United Kingdom National Guideline for the Management of Pelvic 
Inflammatory Disease (2019 Interim Update) 

Guideline development group: Jonathan Ross (lead author), Michelle Cole, Ceri Evans, Deirdre 
Lyons, Gillian Dean, Darren Cousins , PPI representative 
 
What is new in the 2019 interim update ? 
 
• the European Medicines Agency has released new guidance highlighting the potential for 
disabling and permanent side effects following the use of fluo roquinolone antibiotics. The 
guidance recommends t hat fluoroqu inolones should not be used for mild to moderate 
bacterial infections when alternative antibiotic therapy is available. The PID guideline has 
therefore been updated to move fluoroquinolones from first to second -line use, except for 
women with M genitalium associated PID. 
• the UK national treatment guideline for gonorrhoea has been updated to recommend the use 
of an increased dose of 1g ceftriaxone. The PID guideline has been updated to also 
recommend this increased dose. 
• advice on the use of antibiotics in very early pregnancy (before a pregnancy test becomes 
positive) has been updated following advice from the UK Teratology Information Service . The 
benefits of therapy would outweigh the risks in this situation. 

 PID guideline V4 page 2 Introd uction and methodology 
Objectives 
This guideline offers recommendations on the diagnostic tests, treatment regimens and health 
promotion principles needed for the effective management of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
covering the management of the ini tial presentation, as well as how to reduce transmission , 
complications and future repeat infection. 
It is aimed primarily at women aged 16 years or older (see specific guidelines for those under 16) 
presenting to health care professionals working in departments offering specialist care in STI 
management within the United Kingdom. However, the principles of the recommendations should be 
adopted across all providers – non-specialist providers may need to develop local care pathways 
where appropriate. 
Included in the guideline is a patient information leaflet . 
 
Search strategy 
The following reference sources were used to provide a comprehensive basis for the guideline: 
1. Medline Search 
Medline was searched using the search terms: (oophoritis or salpingitis or endometritis or pelvic 
inflammatory disease or PID or adnexitis or parametritis or adnexal disease) NOT primary 
immunodeficiency; the search was limited to humans and English language papers. The search was 
from 1st January 2010 to 1st August 2017 and identified 12 947 titles. Article titles and abstracts were 
reviewed and if relevant the full text article obtained. Priority was given to randomised controlled trial 
and systematic review evidence. 
2. 2015 CDC STD Treatment Guidelines (www.cdc.gov/std/ tg2015/default.htm ) 
3. Cochrane Collaboration Databases (www.cochrane.org) 
 
A number of limitations were recognised in the evidence base: 
• a gold standard for the accurate diagnosis of PID is not available ther efore a pragmatic 
approach to diagnosis and treatment is applied in many clinical trials 
• the evidence base for PID treatment mostly comes from studies from several years ago 
which may not reflect recent changes in antimicrobial sensitivity patterns or new er diagnostic PID guideline V4 page 3 tests, particularly for gonorrhoea. The management recommendations have therefore been 
adapted to reflect this. 
• there are relatively less data available on the long term effectiveness of therapy compared to 
short term resolution of symptoms 
 
Methods 
Article titles and abstracts were reviewed and if relevant the full text article obtained. Priority was 
given to randomised controlled trial and systematic review evidence, and recommendations made and 
graded on the basis of best available evidenc e. The evidence was compiled by an external 
information specialist and reviewed by the authors before being incorporated into the guideline using 
the BASHH framework for guideline development . Successive d rafts of the guideline were informed 
by feedback from the guideline authors . The final draft guideline was used for piloting and external 
review as outlined below . 
 
An Equality Impact Assessment was undertaken to assess the relevance of the guideline 
recommendations in relation to age, disability, gender, gender reassignment , pregnancy, race, 
religion/belief and sexual orientation (Appendix 1) . 
 
A lay representative reviewed the guideline and contributed to the development of a patient 
information leaflet, with the support of co -author CE. This resulted in a number of changes to improve 
the clarity of both documents . The guideline was also reviewed by the BASHH Public Panel. 
 
Piloting and feedback 
Health professional and patient views were further sought by piloting a draft of the guideline with a 
sample of target users. This was coordinated by the BASHH Clinical Effectiveness Group ( CEG ) 
using health care professionals independent from the writing committee who adopt the guideline into 
their clinical practice in a vir tual fashion for a period of time and then provide an evaluation using a 
standard feedback form. 

Aetiology PID guideline V4 page 4 • pelvic inflammatory disease ( PID) is usually the result of infection ascending from the endocervix 
causing endometritis, salpingitis, parametritis, oophoritis, tubo -ovarian abcess and/or pelvic 
peritonitis. 
• Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis have been identified as causative agents1-3. 
C. trachomatis is the commonest identi fied cause account ing for 14-35% of cases4,5, whilst 
Gardnerella vaginalis , anaerobes (including Prevotella , Atopobium and Leptotrichia ) and other 
organisms commonly found in the vagina may also be implicated. Mycoplasma genitalium has 
been associated with upper genital tract infection in women and is a very likely cause of PID6-8. 
Pathogen negative PID is common9. 
• N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are detected less commonly in older women with PID 
• the insertion of an intrauterine device (IUD) increases the risk of developing PID but only for 4 -6 
weeks after insertion . This risk is probably highest in women with pre -existing gonor rhoea or C. 
trachomatis . 
 
Clinical Features 
Symptoms 
The following features are suggestive of a diagnosis of PID2,3,10,11 
• lower abdominal pain which is typically bilateral (but can be unilateral) 
• abnormal vaginal or cervical discharge which is often purulent 
• deep dyspareunia 
• abnormal vaginal bleeding , including post coital bleeding , inter -menstrual bleeding and 
menorrhagia 
• secondary dysmenorrhoea 
 
Signs 
• lower abdominal tenderness which is usually bilateral 
• adnexal tenderness on bimanual vaginal examination – a tender mass is sometimes present 
• cervical motion tenderness on bimanual vaginal examination 
• fever (>38°C) in moderate to severe disease PID guideline V4 page 5 
A diagnosis of PID should be considered , and usually empirical antibiotic treatment offered , in any 
sexually active woman who has recent onset, lower abdominal pain associated with local tenderness 
on bimanual vaginal examin ation, in whom pregnancy has been excluded and no other cause for the 
pain has been identified . The risk of PID is highest in women aged under 255 not using ba rrier 
contraception and with a history of a new sexual partner. The diagnosis of PID based only on positive 
examination findings, in the absence of lower abdominal pain, should only be made with caution12. 
 
Complications 
• women with immunosuppression secondary to HIV may have more severe symptoms associated 
with PID but respond well to standard antibiotic therapy13. No change in treatment 
recommendations compared to HIV uninfected patients is required14-16. (Grade 1B) 
• the Fitz -Hugh Curtis syndrome comprises right upper quadrant pain associated with perihepatitis 
which occurs in some women with PID , especially by C. trachomatis . Although laparoscopic 
division of hepatic adhesions has been performed, there is insufficient clinical tria l evidence to 
make specific recommendations for additional treatment beyond th at for uncomplicated PID. 
• a tubo-ovarian abscess should be suspected in pa tients who are systemically unwell and/or have 
severe pelvic pain. The palpation of an adnexal mass, or lack of response to therapy, should 
prompt pelvic imaging with ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) . Tubo -ovarian abscess is an indication for hospital admission for par enteral 
antimicrobial therapy, with appropriate anaerobic cover, and to monitor for signs of rupture or 
sepsis. 
• the randomised controlled trial evidence for whether an intrauterine contraceptive device should be 
left in situ or removed in women presenting with PID is limited17-19. In women with mild to moderate 
PID the IUD may be left in situ but a review should be performed after 48 -72 hours and the IUD 
removed if significant clinical improvement has not occurred. The decision to remove the IUD 
needs to be balanced against the risk of pregn ancy in those who have had otherwise unprotected 
intercourse in the preceding 7 days. Emergency hormonal contraception following removal of an 
IUD may be appropriate for some women in this situation. 
 PID guideline V4 page 6 Diagnosis 
o PID may be symptomatic or asymptomatic. Even when present, clinical symptoms and signs lack 
sensitivity and specificity (the positive predictive value of a clinical diagnosis is 65 -90% compared 
to laparoscopic diagnosis3,10,11) 
o Testing for gonorrhoea , C. trachomatis and M. genitalium in the lower genital tract is 
recommended since a positive result supports the diagnosis of PID and may alter subsequent 
therapy (Grade 1B). The absence of infection at this site does not exclude PID however3,10,11. 
o Local availability of M. genitalium testing currently varies but implementation of testing is 
strongly recommended to guide the choice of appropriate therapy 
o An elevated ESR or C reactive protein , or high blood white cell count, also supports the diagnosis 
but is non-specific20 and usually only abnormal in moderate or severe PID . 
o The absence of endocervical or vaginal pus cells on Gram -stained examination of a vaginal 
smear has a good negative predictive value (95%) for a diagnosis of PID but their presence is 
non-specific (poor positive predictive value – 17%)21. 
o Ultrasound scanning is of limited value for uncomplicated PID but is helpful if an abscess or 
hydrosalpix is suspected22. Doppler ultrasound can detect increased blood flow associated with 
pelvic infection and may be useful , but it cannot differentiate between PID and other causes of 
increased vascularity such as endometriosis23,24. 
o MRI or CT s canning of the pelvis may be helpful in differentiating PID from alternative 
diagnoses25-27 but are not indicated routinely . MRI, when available, is preferable since it provides 
high resolution images and avoid s ionising radiation in women of reproductive age . 
 
The differential diagnosis of lower abdominal pain in a young woman includes: 
• ectopic pregnancy – pregnancy should be excluded in all women suspected of having PID 
• acute app endicitis – nausea and vomiting occurs in most patients with appendicitis but only 50% of 
those with PID. Cervical movement pain will occur in about a quarter of women with 
appendicitis28,29. 
• endometriosis – the relationship between symptoms and the menstrual cycle may be helpful in 
establishing a diagnosis 
• complications of an ovarian cyst e.g. torsion or rupture – symptoms are often of sudden onset PID guideline V4 page 7 • urinary tract infection – often associated with dysuria and/or urinary frequency 
• irritable bowel syndrome – disturbance in bowel habit and persistence of symptoms over a 
prolonged time period are common . Acute bowel infection or diverticular disease can also cause 
lower abdominal pain usually in association with other gastrointestinal symptoms. 
• functional pain (pain of unknown aetiology) – may be associated with longstanding symptoms 
 
Management 
It is likely that delaying treatment increases the risk of long term sequelae such as ectopic pregnancy, 
infertility and pelvic pain30,31. Because of this, and the lack of definitive diagnostic criteria, a low 
threshold for empiric treatment of PID is recommended (Grade 1B). Broad spectrum antibiotic therapy 
is required to cover the wide range of aerobic and anaerobic bacteria commonly isolated from the 
upper genital tract in women with PID2,3. 
 
Some of t he best evidence for the effe ctiveness of antibiotic treatment in preventing the long term 
complications of PID comes from the PEACH study where women were treated with cefoxitin followed 
by doxycycline – pregnancy rates after 3 years were similar or higher than those in the general 
population32,33. More recent mathematical modelling also supports a low rate of infertility and ectopic 
pregnancy following effective treatment of PID34. 
 
The choice of which of the recommended treatment regimen s to use may be influenced by: 
• robust evidence on local antimicrobial sensitivity patterns 
• robust evidence on the local epidemiology of specific infections in this setting 
• cost 
• patient preference and compliance 
• severity of disease 
• patient age – sexually transmitted pathogens are less likely to be the cause of PID in older women5 
• local antibi otic stewardship guidelines 
 
General Advice PID guideline V4 page 8 Rest is advised for those with severe disease. (Grade 1D) 
Appropriate analgesia should be provided. (Grade 1D) 
Intravenous therapy is recommended for patients with more severe clinical disease (Grade 1D) e.g. 
pyrexia > 38oC, clinical signs of tubo -ovarian ab scess, signs of pelvic peritonitis . 
To avoid reinfection , patients should be advised to avoid oral or genital intercourse until they, and 
their partner(s), have completed their treatment (Grade 1D). 
A detailed explanation of their condition with particular emphasis on the long term implications for the 
health of themselves and their partner(s) should be provided , reinforced with clear and accurate 
written information (Grade 1D). A patient information leaflet is included in Appendix 2 of this guideline. 
 
When giving information to patients, the clinician should consider the following: 
• an explanation of what treatment is being given and its possible adverse effects 
• that following treatment fertility is usually maintained but there remains a risk of future 
infertility, chronic pelvic pain or ectopic pregnancy 
• clinically more severe disease is associated with a greater risk of sequelae 
• repeat episodes of PID are associated with an exponential increase in the risk of infertility 
• the earlier treatment is given the lower the risk of future fertility problems 
• future use of barrier contraception will significantly red uce the risk of PID 
• the need to screen sexual contacts for infection to prevent re -infect ion 
 PID guideline V4 page 9 Outpatient therapy is as effective as inpatient treatment for patients with clinically mild to moderate 
PID32. Admission for parenteral therapy, observation, further investigation and/or possible surgical 
intervention should be considered in the following situations (Grade 1D): 
• a surgical emergency cannot be excluded 
• lack of response to oral therapy 
• clinically se vere disease 
• presence of a tubo -ovarian ab scess 
• intolerance to oral therapy 
• pregnancy 
 
Further Investigation 
All sexually active women who are potentially fertile should be offered a pregnancy test to exclude 
ectopic pregnancy (Grade 1D). 
 
Treatment 
The following antibiotic regimens are evidence based. 
 
Recommended Regimens 
All the recommended regimens are of similar efficacy. 
 
Outpatient Regimens 
 First Line Therapy 
i.m. ceftriaxone* 1g single dose followed by oral doxycycline 100mg twice daily plus 
metronidazole 400mg twice daily for 14 days 
Grade 1A35-37 
 
*Clinical trial data support the use of cefoxitin for the treatment of PID but this agent is not easily 
available in the UK so ceftriaxone, which has a similar spectrum of activity, is recommended. 
 
 Second Line Therapy 
oral ofloxacin 400mg twice daily plus oral metronidazole 400mg twice daily for 14 days PID guideline V4 page 10 Grade 1A37-41 

oral moxifloxacin 400mg once daily for 14 days 
Grade 1A42-44 
 
Metronidazole is included in some regimens to improve coverage for anaerobic bacteria. Anaerobes 
are of relatively greater importance in patients with severe PID and metronidazole may be 
discontinued in those patients with mild or moderate PID who are unabl e to tolerate it. 
 
Ofloxacin and moxifloxacin should be avoided in patients who are at high risk of gonococcal PID (e.g. 
when the patient’s partner has gonorrhoea, in clinically severe disease, following sexual contact 
abroad) because of high levels of quinolone resistance 45. N. gonorrhoeae is, however, an uncommon 
cause of PID in the UK (< 3%) and in those not at high risk of gonorrhoea q uinolones can be used as 
second line empirical treatment , with therapy being adjusted subsequently if testing reveals quinolone 
resistant N. gonorrhoeae . 
 
Levofloxacin is the L isomer of ofloxacin46 and has the advantage of once daily dosing (500mg OD for 
14 days). It may be used as a more convenient alternative to ofloxacin42. 
 
Three large RCTs support the efficacy of moxifloxacin for PID. There is a potential risk of serious liver 
reactions occurring with this agent but they are uncommon (12 cases reported in the UK from 2003 -16 
with no deaths) and moxifloxacin is generally well tolerated47 (Grade 1D). Of the three recommended 
PID treatment regimens, moxifloxacin provides the h ighest microbiological activity against M. 
genitalium8. 
 
Ofloxacin, levofloxacin and moxifloxacin are effective for the treatment of C. trachomatis. Quinolones 
(ofloxacin, levofloxacin and moxifloxacin) can cause disabling and potentially permanent side -effects 
involving tendons. muscles, joints and the nervous system48, and are therefore only recommended as 
second line therapy except for the treatment of M genitalium associated PID where no alternative 
therapy is available. Quinolones are also not licensed for use in patients aged under 18. PID guideline V4 page 11 
Replacing intramuscular ceftriaxone with an oral cephalosporin (e.g. cefixime) is not recommended 
because there is no clinical trial evidence to support its use, and tissue levels are likely to be lower 
which might impact on efficacy. Reports of decreasing susceptibility of N. gonorrhoeae to 
cephalosporins also supports the use of parenteral based regimens when gonococcal PID is 
suspected (to maximise tissue levels and overcome decreased susceptibility ). 
 
Azithromycin is recommended in some guidelines as additional treatment for uncomplicated 
gonorrhoea. It is not recommended for gonococcal PID for the following reasons: 
• azithromycin is used to ‘protect’ cephalosporin therapy to try slow down the development of 
N. gonorrhoeae resistance but the number of cases of gonococcal PID in the UK is very small 
(2-3% of all PID) . Therefore its use is unlikely to affect the public health control of antibiotic 
resistance. 
• use of the ‘non-azithromycin containing ’ regimen s listed above is clinically effective 
• adherence rates for existing two week PID treatment regimens are poor49 and the addition of 
azithromycin has the potential to cause early discontinuation of medication due to 
gastrointestinal side effects. 
 
Ceftriaxone provides microbiological cover for N. gonorrhoeae but also other aerobic and anaerobic 
bacteria associated with PID. The use of doxycycline plus metronidazole, in the absence of 
ceftriaxone, is not recommended because the evidence base is limit ed, previous trials have reported 
significant rates of treatment failure50,51 and the addition of ceftriaxone improve s treatment outcome52. 
 
Alternative Regimens 
intramuscular ceftriaxone 1g immediately, followed by azithromycin 1 g/week for 2 weeks 
Grade 2B53,54 
Clinical trial evidence for th is regimen is limited but it may be used when the treatments above are not 
appropriate e.g. allergy, intolerance . Single doses of azithromycin have the potential to induce 
macrolide resistance in M. genitalium and, if possible, use should be restricted to wo men who are 
known to be M. genitalium negative. PID guideline V4 page 12 
 
Inpatient Regimens 
i.v. ceftriaxone 2g daily plus i.v. doxycycline 100mg twice daily (oral doxycycline may be used 
if tolerated) followed by oral doxycycline 100mg twice daily plus oral metronidazole 400mg 
twice daily for a total of 14 days 
Grade 1A36,37 

i.v. clindamycin 900mg 3 times daily plus i.v. gentamicin (2mg/kg loading dose ) 
followed by 1.5mg/kg 3 times daily [a single daily dose of 7mg/kg may be substituted]) 
followed by either oral clindamycin 450mg 4 times daily or oral doxycycline 100mg twice daily 
plus oral metronidazole 400mg twice daily to complete 14 days 
Grade 1A36 
Gentamicin levels should be monitored if this regimen is used. 
 
Intravenous therapy should be continued until 24 hours after clinical improvement and then switched 
to oral (Grade 2D) . Intravenous doxycycline is not currentl y licensed in the UK but is available from 
IDIS world medicines ( tel. 01932 824100). 
 
Alternative Regimens 
Clinical trial evidence for the following regimens is more limited but they may be used when the 
treatments above are not appropriate e.g. allergy, intolerance: 
 
i.v. ofloxacin 400mg BD plus i.v. metronidazole 500mg TID for 14 days 
Grade 1B37-39 
 
i.v. ciprofloxacin 200mg BD plus i.v. (or oral) doxycycline 100mg BD plus i.v. metronidazole 
500mg TID for 14 days 
Grade 1B38,55 
 PID guideline V4 page 13 Allergy 
There is no clear evidence of the superiority of any one of the recommended regimens over the 
others. Therefore patients known to be allergic to one of the suggested regimens should be treated 
with an alternative. 
 
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding 
• PID i n pregnancy is uncommon but associated with an increase in both maternal and fetal 
morbidity, therefore parenteral therapy is advised although none of the suggested evidence 
based regimens are of proven safety in this situation. 
• there are insufficient data from clinical trials to recommend a specific regimen and empirical 
therapy with a gents effective against gonorrhoea, C. trachomatis and anaerobic infections 
should be considered taking into account local antibiotic sensitivity patterns (e.g. i.v. 
ceftriaxone , i.v. erythromycin and i.v. metronidazole switching to oral therapy following clinical 
response and completing 2 weeks of treatment ) (Grade 2D). 
• use of the recommended antibiotic regimens (listed above for non-pregnant women) in very early 
pregnancy (prior to a pregnancy test becoming positive) is justified by the benefits of treatment of 
PID at any stage of pregnancy being likely to outweigh any possible risks (personal 
communication, UK National Teratology Information Service – 15th October 2018 ). 
 
Surgical Management 
• laparoscopy may help early resolution of severe disease by divi ding adhesions and drain ing 
pelvic abscesses56 but ultrasound guided aspiration of p elvic fluid collections is less invasive 
and may be equally effective57,58 
• laparotomy may be required to assess and treat clinically severe pelvic infection 
• it is possible to perform adhesiolysis in cases of perihepatitis but there is no evidence on 
whether this is superior to only using antibiotic therapy PID guideline V4 page 14 
Follow Up 
Review at 72 hours is recommended11 for those with moderate or severe symptoms or signs (Grade 
2D). Failure to improve suggests the need for further investigation, parenteral therapy and/or surgical 
intervention. 
 
Further review , either in clinic or by phone, 2-4 weeks after therapy is recommended (Grade 1D) to 
ensure: 
• adequate clinical response to treatment 
• compliance with oral antibiotics 
• screening and treatment of sexual contacts 
• awareness of the significance of PID and its sequelae 
• repeat pregnancy test, if clinically indicated 
 
If initial testing for gonorrhoea was positive, r epeat testing should be routinely performed after 2 to 4 
weeks . If initial testing for C. trachomatis was positive, r epeat testing after 3 to 5 weeks is appropriate 
for women who have persisting symptoms or where compliance with antibiotics and/or tracing of 
sexual contacts indicate the possibility of persisting or rec urrent infection. 
 
The following are recommended if the initial test for M. genitalium is positive: 
• treatment with moxifloxacin. This agent currently has good microbiological activity against M. 
genitalium (Grade 1D) 
• repeat testing for M. genitalium following treatment to ensure microbiological clearance. 
Treatment failure following the use of any of the recommended regimens has been reported 
but is least likely following treatment with moxifloxacin . The optimal time for testing after 
starting treatment is not known but 4 weeks is recommended based on expert opinion59,60 
(Grade 1D). 
 PID guideline V4 page 15 Partner Notification and Treatment of Sexual Partners 
• current male partners of women with PID should be contacted and offered health advice and 
screening for gonorrhoea and C. trachomatis (Grade 1D). Other recent sexual partners may 
also be offered screening - tracing of contacts within a 6 month period since onset of 
symptoms is recommended but this time period may be influenced by the sexual history 
(Grade 2D). 
• gonorrhoea or C. trachomatis diagnosed in the male partner should be treated appropriately 
and concurrently with the index patient according to the relevant BASHH guideline at 
www.bashh.org (Grade 1D). 
• in women with confirmed M. genitalium infection, their male partner(s) should be offered 
testing for M. genitalium and, if positive, treated appro priately and concurrently with the index 
case ( for appropriate treatment regimens see the BASHH Non-specific Urethritis Guideline – 
www.bashh.org) 
• because many cases of PID are not associated with gonorrhoea , C. trachomatis or M. 
genitalium , broad spectrum e mpirical therapy should also be offered to male partners e.g. 
doxycycline 100mg twice daily for 1 week (Grade 2D). 
• partners should be advised to avoid oral or vaginal intercourse until they and the index patient 
have completed the ir treatment cou rse (Grade 1D). 
 
Auditable Outcome Measures 
Appropriate short term audit outcomes include: 
• proportion of women receiving treatment with a recommended regimen – target 95% 
• proportion of women with suspected PID tested for M. genitalium - target 90% 
• proportion of women who are reviewed (face to face, by telephone or online) within 4 weeks of 
initiating treatment for PID – target 60% 
 
Recommendations for future research 
• assess ment of the utility of metronidazole as an adjunctive therapy for patients with mild to 
moderate PID PID guideline V4 page 16 • development of sensitive and specific diagnostic tests 
• assessment of efficacy of a single dose versus multiple doses of ceftriaxone within treatment 
regimens for the management of PID 
 
Qualifying statement 
The recommendations in this guideline may not be appropriate for use in all clinical situations. 
Decisions to follow these recommendations must be based on the professional judgement of the 
clinician and conside ration of individual patient circumstances and available resources. 
 
All possible care has been undertaken to ensure the publication of the correct dosage of medication 
and route of administration. However, it remains the responsibility of the prescribing physician to 
ensure the accuracy and appropriateness of the medication they prescribe. 
 
Editorial independence 
This guideline was commissioned, edited and endorsed by the BASHH CEG . The group receives 
funding from BASHH for external researcher support which was used in the production of this 
guideline. 
 
Declarations of interest 
All members of the guideline writing committee completed the BASHH conflict of interest declaration 
detailed below at the time the guideline’s final draft was submitted to the CEG. JR has received 
consultancy fees from BD Diagnostics and GSK pharma , and sponsorship to attend a medical 
conference from Janssen pharma. 
 
Author affiliation 
• Jonathan Ross, Professor of Sexual Health and HIV, University Hospital Birmingham NHS 
Foundation Trust PID guideline V4 page 17 • Michelle Cole, Head of Antimicrobial Resistance in STIs Section, Antimicrobial Resistance 
and Healthcare -Associated Infections Reference Unit, National Infection Service, Public 
Health England 
• Ceri Evans , Senior Health Advis er, 10 Hammersmith Broadway, Chelsea and Westminster 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London 
• Deirdre Lyons , Consultant Obstetrician and Gynaecologist, Imperial College Healthcare NHS 
Trust 
• Gillian Dean, Consultant in Sexual Health, Brighto n & Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust 
• Darren Cousins , Consultant in Sexual Health, Northamptonshire Healthcare NHS Foundation 
Trust 
• Patient Representative – member of BASHH Public Panel 
 
Membership of the CEG 
Dr Keith Radcliffe (Chair) 
Dr Mark FitzGerald 
Dr Deepa Grover 
Dr Steve Higgins 
Dr Margaret Kingston 
Dr Michael Rayment 
Dr Darren Cousins 
Dr Ann Sullivan 
Dr Helen Fifer 
 
Timescale for next revision 
An author group will be invited by the BASHH CEG to review and revise the guideline in 2022 using 
the BASHH framework for guideline development . 
 PID guideline V4 page 18 Acknowledgements 
The group wishes to thank our public panel member for their hard work throughout the development 
of the guideline. In addition, the group wishes to thank the external researcher Dr. Jacoby Patterson 
for her help in the production of this guideline. 
 
 PID guideline V4 page 19 Appendix 1: Equality Impact Assessment 
 
Topic suggestion: impact assessment 
Guidance title: BASHH Guidelines for the Management of Pelvic Inflammatory Disease 2016. 
Completed by Dr Darren Cousins 
 
How relevant is the 
topic to equality? Inequalities in 
health impact of the 
condition or public 
health issue 
 Potential of 
guidance to add 
value Priority for NHS or 
other government 
department Topic relevance: 
conclusions and 
outcome 
 - Prevalence and 
impact of 
condition or public 
health problem 
- Prevalence of risk 
factors - Inequalities in 
access, uptake or 
impact 
- Timeliness 
- Equality issues 
identified by 
proposers of this 
topic 
- Equality issues 
identified by 
patient or lay 
organisations - Department of 
Health 
- DCLG, DCSF. 
DoT, Home 
Office, etc. 
- Other agency or 
ALB 
- Agencies in 
devolved nations 
 - High/medium/low/
none 
- Not 
known/inconclusiv
e 
- Reasons for rating 
- Recommendation 
Gender 
- Women 
- Men This disease does 
not present in men 
 Clear guidance on 
treatment of male 
contact of patients 
with this condition 
 
 Society of Sexual 
Health Advisers 
(SSHA) 
 Low 
Race 
- Asian or Asian 
British 
- Black or Black 
British 
- People of mixed 
race 
- Irish 
- White British 
- Chinese 
- Other minority 
groups not listed The highest rates of 
STI diagnoses at 
sexual health clinics 
are found among 
people of black 
ethnicity in deprived 
areas. This is most 
likely seen as a 
consequence of a 
complex interplay of 
cultural, economic 
and behavioural 
factors. 
 Accurate diagnosis 
and better tolerated 
treatments should 
improve the burden 
of disease in the 
community 
 Dept of Health 
 Medium 

Disability 
- Sensory 
- Learning disability 
- Mental health 
- Cognitive 
- Mobility 
- Other impairment There are no data 
to suggest any link 
between this 
condition and 
disability status, 
although people 
with mental health 
problems are at 
disproportionate 
risk of STIs in 
general 
 None identified 
although use of 
clinical tests in 
guideline may 
improve diagnostic 
accuracy in non 
verbalising patients 
 Dept of H ealth Low 
 PID guideline V4 page 20 Age 
- Older people 
- Children and 
young people 
- Young adults Young woman are 
disproportionately 
at greater risk of 
this condition in 
common with other 
sexually transmitted 
infections 
 Accurate diagnosis 
and better tolerated 
treatments should 
improve the burden 
of disease in the 
community . Dept of Health 
 Medium 
 
Sexual orientation 
and gender identity 
- Lesbians 
- Gay men 
- Bisexual people 
- Transgender 
people This disease does 
not present in men. 
There are little data 
on the prevalence 
of this condition in 
gay or bisexual 
women None identified Dept of Health 
 
Commissioners of 
local sexual health 
services 
 Low 
Religion / belief 
 There are no data 
to suggest any link 
between religion or 
belief and this 
condition 
 None identified None identified 
 Low 
Socioeconomic 
status There are no 
specific data to 
suggest any link 
between this 
condition and 
socioeconomic 
status, although 
people of low 
socioeconomic 
status are 
disproportionately 
higher risk of STIs 
in general 
 Accurate diagnosis 
and better tolerated 
treatments should 
improve the burden 
of disease in the 
community Commissioners of 
local sexual health 
services 
 
National public 
health agencies 
that consider data 
collection in sexual 
health (e.g. Public 
Health England) Medium 

Other categories 
- Gypsy travellers 
- Refugees and 
asylum seekers 
- Migrant workers 
- Looked after 
children 
- Homeless people There are no data 
to suggest any link 
between this 
condition and these 
categories although 
some people in 
these categories 
may not be 
identi fied by sexual 
health services 
 None identified 
 Commissioners of 
local sexual health 
services 
 
National public 
health agencies 
that consider data 
collection in sexual 
health (e.g. Public 
Health England) Low 
 
 PID guideline V4 page 21 
Appendix 2: Patient information leaflet on PID 
 
See attached document 

 PID guideline V4 page 22 References 
 
• 1. Goller J, Fairley C, Guy R, Bradshaw C, Chen M, Hocking J. Aetiology of infections 
associated with 1228 cases of pelvic inflammatory disease in an urban Australian sexual health clinic 
setting. Sexually Transmitted Diseases 2014; 41: S59. 
• 2. Recommendation s arising from the 31st Study Group: The Prevention of Pelvic Infection. In: 
Templeton A, ed. The Prevention of Pelvic Infection. London: RCOG Press; 1996: 267 -70. 
• 3. Bevan CD, Johal BJ, Mumtaz G, Ridgway GL, Siddle NC. Clinical, laparoscopic and 
microbiol ogical findings in acute salpingitis: report on a United Kingdom cohort. British Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology 1995; 102(5): 407 -14. 
• 4. Goller JL, De Livera AM, Fairley CK, et al. Population attributable fraction of pelvic 
inflammatory disease associ ated with chlamydia and gonorrhoea: a cross -sectional analysis of 
Australian sexual health clinic data. Sexually Transmitted Infections 2016; 18: 18. 
• 5. Price MJ, Ades AE, Welton NJ, Simms I, Macleod J, Horner PJ. Proportion of Pelvic 
Inflammatory Disease Cases Caused by Chlamydia trachomatis: Consistent Picture From Different 
Methods. J Infect Dis 2016; 214(4): 617 -24. 
• 6. Manhart LE. Mycoplasma genitalium: An emergent sexually transmitted disease? Infect Dis 
Clin North Am 2013; 27(4): 779 -92. 
• 7. Lis R, Row hani-Rahbar A, Manhart LE. Mycoplasma genitalium Infection and Female 
Reproductive Tract Disease: A Meta -analysis. Clinical Infectious Diseases 2015; 61(3): 418 -26. 
• 8. Dean G, Whetham J, Soni S, Pitt R, Alexander S. Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID), 
Mycoplasma genitalium and macrolide resistance in England. Sexually Transmitted Infections 2016; 
92(Suppl 1): A12 -A. 
• 9. Goller JL, De Livera AM, Fairley CK, et al. Character istics of pelvic inflammatory disease 
where no sexually transmitted infection is identified: a cross -sectional analysis of routinely collected 
sexual health clinic data. Sexually Transmitted Infections 2017; 93(1): 68 -70. 
• 10. Morcos R, Frost N, Hnat M, Pet runak A, Caldito G. Laparoscopic versus clinical diagnosis of 
acute pelvic inflammatory disease. Journal of Reproductive Medicine 1993; 38(1): 53 -6. 
• 11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment 
Guidelines 2015. 20 15 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/default.htm (accessed 15.11.17 2016). 
• 12. Morris GC, Stewart CMW, Schoeman SA, Wilson JD. A cross -sectional study showing 
differences in the clinical diagnosis of pelvic inflammatory disease according to the experience of 
clinicians: Implications for training and audit. Sexually Transmitted Infections 2014; 90(6): 445 -51. 
• 13. Kamenga MC, De Cock KM, St.Louis ME, et al. The impact of human immunodeficiency virus 
infection on pelvic inflammatory disease: a case -control study in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. American 
Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 1995; 172(3): 919 -25. 
• 14. Cohen CR, Sinei S, Reilly M, et al. Effect of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection 
upon a cute salpingitis: a laparoscopic study. Journal of Infectious Diseases 1998; 178(5): 1352 -8. PID guideline V4 page 23 • 15. Bukusi EA, Cohen CR, Stevens CE, et al. Effects of human immunodeficiency virus 1 
infection on microbial origins of pelvic inflammatory disease and on efficacy of ambulatory oral 
therapy. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 1999; 181(6): 1374 -81. 
• 16. Irwin KL, Moorman AC, O'Sullivan MJ, et al. Influence of human immunodeficiency virus 
infection on pelvic inflammatory disease. Obstetrics & Gynecology 2000 ; 95(4): 525 -34. 
• 17. Altunyurt S, Demir N, Posaci C. A randomized controlled trial of coil removal prior to treatment 
of pelvic inflammatory disease. European Journal of Obstetrics Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 
2003; 107: 81-4. 
• 18. Soderberg G, Lindg ren S. Influence of an intrauterine device on the course of an acute 
salpingitis. Contraception 1981; 24(2): 137 -43. 
• 19. Tepper NK, Steenland MW, Gaffield ME, Marchbanks PA, Curtis KM. Retention of intrauterine 
devices in women who acquire pelvic inflammat ory disease: a systematic review. Contraception 2013; 
87(5): 655 -60. 
• 20. Miettinen AK, Heinonen PK, Laippala P, Paavonen J. Test performance of erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate and C - reactive protein in assessing the severity of acute pelvic inflammatory 
disease. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 1993; 169(5): 1143 -9. 
• 21. Yudin MH, Hillier SL, Wiesenfeld HC, Krohn MA, Amortegui AA, Sweet RL. Vaginal 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and bacterial vaginosis as markers for histologic endometritis among 
women without symptoms of pelvic inflammatory disease. American Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology 2003; 188(2) : 318 -23. 
• 22. Romosan G, Valentin L. The sensitivity and specificity of transvaginal ultrasound with regard 
to acute pelvic inflammatory disease: A review of the literature. Archives of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics 2014; 289(4): 705 -14. 
• 23. Romosan G, Bjartling C, Skoog L, Valentin L. Ultrasound for diagnosing acute salpingitis: a 
prospective observational diagnostic study. Human Reproduction 2013; 28(6): 1569 -79. 
• 24. Molander P, Sjoberg J, Paavonen J, Cacciatore B. Transv aginal power Doppler findings in 
laparoscopically proven acute pelvic inflammatory disease. Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 
2001; 17(3): 233 -8. 
• 25. Lee MH, Moon MH, Sung CK, Woo H, Oh S. CT findings of acute pelvic inflammatory 
disease. Abdominal Ima ging 2014; 39(6): 1350 -5. 
• 26. Fahmy HS, Swamy N, Elshahat HM. Revisiting the role of MRI in gynecological emergencies 
- An institutional experience. Egyptian Journal of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine 2015; 46(3): 769 -
79. 
• 27. Wongwaisayawan S, Kaewlai R, Da ttwyler M, Abujudeh HH, Singh AK. Magnetic Resonance 
of Pelvic and Gastrointestinal Emergencies. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am 2016; 24(2): 419 -31. 
• 28. Bongard F, Landers DV, Lewis F. Differential diagnosis of appendicitis and pelvic 
inflammatory disease. A prospective analysis. American Journal of Surgery 1985; 150(1): 90 -6. 
• 29. Lewis FR, Holcroft JW, Boey J, Dunphy JE. Appendicitis: a critical review of diagnosis and 
treatment in 1000 cases. Archives of Surgery 1975; 110: 677 -84. PID guideline V4 page 24 • 30. Hillis SD, Joesoef R, Marchbanks PA, et al. Delayed care of pelvic inflammatory disease as a 
risk factor for impaired fertility. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 1993; 168(5): 1503 -9. 
• 31. Taylor BD, Ness RB, Darville T, Haggerty CL. Microbial correlates of delayed care for pelvic 
inflammatory disease. Sex Transm Dis 2011; 38(5): 434 -8. 
• 32. Ness RB, Soper DE, Holley RL, et al. Effectiveness of inpatient and outpatient treatment 
strategies for women with pelvic inflammatory disease: results from the Pelvic Inflammatory Disease 
Evaluation and Clinical Health (PEACH) Randomized Trial. American J ournal of Obstetrics & 
Gynecology 2002; 186(5): 929 -37. 
• 33. Haggerty CL, Ness RB, Amortegui A, et al. Endometritis does not predict reproductive 
morbidity after pelvic inflammatory disease. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 2003; 
188(1): 141 -8. 
• 34. Price MJ, Ades AE, Soldan K, et al. The natural history of Chlamydia trachomatis infection in 
women: a multi -parameter evidence synthesis. Health Technol Assess 2016; 20(22): 1 -250. 
• 35. Arredondo JL, Diaz V, Gaitan H, et al. Oral clindamycin and ciprofl oxacin versus 
intramuscular ceftriaxone and oral doxycycline in the treatment of mild -to- moderate pelvic 
inflammatory disease in outpatients. Clinical Infectious Diseases 1997; 24(2): 170 -8. 
• 36. Hemsell DL, Little BB, Faro S, et al. Comparison of three re gimens recommended by the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for the treatment of women hospitalized with acute pelvic 
inflammatory disease. Clinical Infectious Diseases 1994; 19(4): 720 -7. 
• 37. Martens MG, Gordon S, Yarborough DR, Faro S, Binder D, Berkeley A. Multicenter 
randomized trial of ofloxacin versus cefoxitin and doxycycline in outpatient treatment of pelvic 
inflammatory disease. Ambulatory PID Research Group. Southern Medical Journal 1993; 86: 604 -10. 
• 38. Walker CK, Kahn JG, Washington AE, Peterson HB, Sweet RL. Pelvic inflammatory disease: 
metaanalysis of antimicrobial regimen efficacy. Journal of Infectious Diseases 1993; 168: 969 -78. 
• 39. Wendel GD, Jr., Cox SM, Bawdon RE, Theriot SK, Heard MC, Nobles BJ. A randomized trial 
of ofloxacin v ersus cefoxitin and doxycycline in the outpatient treatment of acute salpingitis. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1991; 164: 1390 -6. 
• 40. Soper DE, Brockwell NJ, Dalton HP. Microbial etiology of urban emergency department acute 
salpingitis: treatment with ofloxacin. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 1992; 167: 653 -60. 
• 41. Peipert JF, Sweet RL, Walker CK, Kahn J, Rielly -Gauvin K. Evaluation of ofloxacin in the 
treatment of laparoscopically documented acute pelvic inflammatory disease (salpingitis). Infectious 
Diseases in Obstetrics & Gynecology 1999; 7(3): 138 -44. 
• 42. Judlin P, Liao Q, Liu Z, Reimnitz P, Hampel B, Arvis P. Efficacy and safety of moxifloxacin in 
uncomplicated pelvic inflammatory disease: the MONALISA study. BJOG 2010; 117(12): 1475 -84. 
• 43. Heyste k MJ, Ross JDC, Group PS. A randomised double -blind comparison of moxifloxacin 
and doxycycline/metronidazole/ciprofloxacin in the treatment of acute, uncomplicated pelvic 
inflammatory disease. International Journal of STD & AIDS 2009; 20: 690 -5. PID guideline V4 page 25 • 44. Ross J D, Cronje HS, Paszkowski T, et al. Moxifloxacin versus ofloxacin plus metronidazole in 
uncomplicated pelvic inflammatory disease: results of a multicentre, double blind, randomised trial. 
Sex Transm Infect 2006; 82(6): 446 -51. 
• 45. Public Health England. Su rveillance of antimicrobial resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae - 
GRASP 2014 Report. London, 2015. 
• 46. Isaacson DM, Fernadez JA, Frosco M, et al. Levofloxacin: A review of its antibacterial activity. 
Recent Res Devel in Antimicrob Agents & Chemotherapy 1996; 1: 391 -439. 
• 47. Raz-Pasteur A, Shasha D, Paul M. Fluoroquinolones or macrolides alone versus combined 
with beta -lactams for adults with community -acquired pneumonia: Systematic review and meta -
analysis. International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 2015 ; 46(3): 242 -8. 
• 48. European Medicines Agency. Disabling and potentially permanent side effects lead to 
suspension or restrictions of quinolone and fluoroquinolone antibiotics. 2018. 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/documents/referral/quinolone -fluoroquinolone -article -31-referral -disabling -
potentially -permanent -side-effects -lead_en.pdf . 
• 49. Dunbar -Jacob J, Sereika SM, Fole y SM, Bass DC, Ness RB. Adherence to oral therapies in 
pelvic inflammatory disease. Journal of Women's Health 2004; 13(3): 285 -91. 
• 50. Witte EH, Peters AA, Smit IB, et al. A comparison of pefloxacin/metronidazole and 
doxycycline/metronidazole in the treatm ent of laparoscopically confirmed acute pelvic inflammatory 
disease. European Journal of Obstetrics, Gynecology, & Reproductive Biology 1993; 50(2): 153 -8. 
• 51. Heinonen PK, Teisala K, Punnonen R, et al. Treating pelvic inflammatory disease with 
doxycycline and metronidazole or penicillin and metronidazole. Genitourinary Medicine 1986; 62(4): 
235-9. 
• 52. Piyadigamage A, Wilson J. Improvement in the clinical cure ra te of outpatient management of 
pelvic inflammatory disease following a change in therapy. Sex Transm Infect 2005; 81(3): 233 -5. 
• 53. Savaris RF, Teixeira LM, Torres TG, Edelweiss MI, Moncada J, Schachter J. Comparing 
ceftriaxone plus azithromycin or doxycyc line for pelvic inflammatory disease: a randomized controlled 
trial. Obstetrics & Gynecology 2007; 110(1): 53 -60. 
• 54. Bevan CD, Ridgway GL, Rothermel CD. Efficacy and safety of azithromycin as monotherapy 
or combined with metronidazole compared with two st andard multidrug regimens for the treatment of 
acute pelvic inflammatory disease. Journal of International Medical Research 2003; 31(1): 45 -54. 
• 55. Heinonen PK, Teisala K, Miettinen A, Aine R, Punnonen R, Gronroos P. A comparison of 
ciprofloxacin with doxy cycline plus metronidazole in the treatment of acute pelvic inflammatory 
disease. Scandinavian Journal of Infectious Diseases - Supplementum 1989; 60: 66-73. 
• 56. Reich H, McGlynn F. Laparoscopic treatment of tuboovarian and pelvic abscess. Journal of 
Repro ductive Medicine 1987; 32(10): 747 -52. 
• 57. Aboulghar MA, Mansour RT, Serour GI. Ultrasonographically guided transvaginal aspiration 
of tuboovarian abscesses and pyosalpinges: an optional treatment for acute pelvic inflammatory 
disease. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 1995; 172(5): 1501 -3. PID guideline V4 page 26 • 58. Corsi PJ, Johnson SC, Gonik B, Hendrix SL, McNeeley SG, Jr., Diamond MP. Transvaginal 
ultrasound -guided aspiration of pelvic abscesses. Infectious Disease in Obstetrics and Gynecology 
1999; 7(5): 216 -21. 
• 59. Jensen Jo S, Cusini M, Gomberg M. 2016 European guideline on Mycoplasma genitalium 
infections. 2016. 
http://www.iusti.org/regions/europe/pdf/2016/2016Europe anMycoplasmaGuidelines.pdf . 
• 60. Falk L, Enger M, Jensen JS. Time to eradication of Mycoplasma genitalium after antibiotic 
treatment in men and women. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 2015; 70(11): 3134 -40.