Assisted Vaginal Birth
Green-top Guideline No. 26
April 2020
Preparation for assisted vaginal birth
Encourage continuous support during labor to reduce the need for assisted vaginal birth.
Inform women about the effects of epidural analgesia on the need for assisted vaginal birth.
Encourage different positions during the second stage of labor based on the use of epidural analgesia.
Recommend delayed pushing in certain situations to reduce the need for assisted vaginal birth.
Assisted Vaginal Birth Definition
Use a standard classification system for assisted vaginal birth.
When to Recommend/Contraindicate Assisted Vaginal Birth
Clinical judgment is required for all situations.
Relative contraindications to assisted vaginal birth include fetal bleeding disorders or a predisposition to fracture.
Blood borne viral infections in the woman are not a contraindication.
Conditions for Safe Assisted Vaginal Birth
Assessment, communication, and expertise are essential for safe assisted vaginal birth.
Ultrasound assessment may be recommended prior to assisted vaginal birth.
Consent for Assisted Vaginal Birth
Inform women about assisted vaginal birth antenatally.
Verbal and written consent should be obtained before attempting assisted vaginal birth.
Performing Assisted Vaginal Birth
Experienced operators should perform assisted vaginal birth.
Supervision by experienced operators is necessary.
Assisted vaginal birth should be attempted in a suitable location.
Choose the appropriate instrument based on clinical circumstances and skill level.
Discontinue vacuum or forceps birth in certain situations.
Episiotomy may be considered to prevent maternal pelvic floor morbidity.
Aftercare following assisted vaginal birth
Prophylactic antibiotics and thromboprophylaxis may be recommended.
Offer analgesia and educate women about bladder care after birth.
Psychological support and follow-up are important for women after assisted vaginal birth.
Provide information for future births.

-degree perineal tear, or
who have ongoing pelvic ﬂoor morbidity.
Documentation for assisted vaginal birth should include detailed information on the assessment, decision making and conduct of the procedure, a plan for postnatal care and sufficient information for counselling in relation to subsequent pregnancies. Use of a standardised proforma is recommended.
Paired cord blood samples should be processed and recorded following all attempts at assisted vaginal birth.
Adverse outcomes, including unsuccessful assisted vaginal birth, major obstetric haemorrhage, OASI, shoulder dystocia and significant neonatal complications should trigger an incident report as part of effective risk management processes.
Obstetricians should ensure that the ongoing care of the woman, baby and family is paramount.
Obstetricians have a duty of candour; a professional responsibility to be honest with patients when things go wrong.
Obstetricians should contribute to adverse event reporting, confidential enquiries, and take part in regular reviews and audits. They should respond constructively to outcomes of reviews, taking necessary steps to address any problems and carry out further retraining where needed.
Maternity units should provide a safe and supportive framework to support women, their families and staff when serious adverse events occur.

birth Outlet Fetal scalp visible without separating the labia
Fetal skull has reached the perineum
Rotation does not exceed 45 °
Low Fetal skull is at station +2 cm, but not on the perineum
Mid Fetal head is no more than one- ﬁfth palpable per abdomen
Leading point of the skull is at station 0 or +1c m
Blood borne viral infections in the mother are not an absolute contraindication to assisted
vaginal birth
Vacuum extraction is not contraindicated following a fetal blood sampling procedure or application of a fetal scalp electrode
Operators should be aware of the risks associated with vacuum extraction compared to forceps
Operative intervention may be indicated based on maternal and fetal findings
Maternal morbidity increases significantly after prolonged second stage of labor
Indications for assisted vaginal birth include suspected fetal compromise, lack of progress in labor, maternal exhaustion or distress
Safe assisted vaginal birth requires careful assessment, communication, and expertise
Ultrasound assessment of fetal head position is recommended prior to assisted vaginal birth
Consent should be obtained and documented prior to attempting assisted vaginal birth
Complex decision making is required for choosing between assisted vaginal birth and second stage cesarean birth
Assisted vaginal birth should be performed by an experienced operator or in their presence

Assess, complete, and manage complications during assisted vaginal birth. Trainees should achieve expertise in spontaneous vaginal birth before training in assisted birth. Training in vacuum and forceps birth is essential, with competency demonstrated before unsupervised births. Complex assisted births should be performed by experienced operators or under supervision. Training is crucial for patient safety. The goal of assisted birth is to expedite birth with minimal morbidity. Familiarize with theoretical knowledge and skills, supplemented by simulation training. Competence should be assessed using OSATS. High-risk assisted births should be conducted in settings with immediate access to cesarean birth. Choose instruments based on clinical circumstances and skill level. Vacuum and forceps have different benefits and risks. Birth by vacuum and forceps can lead to maternal and neonatal complications. Maternal outcomes include episiotomy, tears, OASI, postpartum hemorrhage, and incontinence. Neonatal complications include intracranial and subgaleal hemorrhage.

Perinatal outcomes:
- Cephalhaematoma, facial or scalp lacerations, retinal haemorrhage, jaundice, subgaleal haemorrhage, intracranial haemorrhage, cervical spine injury, skull fracture, facial nerve palsy, and fetal death are all potential risks associated with vacuum and forceps deliveries.
- The ‘Od on’ device is not recommended for routine use until fully evaluated.
- Alternative techniques for rotational assisted vaginal birth should be considered, with Kielland’s forceps showing lower failure rates and neonatal trauma compared to rotational vacuum birth.
- Enhanced skills in assisted vaginal birth may reduce the need for second stage caesarean births.
- Vacuum-assisted birth should be discontinued if there is no evidence of progressive descent or if there are repeated ‘pop-offs’ of the instrument.
- Sequential use of instruments is associated with increased neonatal morbidity and should be approached with caution.
- Failed forceps birth is associated with an increased risk of neonatal traumatic injury.
- Episiotomy should be discussed with the woman as part of the preparation for assisted vaginal birth.

The evidence supports the use of mediolateral episiotomy at assisted vaginal birth to prevent OASI, especially for nulliparous women and birth via forceps. When performing a mediolateral episiotomy, the cut should be at a 60-degree angle initiated when the head is distending the perineum. Routine episiotomy may not be better than a restrictive policy at assisted vaginal birth. Prophylactic antibiotics should be given after assisted vaginal birth to reduce maternal infection. Good hygiene and aseptic techniques are recommended. Reassess women after birth for venous thromboembolism risk and consider thromboprophylaxis. Offer NSAIDs and paracetamol for pain relief after birth. Educate women about the risk of urinary retention and monitor voiding. Offer physiotherapy-directed strategies to reduce the risk of urinary incontinence. Shared decision making and good communication can reduce psychological morbidity after birth. Inform women of the high probability of a spontaneous vaginal birth in subsequent labors following assisted vaginal birth. Individualize care for women with perineal tears or ongoing pelvic floor morbidity.

Women who have required more complex assisted vaginal births in theatre have an 80% chance of achieving a spontaneous vaginal birth in a subsequent pregnancy. Careful review of future plans is recommended for women who have experienced a third- or fourth-degree tear. Documentation for assisted vaginal birth should include detailed information for counselling in subsequent pregnancies and adverse outcomes should trigger an incident report. Obstetricians have a duty to be honest with patients when things go wrong and should participate in adverse event reporting and reviews. Maternity units should provide a safe and supportive framework for women, families, and staff during serious adverse events.

41. Ramphul M, Ooi PV, Burke G, Kennelly MM, Said SAT, Montgomery AA, et al. Instrumental delivery and ultrasound: a multicentre randomised controlled trial of ultrasound assessment of the fetal head position versus standard care as an approach to prevent morbidity at instrumental delivery.
42. Popowski T, Porcher R, Fort J, Javoise S, Rozenberg P. Influence of ultrasound determination of fetal head position on mode of delivery: a pragmatic randomized trial.
43. Ramphul M, O’Brien Y, Murphy DJ. Strategies to enhance assessment of the fetal head position before instrumental delivery: a survey of obstetric practice in the United Kingdom and Ireland.
44. Ramphul M, Kennelly M, Murphy DJ. Establishing the accuracy and acceptability of abdominal ultrasound to identify the fetal head position in the second stage of labour: a validation study.
45. Sananes NP, Kasbaoui S, Severac F, Gaudineau A, Aïssi G, Favre R, et al. Ultrasound measurement of the perineum-fetal head distance as a predictive factor of difficult vaginal operative delivery.
46. Kasbaoui S, Severac F, Aïssi G, Gaudineau A, Lecointre L, Akladios C, et al. Predicting the difficulty of operative vaginal delivery by ultrasound measurement of fetal head station.
47. Bultez T, Quibel T, Bouhanna P, Popowski T, Resche-Rigon M, Rozenberg P. Angle of fetal head progression measured using transperineal ultrasound as a predictive factor of vacuum extraction failure.

Frequency and natural history of subdural haemorrhages in babies and relation to obstetric factors. The ODON device. Rotational vaginal delivery with Kielland’s forceps. Maternal and neonatal morbidity in relation to the instrument used for mid-cavity rotational operative vaginal delivery. Maternal and neonatal outcomes of successful Kielland’s rotational forceps delivery. Use and safety of Kielland’s forceps in current obstetric practice. Kjelland’s forceps in the new millennium. Factors influencing the likelihood of instrumental delivery success. The trouble with vacuum extraction. Risk factors and morbidity associated with suboptimal instrument placement at instrumental delivery. Is duration of operative vaginal delivery associated with adverse obstetric outcomes? Rapid versus stepwise negative pressure application for vacuum extraction assisted vaginal delivery. The effect of sequential use of vacuum and forceps for assisted vaginal delivery on neonatal and maternal outcomes. Failed vacuum does not increase the risk for long-term pediatric neurological morbidity. A cohort study of maternal and neonatal morbidity in relation to use of sequential instruments at operative vaginal delivery. Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism during pregnancy and the puerperium. Analgesia for forceps delivery. Risk factors for postpartum urinary retention. Mode of birth and women’s psychological and physical wellbeing in the postnatal period. Risk factors for developing post-traumatic stress disorder following childbirth. The impact of subjective birth experiences on post-traumatic stress symptoms. Debrieﬁng interventions for the prevention of psychological trauma in women following childbirth. Cohort study of maternal views on future mode of delivery following operative delivery in the second stage of labor. Duty of Candour. Comparison of techniques used to deliver a deeply impacted fetal head at full dilatation. Routine antibiotic prophylaxis after normal vaginal birth for reducing maternal infectious morbidity. Prophylactic antibiotics in the prevention of infection after operative vaginal delivery. Postnatal care up to 8 weeks after birth. Urinary incontinence in women: management. Impact of systematic urinary catheterization protocol in delivery room on covert postpartum urinary retention. Pelvic floor muscle training for prevention and treatment of urinary and faecal incontinence in antenatal and postnatal women. Promoting urinary continence in women after delivery. Mode of delivery and postpartum emotional distress: a cohort study of 55,814 women. Risk factors for developing post-traumatic stress disorder following childbirth: a systematic review. The impact of subjective birth experiences on post-traumatic stress symptoms. Debrieﬁng interventions for the prevention of psychological trauma in women following childbirth. Cohort study of maternal views on future mode of delivery following operative delivery in the second stage of labor. Duty of Candour.

- Head is low-pelvic/outlet
- No rotation or rotates easily 
- No features of CPD 
- Select optimal instrument and place for birth
- Correct application of instrument
- Attempt traction
- Attempt rotation if indicated
- Reassess after 3 pulls
- Consider consequences of failed attempt at OVB
- Inform neonatologist of increased risk of neonatal morbidity 
- Complete the OVB proforma
- Debrief the mother/partner/family