Management of Premenstrual Syndrome
Green-top Guideline No. 48
February 2017
Please cite this paper as: Green LJ, O’Brien PMS, Panay N, Craig M on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists. Management of premenstrual syndrome. BJOG 2017 ;124:e73 –e105.
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.14260
Management of Premenstrual Syndrome
This is the second edition of this guideline, which was ﬁrst published in 2007 under the same title.
Executive summary of recommendations
How is premenstrual syndrome (PMS) diagnosed?
When clinically reviewing women for PMS, symptoms should be recorded prospectively, over
two cycles using a symptom diary, as retrospective recall of symptoms is unreliable. /check
A symptom diary should be completed by the patient prior to commencing treatment./check
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues may be used for 3 months for a de ﬁnitive
diagnosis if the completed symptom diary alone is inconclusive. [ New 2016 ] /check
What aspects are involved in delivering a service to women with PMS?
When should women with PMS be referred to a gynaecologist?
Referral to a gynaecologist should be considered when simple measures (e.g. combined oral
contraceptives [COCs], vitamin B6, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs]) have beenexplored and failed and when the severity of the PMS justi ﬁes gynaecological intervention./check
Who are the key health professionals to manage women with severe PMS?
Women with severe PMS may bene ﬁt from being managed by a multidisciplinary team
comprising a general practitioner, a general gynaecologist or a gynaecologist with a special
interest in PMS, a mental health professional (psychiatrist, clinical psychologist or counsellor)
and a dietician. [ New 2016 ]/check
How is PMS managed?
Are complementary therapies efﬁcacious in treating PMS?
Women with PMS should be informed that there is con ﬂicting evidence to support the use of
some complementary medicines.C
An integrated holistic approach should be used when treating women with PMS./check
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e74 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Interactions with conventional medicines should be considered./check
Is there a role for cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and other psychological counselling techniques?
When treating women with severe PMS, CBT should be considered routinely as a treatment
option.A
Hormonal medical management of PMS
Which COC has the best evidence for managing PMS, including regimens delivering ethinylestradiol?
When treating women with PMS, drospirenone-containing COCs may represent effective treatment
for PMS and should be considered as a ﬁrst-line pharmaceutical intervention. [ New 2016 ]B
What is the optimum COC pill regimen, e.g. continuous, cyclical or ﬂexible?
When treating women with PMS, emerging data suggest use of the contraceptive pill
continuously rather than cyclically. /check
How efﬁcacious is percutaneous estradiol?
Percutaneous estradiol combined with cyclical progestogens has been shown to be effective forthe management of physical and psychological symptoms of severe PMS.A
When treating women with PMS, alternative barrier or intrauterine methods of contraceptionshould be used when estradiol is used to suppress ovulation./check
How can the return of PMS symptoms be avoided during estrogen therapy with progestogenic protection?
When using transdermal estrogen to treat women with PMS, the lowest possible dose ofprogesterone or progestogen is recommended to minimise progestogenic adverse effects. [ New 2016 ]A
Women should be informed that low levels of levonorgestrel released by the levonorgestrel-
releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) 52 mg can initially produce PMS-type adverse effects(as well as bleeding problems). [ New 2016 ]/check
Micronised progesterone is theoretically less likely to reintroduce PMS-like symptoms and
should therefore be considered as ﬁrst line for progestogenic opposition rather than
progestogens. [ New 2016 ]/check
What is the optimum regimen for prevention of endometrial hyperplasia?
When treating women with percutaneous estradiol, a cyclical 10 –12 day course of oral or
vaginal progesterone or long-term progestogen with the LNG-IUS 52 mg should be used for theprevention of endometrial hyperplasia. [ New 2016 ]/check
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e75 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
When using a short duration of progestogen therapy, or in cases where only low doses are
tolerated, there should be a low threshold for investigating unscheduled bleeding. [ New 2016 ]/check
What is the safety of estradiol on the premenopausal endometrium and breast tissue?
When treating women with PMS using estradiol, women should be informed that there are
insufﬁcient data to advise on the long-term effects on breast and endometrial tissue. /check
For how long can estradiol be used safely and what is the risk of recurrence?
Due to the uncertainty of the long-term effects of opposed estradiol therapy, treatment of
women with PMS should be on an individual basis, taking into account the risks and bene ﬁts.
[New 2016 ]/check
What is the evidence for efﬁcacy and adverse effects of danazol in the treatment of PMS?
Women with PMS should be advised that, although treatment with low dose danazol (200 mg
twice daily) is effective in the luteal phase for breast symptoms, it also has potentialirreversible virilising effects. [ New 2016 ]A
Women treated with danazol for PMS should be advised to use contraception during treatment
due to its potential virilising effects on female fetuses. [ New 2016 ] /check
How effective are GnRH analogues for treating severe PMS?
GnRH analogues are highly effective in treating severe PMS. [ New 2016 ]A
When treating women with PMS, GnRH analogues should usually be reserved for women with
the most severe symptoms and not recommended routinely unless they are being used to aiddiagnosis or treat particularly severe cases. [ New 2016 ]/check
How should women with PMS receiving add-back therapy be managed?
When treating women with severe PMS using GnRH analogues for more than 6 months, add-
back hormone therapy should be used. [ New 2016 ]A
When add-back hormone therapy is required, continuous combined hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) or tibolone is recommended.A
Women should be provided with general advice regarding the effects of exercise, diet andsmoking on bone mineral density (BMD)./check
Women on long-term treatment should have measurement of BMD (ideally by dual-energyX-ray absorptiometry [DEXA]) every year. Treatment should be stopped if bone density declinessigniﬁcantly. [ New 2016 ]D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e76 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Can GnRH analogues be useful in clariﬁcation of diagnostic category?
When the diagnosis of PMS is unclear from 2 months ’prospective Daily Record of Severity of
Problems (DRSP) charting, GnRH analogues can be used to establish and/or support a diagnosisof PMS. [ New 2016 ]/check
What is the role for progesterone and progestogen preparations in treating PMS?
There is good evidence to suggest that treating PMS with progesterone or progestogens is not
appropriate. [ New 2016 ]A
There is no evidence to support the use of the LNG-IUS 52 mg alone to treat PMS symptoms.
Its role should be con ﬁned to opposing the action of estrogen therapy on the endometrium. /check
Non-hormonal medical management of PMS
How do selective SSRIs work in PMS and how should they be given?
SSRIs should be considered one of the ﬁrst-line pharmaceutical management options in severe
PMS. [ New 2016 ]A
What is the efﬁcacy of SSRIs in treatment of PMS?
When treating women with PMS, either luteal or continuous dosing with SSRIs can be
recommended.B
Is there any evidence on how SSRIs should be discontinued when used in PMS?
SSRIs should be discontinued gradually to avoid withdrawal symptoms, if given on a continuousbasis./check
What are the risks and adverse effects of SSRIs?
Women with PMS treated with SSRIs should be warned of the possible adverse effects such asnausea, insomnia, somnolence, fatigue and reduction in libido. [ New 2016 ]/check
Is there evidence for improved efﬁcacy with other SSRI regimens?
When using SSRIs to treat PMS, ef ﬁcacy may be improved and adverse effects minimised by
the use of luteal-phase regimens with the newer agents. [ New 2016 ]A
What preconception and early pregnancy advice should be given regarding SSRIs/serotonin –noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs)?
Women should be provided with prepregnancy counselling at every opportunity. They should
be informed that PMS symptoms will abate during pregnancy and SSRIs should therefore bediscontinued prior to and during pregnancy. [ New 2016 ]/check
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e77 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Women should be informed how to safely stop SSRIs. [ New 2016 ]/check
Women with PMS who become pregnant while taking an SSRI/SNRI should be aware of the
possible, although unproven, association with congenital malformations. They should bereassured that if such an association does exist, it is likely to be extremely small whencompared to the general population. [ New 2016 ]B
Are diuretics efﬁcacious in the treatment of PMS?
Spironolactone can be used in women with PMS to treat physical symptoms. [ New 2016 ]C
How can PMS be managed surgically?
Can surgical management of PMS be justiﬁed and is it efﬁcacious?
When treating women with severe PMS, hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy has been
shown to be of bene ﬁt.D
When treating women with PMS, hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy can be considered
when medical management has failed, long-term GnRH analogue treatment is required or othergynaecological conditions indicate surgery. [ New 2016 ]/check
Should the efﬁcacy of surgery always be predicted by the prior use of GnRH analogues?
When treating women with PMS, surgery should not be contemplated without preoperative
use of GnRH analogues as a test of cure and to ensure that HRT is tolerated. /check
What is the role of HRT after surgical management?
Women being surgically treated for PMS should be advised to use HRT, particularly if they areyounger than 45 years of age. [ New 2016 ]/check
Is there a role for endometrial ablation, oophorectomy or hysterectomy alone?
When treating women with severe PMS, endometrial ablation and hysterectomy with
conservation of the ovaries are not recommended. [ New 2016 ] /check
Bilateral oophorectomy alone (without removal of the uterus) will necessitate the use of a
progestogen as part of any subsequent HRT regimen and this carries a risk of reintroduction ofPMS-like symptoms (progestogen-induced premenstrual disorder). [ New 2016 ]/check
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e78 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Classiﬁcation of PMS
How PMS is treated –a decision-making algorithm
First line Exercise, cogni Ɵve behavioural therapy, vitamin B6
Combined new genera Ɵon pill (cyclically or con Ɵnuously)
ConƟnuous or luteal phase (day 15–28) low dose SSRIs, e.g. citalopram/escitalopram 10 mg
Second line Estradiol patches (100 micrograms) + micronise d progesterone (100 mg or 200 mg [day 17–28],
orally or vaginally) or LNG-IUS 52 mg 
Higher dose SSRIs con Ɵnuously or luteal phase, e.g. citalopram/escitalopram 20–40 mg
Third line GnRH analogues + add-back HRT (con Ɵnuous combined estrogen + progesterone
[e.g. 50–100 micrograms estradiol patches or2–4 doses of estradiol gel combined with
micronised progesterone 100 mg/day] or Ɵbolone 2.5 mg) 
Fourth line Surgical treatment ± HRT
Patient presenting with premenstrual symptoms
Patient records menstrual symptoms and effect on daily life for two consecutive menstrual cycles
Symptoms cyclical and
 relieved by menstruationSymptoms cyclical and
 relieved by menstruationSymptoms cyclical and
 relieved by menstruationSymptoms cyclical 
Symptom-free weekAffects quality of lifeNo menstruationNo additional factorsSymptoms cyclical and
 relieved by menstruationNon-cyclical symptoms
No symptom-free weekConstant influence on quality of lifeSymptom-free week
Affects quality of life
Menstruation
Progestogen treatmentMenstruation
No additional factors
M
M M M M M M M MM M M M
P
P M P MSymptom-free weekNo influence on quality of lifeSymptom-free week
Affects quality of lifeNo symptom-free week
Affects quality of life
Menstruation
No additonal factors
Physiological (mild)
premenstrual disorder
Counselling and
reassurance required, no
need for treatmentCore premenstrual disorder
(premenstrual syndrome
or premenstrual dysphoric
disorder)
Consider all alternative
approaches to treatmentPremenstrual
exacerbationPremenstrual disorder
with absent menstruationProgestogen induced
premenstrual disorderUnderlying psychological
disorder, not
premenstrual disorder
Psychiatric referral Alternative progesterone 
treatmentTreat as core
premenstrual disorderTreatment should aim to
treat underlying medical,
physical. or psychiatric
condition or suppress
ovulation (or both)Effect on
quality of life
Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycleEffect on
quality of life
Effect on
quality of life
Effect on
quality of life
Effect on
quality of life
Effect on
quality of lifeMenstruation
No additonal factorsMenstruation
Existing non-menstrual condition
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e79 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1. Purpose and scope
The aim of this guideline is to review the diagnosis, classiﬁcation and management of premenstrual syndrome (PMS).
The evidence for pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatments is examined.
2. Introduction and background epidemiology
Since the 2007 guideline, there has been considerable work by the International Society for Premenstrual Disorders
(ISPMD) and the National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome (NAPS) to achieve consensus on the recognition,diagnosis, classiﬁcation and management of PMS. Misdiagnosis of PMS (e.g. confusion with bipolar disorder) and theuse of a wide range of treatments, often with little evidence for effectiveness and safety, demand that these issuesare addressed.
2.1 Deﬁnition of PMS
PMS encompasses a vast array of psychological symptoms such as depression, anxiety, irritability, loss of conﬁdenceand mood swings. There are also physical symptoms, typically bloatedness and mastalgia. It is the timing, rather thanthe types of symptoms, and the degree of impact on daily activity that supports a diagnosis of PMS. The character ofsymptoms in an individual patient does not inﬂuence the diagnosis. In order to differentiate physiological menstrualsymptoms from PMS, it must be demonstrated that symptoms cause signiﬁcant impairment to the individual duringthe luteal phase of the menstrual cycle.
1
2.2 Classiﬁcation of PMS (ISPMD consensus)
Core premenstrual disorders (PMDs) are the most commonly encountered and widely recognised type of PMS. Aswith all PMDs, symptoms must be severe enough to affect daily functioning or interfere with work, schoolperformance or interpersonal relationships. The symptoms of core PMDs are nonspeciﬁc and recur in ovulatorycycles. They must be present during the luteal phase and abate as menstruation begins, which is then followed by asymptom-free week. There is no limit on the type or number of symptoms experienced; however, some individualswill have predominantly psychological, predominantly somatic or a mixture of symptoms (Appendix II).
There are also PMDs that do not meet the criteria for core PMDs. These are called ‘variant’ PMDs and fall into four
subtypes.
1. ‘Premenstrual exacerbation of an underlying disorder ’, such as diabetes, depression, epilepsy, asthma
and migraine. These patients will experience symptoms relevant to their disorder throughout the menstrualcycle.
2. ‘Non-ovulatory PMDs ’ occur in the presence of ovarian activity without ovulation. This is poorly understood
due to a lack of evidence, but it is thought that follicular activity of the ovary can instigate symptoms.
3. ‘Progestogen-induced PMDs ’ are caused by exogenous progestogens present in hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) and the combined oral contraceptive (COC) pill. This reintroduces symptoms to women whomay be particularly sensitive to progestogens. Although progestogen-only contraceptives may introducesymptoms, as they are noncyclical they are not included within variant PMDs and are considered adverse effects(probably with similar mechanisms) of continuous progestogen therapy.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e80 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4. ‘PMDs with absent menstruation ’ include women who still have a functioning ovarian cycle, but for reasons
such as hysterectomy, endometrial ablation or the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) they
do not menstruate.2
An additional term, premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) classiﬁed by the American Psychiatric Association in1994
3requires fulﬁlment of strict criteria. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V)
demands ﬁve out of 11 stipulated symptoms, one of which must include mood.4The symptoms must strictly occur in
the luteal phase and must be severe enough to disrupt daily functioning. However, these restrictive criteria may
exclude women with a narrow range of severe symptoms who should receive treatment.
Care must be taken not to label women with underlying psychiatric or somatic disorders that do not appear to be
inﬂuenced by the menstrual cycle as having PMS.
2.3 Prevalence and aetiology
Four in ten women (40%) experience symptoms of PMS and of these 5 –8% suffer from severe PMS.5A cross-
sectional survey of 929 women based in Southampton who completed a 6-week prospective symptom diaryrevealed a 24% prevalence of premenstrual symptoms.
6Although the aetiology remains uncertain, it revolves
around the ovarian hormone cycle, which is reinforced by the absence of PMS prior to puberty, during pregnancyand after the menopause. Currently two theories predominate and appear interlinked. The ﬁrst suggests thatsome women are ‘sensitive’ to progesterone and progestogens, since the serum concentrations of estrogen orprogesterone are the same in those with or without PMS. The second theory implicates the neurotransmittersserotonin and c-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Serotonin receptors are responsive to estrogen and progesterone, and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are proven to reduce PMS symptoms. GABA levels are modulatedby the metabolite of progesterone, allopregnanolone, and in women with PMS the allopregnanolone levels appearto be reduced.
7
3. Identi ﬁcation and assessment of evidence
This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing RCOG Green-top Guidelines.
The Cochrane Library (including the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and DARE), EMBASE, Trip,MEDLINE, Psych INFO, CINAHL, the Allied and Complementary Medicine Database (AMED), and the BritishNursing Index (BNI) were searched. The search was restricted to articles published between 2005 and March 2014in the English language. The databases were searched using the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms,including all subheadings, and this was combined with a keyword search. Search words included ‘premenstrualsyndrome’, ‘premenstrual tension’, ‘late luteal phase dysphoric disorder’, ‘premenstrual dysphoric disorder’, ‘PMDD’,‘PMS’, ‘PMD’, ‘LLPDD’, ‘PMT’. The search was restricted to humans and there were no language restrictions.
Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. In the absence of published evidence, these have
been annotated as ‘good practice points’. Further information about the assessment of evidence and the grading ofrecommendations may be found in Appendix I.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e81 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4. How is PMS diagnosed?
When clinically reviewing women for PMS, symptoms should be recorded prospectively, over
two cycles using a symptom diary, as retrospective recall of symptoms is unreliable. /check
A symptom diary should be completed by the patient prior to commencing treatment./check
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues may be used for 3 months for adeﬁnitive diagnosis if the completed symptom diary alone is inconclusive./check
There are many patient-rated questionnaires available. However, the Daily Record of Severity of Problems (DRSP)
remains the most widely used and is simple for patients to use.2The DRSP has also been consistently shown to
provide a reliable and reproducible record of symptoms (see Appendix III).8The Premenstrual Symptoms Screening
Tool (PSST)9is another patient-rated questionnaire; however, it is retrospective and has been validated for screening
but not diagnosis. Various attempts at electronic data capture have been attempted. Commercially availablediagnostic apps are now available, but these require validation. Another easily accessible symptom diary exists onthe NAPS website (www.pms.org.uk). This diary is not validated but is sufﬁcient to be used in the context ofclinical practice.
10
Before any form of treatment is initiated, symptom diaries should be completed over at least two consecutivemenstrual cycles. Treatment may improve symptoms, therefore masking underlying PMS, but it can also create apattern of symptoms incompatible with a diagnosis of PMS, making the interpretation of DRSP charts confusing.These charts should be brought by the patient to any future appointments.
Symptom diaries can sometimes be confusing and inconclusive: this is most likely to occur in those patients with
variant PMDs. GnRH analogues, which are widely used within gynaecology, can be useful in separating those with andthose without PMS by inhibiting cyclical ovarian function. These should be used for 3 months to establish a deﬁnitivediagnosis. This is to allow a month for the agonist to generate a complete hormonal suppressive effect, as well asproviding 2 months’ worth of symptom diaries.
5. What aspects are involved in delivering a service to women with PMS?
5.1 When should women with PMS be referred to a gynaecologist?
Referral to a gynaecologist should be considered when simple measures (e.g. COCs,
vitamin B6, SSRIs) have been explored and failed and when the severity of the PMSjustiﬁes gynaecological intervention./check
General practitioners will manage the majority of cases of PMS; therefore, awareness of the condition together with
up-to-date information on its management is essential. Referral to secondary care should be reserved for those with
conﬁrmed PMS in whom simple measures have failed to control symptoms. In women whose symptom diaries
demonstrate noncyclical symptoms, an underlying psychiatric or somatic disorder should be considered.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e82 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
5.2 Who are the key health professionals to manage women with severe PMS?
Women with severe PMS may bene ﬁt from being managed by a multidisciplinary team
comprising a general practitioner, a general gynaecologist or a gynaecologist with a specialinterest in PMS, a mental health professional (psychiatrist, clinical psychologist or counsellor)and a dietician./check
While this set-up is desirable, it is not widely available or implemented within the National Health Service (NHS).
There are specialist clinics within tertiary centres to which patients can be referred. However, it is likely that thegeneral practitioner will remain key in facilitating potential treatments. A multidisciplinary team can offer women anindividualised management plan utilising a range of treatments, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) andlifestyle interventions.
11
6. How is PMS managed?
6.1 Are complementary therapies efﬁcacious in treating PMS?
Women with PMS should be informed that there is con ﬂicting evidence to support the use
of some complementary medicines.C
An integrated holistic approach should be used when treating women with PMS./check
Interactions with conventional medicines should be considered./check
Although there is limited evidence to support the use of complementary therapies, some women with PMS
may beneﬁt from a holistic approach.12This is particularly important for women in whom hormonal
therapy is contraindicated. It is important to evaluate evidence carefully for PMS as there is a 36 –43%
placebo response.13,14Evidence
level 1 /C0
Table 1 summarises current research into the beneﬁts of selected complementary therapies for the treatment of
PMS.
Unsaturated fatty acids, as contained in evening primrose oil, have been shown in one prospective randomised trial15
to improve menstrual symptoms compared with placebo at both 1 g/day and 2 g/day dosages. There was no
measurable change in cholesterol levels.
Dante et al.16conducted a systematic review into herbal remedies for PMS. Four of the trials, including almost
600 women, supported the use of Vitex agnus castus L.(also known as chasteberry). However, this study concluded
that there were inadequate safety data to support its use.
Whelan et al.17conducted a systematic review of 29 randomised controlled trials (RCTs). Two of these studies
(n=499) revealed consistent evidence for calcium in alleviating both physical and psychological symptoms of PMS.
The evidence for both vitamin B6 and Vitex was contradictory in this review and therefore advice could not be given
for either. Due to the lack of power, reliable recommendations cannot be provided.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e83 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Table 1. Summary of evidence for selected complementary therapies
Complementary
therapyBene ﬁt Types of studies Numbers in the study Note
Exercise22–25Some bene ﬁt Nonrandomised
and randomised72 (4 published studies) High quality studies recommended.
Reﬂexology26Some bene ﬁt Randomised 35
Vitamin B627–39Mixed results Double-blind
RandomisedCross-over1067 (13 published studies) Peripheral neuropathy with
high doses (most studiesperformed using higher doses).Department of Health restrictsthe daily dose to 10 mg.
Magnesium
37,40,41Mixed results Double-blind
Randomised
Cross-over153 (3 published studies) Used in premenstrual phase.
Multivitamins42–45Unknown – 400 (several published
studies)Unclear which are the active
ingredients.
Calcium/
vitamin D46,47Yes Double-blind
RandomisedCross-over499 (2 published studies)
Isoﬂavones
48,49Mixed results Double-blind
Randomised
Cross-over72 (2 published studies) May bene ﬁt menstrual migraine.
Vitex agnus castus
L.19,39,50 –54Yes Double-blind
Randomised923 (7 published studies) There is no standardised
preparation.
St John ’s
Wort20,21,55,56Mixed results Double-blind
Placebo-controlled401 (4 published studies) May bene ﬁt physical and
behavioural symptoms.Many withdrew from one studydue to adverse effects.Signiﬁcant interactions with
conventional medicines.
The British National Formularyadvises avoid concomitantuse with SSRIs.
Ginkgo biloba
57,58Some bene ﬁt Double-blind
Placebo-controlled233 (2 published studies)
Saffron59Yes Double-blind
Placebo-controlled47 Further data before recommendation.
Evening primrose
oil15,60 –63Some bene ﬁt Double-blind
Placebo-controlledCross-over215 (4 published studies) May bene ﬁt women with cyclical
breast symptoms.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e84 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
A systematic review18focusing on the use of Vitex illustrated that in four out of ﬁve discrete placebo-controlled trials
and two comparator trials, Vitex was superior to placebo, pyridoxine and magnesium in the treatment of PMS. In
another study, it appeared comparable to ﬂuoxetine for PMDD.16The safety of Vitex is described as excellent, with
adverse effects being infrequent and mild.18,19Studies have shown a dose dependent treatment response; however,
due to the variability in quality and content of preparations a dosage range to treat PMS cannot be recommended.
RCTs including St John’s Wort ( Hypericum perforatum ) show conﬂicting results. A trial20including
36 women with mild PMS showed signiﬁcant improvements in physical and behavioural symptoms but no
improvement in mood or pain-related symptoms. Another trial21including 125 women found no evidence
of beneﬁt but felt that this may be attributable to low statistical power. St John’s Wort interacts withother medications, in particular it should not be used concurrently with SSRIs and can render low doseCOCs ineffective.Evidence
level 1 /C0
6.2 Is there a role for CBT and other psychological counselling techniques?
When treating women with severe PMS, CBT should be considered routinely as a treatment
option.A
Hunter et al.77conducted a randomised trial comparing ﬂuoxetine, CBT and the combination of ﬂuoxetine
and CBT for the treatment of PMDD. After a 6-month treatment period, all three treatment groupsshowed evidence of beneﬁt, which was similar for each group, with ﬂuoxetine combined with CBT nomore effective than the two component therapies used separately. Fluoxetine showed quickerimprovements; however at follow-up CBT was associated with better maintenance of treatment effectscompared with ﬂuoxetine.
Evidence
level 1 +
A meta-analysis identiﬁed ﬁve RCTs testing CBT against a control intervention. The evidence was poor
due to a high risk of bias but demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction in depression, anxiety and behaviouralproblems. If CBT proves successful to a patient it would avoid pharmacotherapy and potential adverseeffects.
78Evidence
level 1 /C0Table 1. (Continued)
Complementary
therapyBene ﬁt Types of studies Numbers in the study Note
Acupuncture64–73
Lemon balm74
Curcumin75
Wheat germ76Some bene ﬁt
Some bene ﬁt
Some bene ﬁt
Some bene ﬁtCase–control
Double-blind
Placebo-controlled
Double-blind
Placebo-controlled
Triple-blind
Placebo-controlled235 (10 published studies)
100 (1 published study)
70 (1 published study)
84 (1 published study)High risk of bias. Further data
before recommendation.PMS severity quanti ﬁed by PSST.
Further data before recommendation.
PMS severity quanti ﬁed by an
unvalidated symptom score.Further data before recommendation.
PMS severity quanti ﬁed by an
unvalidated symptom score.Further data before recommendation.Table 1. (Continued)
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e85 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
6.3 Hormonal medical management of PMS
6.3.1 What is the role of cycle-modifying agents in managing PMS?
6.3.1.1 Which COC has the best evidence for managing PMS, including regimens delivering ethinylestradiol?
When treating women with PMS, drospirenone-containing COCs may represent effective
treatment for PMS and should be considered as a ﬁrst-line pharmaceutical intervention.B
Despite the combined pill’s ability to suppress ovulation, studies initially illustrated no beneﬁt in the
treatment of PMS.79This may be attributed to the progestogens in second-generation pills (levonorgestrel
or norethisterone) regenerating PMS-type symptoms. Further research has therefore been directedtowards new combined contraceptives, in particular those containing the antimineralocorticoid andantiandrogenic progestogen, such as drospirenone.Evidence
level 2 +
AC o c h r a n er e v i e w80involving ﬁve RCTs and 1920 participants looked into the effectiveness of drospirenone
(3 mg) and ethinylestradiol COCs against placebo or an alternative COC, where the progestogen wassubstituted for desogestrel (150 micrograms) or levonorgestrel (150 micrograms). This concluded that, whencompared with placebo, drospirenone-containing oral contraceptives used for 3 months did reduce theseverity of symptoms for those with PMDD (mean difference /C07.92; 95% CI /C011.16 to /C04.67). The severity
of symptoms was rated using validated questionnaires and where nonvalidated tools were used the originaldata were analysed.Evidence
level 1 /C0
A double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial81of 64 subjects showed drospirenone 3 mg and
ethinylestradiol 20 micrograms to be effective for treating PMDD, based upon DRSP chart scoring. Themean decrease from baseline scoring was /C012.47 (95% CI /C018.28 to /C06.66, P<0.001). Participants were
allocated to their initial treatment arm for three cycles and swapped to the alternative treatment arm afterone cycle treatment-free.
Another double-blind RCT
82of 450 participants comparing the same contraceptive pill with placebo also
supported its use in PMDD.Evidence
level 1 +
This oral contraceptive is now available on the NHS in the UK; it is licensed in Europe and the USA for PMDD but
only in women requiring oral contraception.
6.3.1.2 What is the optimum COC pill regimen, e.g. continuous, cyclical or ﬂexible?
When treating women with PMS, emerging data suggest use of the contraceptive pill
continuously rather than cyclically. /check
Continuous therapy would seem appropriate; there are some data to support this. Phase I of a study83
showed that a 168-day extended regimen of drospirenone 3 mg and ethinylestradiol 30 micrograms led to
a signiﬁcant decrease in premenstrual-type symptoms compared with a standard 21/7-day regimen. Phase IIof this trial extended the continuous use of this COC for a total of 364 days. Menstrual symptoms wererecorded using DRSP charts. The results concluded that mood, headache and pelvic pain scores improvedEvidence
level 2 /C0
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e86 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
when compared with a 21/7-day regimen. There was a high level of satisfaction, with most women
continuing on this regimen 6 months on from the 364-day trial.84This trial used a preparation that is
currently available in the UK as a 24/4-day regimen containing ethinylestradiol 20 micrograms anddrospirenone 3 mg; however, phase II of the study supports continuous use and this may be consideredfor off-label usage.Evidence
level 2 /C0
6.3.2 How efﬁcacious is percutaneous estradiol?
Percutaneous estradiol combined with cyclical progestogens has been shown to be effective
for the management of physical and psychological symptoms of severe PMS.A
When treating women with PMS, alternative barrier or intrauterine methods ofcontraception should be used when estradiol is used to suppress ovulation./check
Percutaneous preparations give sufﬁcient estradiol levels to suppress ovarian activity. A placebo-controlled
trial demonstrated that implants of 17 b-estradiol combined with cyclical progestogens are effective for the
management of severe PMS symptoms. Administered as a 100-mg implant, this proved to be highlyeffective when compared with placebo.
85Both implants and patches have been evaluated in controlled
trials but gels have not. Implants are available in the UK but are unlicensed for use in PMS.
In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 20 women with cross-over at 3 months,
transdermal estradiol patches (200 micrograms) were assessed and found to be highly effective.86
Signiﬁcant improvements occurred after changing to active treatment, proven by the use of symptomquestionnaires. There was concern that estradiol 200 micrograms twice weekly was still too high a doseto be used as long-term therapy. A subsequent randomised study
87showed that 100-microgram estradiol
patches twice weekly were as effective as 200 micrograms in reducing symptom levels in severe PMS andthis dosage was better tolerated.
88Evidence
level 1 +
Although doses are usually sufﬁcient to suppress ovulation, contraceptive efﬁcacy has not been demonstrated and so
should not be relied upon; additional contraceptive measures should be adopted. It is also important to ensureappropriate endometrial protection (see section 6.3.4).
6.3.3 How can the return of PMS symptoms be avoided during estrogen therapy with progestogenic
protection?
When using transdermal estrogen to treat women with PMS, the lowest possible dose of
progesterone or progestogen is recommended to minimise progestogenic adverse effects.A
Women should be informed that low levels of levonorgestrel released by the LNG-IUS 52 mgcan initially produce PMS-type adverse effects (as well as bleeding problems)./check
Micronised progesterone is theoretically less likely to reintroduce PMS-like symptoms andshould therefore be considered as ﬁrst line for progestogenic opposition rather than
progestogens./check
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e87 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Use of continuous estradiol necessitates the addition of cyclical progesterone or progestogens
(10–12 days/cycle) to avoid endometrial hyperplasia in women who have a uterus. A study of long-term
treatment over eight cycles using a 100 mg estradiol patch with a low dose of cyclical norethisteroneacetate (1 mg; 10 days/cycle) has shown beneﬁt compared with placebo, with continued improvement in a6-month extension.
89Evidence
level 1 +
Intrauterine administration of progestogen has the potential to avoid systemic absorption and hence minimise
progestogenic effects. The LNG-IUS 52 mg as progestogen replacement can maximise efﬁcacy by minimising PMS-like
adverse effects. Low systemic levels of levonorgestrel released by the LNG-IUS can initially produce PMS-typeadverse effects (as well as bleeding) in progestogen-intolerant women and on rare occasions it will need to beremoved due to the persisting adverse effects.
90–92
Micronised oral progesterone (100 or 200 mg) has fewer androgenic and unwanted adverse effects
compared with progestogens such as norethisterone and levonorgestrel. Progesterone may act as a
diuretic and a central nervous system anxiolytic and so in theory could also alleviate PMS symptoms,
although there is currently little evidence to demonstrate this.90Micronised progesterone can also be
administered vaginally, which may be better tolerated by avoiding ﬁrst-pass hepatic metabolism.93,94
Vaginally administered progesterone avoids the formation of psychoactive metabolites such asallopregnanolone.Evidence
level 2 /C0
6.3.4 What is the optimum regimen for prevention of endometrial hyperplasia?
When treating women with percutaneous estradiol, a cyclical 10 –12 day course of oral or
vaginal progesterone or long-term progestogen with the LNG-IUS 52 mg should be used forthe prevention of endometrial hyperplasia./check
When using a short duration of progestogen therapy, or in cases where only low doses aretolerated, there should be a low threshold for investigating unscheduled bleeding./check
The lowest dose for the shortest time should limit unwanted progestogenic effects, and therefore an oral dose
(micronised progesterone 100 mg or norethisterone 2.5 mg) for days 17 –28 of each calendar month should be
sufﬁcient.88
Due to the lack of evidence regarding endometrial hyperplasia and neoplasia in this cohort, any suspicioussymptoms should be investigated. Evidence
level 4
6.3.5 What is the safety of estradiol on the premenopausal endometrium and breast tissue?
When treating women with PMS using estradiol, women should be informed that there are
insufﬁcient data to advise on the long-term effects on breast and endometrial tissue. /check
There is insufﬁcient evidence to determine whether there is an increased risk of endometrial or breast
carcinoma in premenopausal women using percutaneous patches and cyclical progestogens or the LNG-IUS.Randomised placebo-controlled trial data in large populations looking at major outcome measures over a longperiod of time are lacking.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e88 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
6.3.6 For how long can estradiol be used safely and what is the risk of recurrence?
Due to the uncertainty of the long-term effects of opposed estradiol therapy, treatment of
women with PMS should be on an individual b asis, taking into account the risks and
bene ﬁts./check
Treatment of PMS is required as long as the woman’s ovarian cycle continues to function. Discontinuation of
treatment could allow a return of premenstrual symptoms. A reliable long-term treatment is therefore essential and
should be seriously considered when evaluating treatment options.
Unlike premature ovarian failure, women with PMS still have a functioning endogenous hormone cycle. With this in
mind, there are no long-term data among this speciﬁc cohort of patients.
6.3.7 What is the evidence for efﬁcacy and adverse effects of danazol in the treatment of PMS?
Women with PMS should be advised that, although treatment with low dose danazol
(200 mg twice daily) is effective in the luteal phase for breast symptoms, it also haspotential irreversible virilising effects.A
Women treated with danazol for PMS should be advised to use contraception duringtreatment due to its potential virilising effects on female fetuses./check
Cycle suppression may be achieved using danazol, an androgenic steroid. Mansel et al. ﬁrst assessed the
effect of danazol on PMS symptoms in a study rand omised on the basis of the complaint of breast
tenderness.95It demonstrated beneﬁt for breast but no other PMS symptoms. Other studies have
shown greater beneﬁt.96,97A randomised, double-blind, cross-over study compared three successive
cycles of danazol at a dose of 200 mg twic e daily with three cycles of placebo.97Twenty-eight of 31
women completed at least one cycle of treatment while recording symptoms. From this study, the
authors demonstrated that danazol at a dose of 200 mg twice daily was superior to placebo for therelief of severe PMS during the premenstrual period. However, this superiority is muted or evenr e v e r s e dw h e nt h ee n t i r ec y c l ei sc o n s i d e r e d .T h i sm a yb ee x p l a i n e db yt h ef a c tt h a td a n a z o lt h e r a p y
does have some adverse effects, which may interfere with the usual symptom-fr ee late follicular phase
of women with PMS. These symptoms include acne, weight gain, hirsutism and deepening of the voice.
One solution suggested for this problem might be to limit danazol treatment to the luteal phase only.
One study of danazol given in the luteal phase demonstrated improvement in breast symptoms only, butwith minimal adverse effects.
98Evidence
level 1 +
Danazol taken during pregnancy is known to cause cliteromegaly, labial fusion and urogenital sinus abnormalities in
female fetuses. These abnormalities occur more frequently with higher doses, however cases have been reported at
200 mg daily.99
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e89 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
6.3.8 How effective are GnRH analogues for treating severe PMS?
GnRH analogues are highly effective in treating severe PMS.A
When treating women with PMS, GnRH analogues should usually be reserved for women
with the most severe symptoms and not recommended routinely unless they are being usedto aid diagnosis or treat particularly severe cases./check
GnRH analogues suppress ovarian steroid production and therefore cause a drastic improvement or
complete cessation of symptoms in patients with core PMDs, but their effects on bone mineral density(BMD) mean that they should only be considered for severe cases. A meta-analysis identiﬁed 71 womenon active treatment in seven trials.
100The overall standardised mean difference (SMD) for all trials was
/C01.19 (95% CI /C01.88 to /C00.51). The OR for beneﬁt was 8.66 (95% CI 2.52 –30.26). The SMD was /C01.43
and OR 13.38 (95% CI 3.9 –46.0) if data were taken only from anovulation trials. Efﬁcacy of symptom relief
was greater for physical than for behavioural symptoms (physical SMD /C01.16, 95% CI /C01.53 to /C00.79;
behavioural SMD /C00.68, 95% CI /C01.11 to /C00.25) but the difference was not signiﬁcant ( P=0.484). If
GnRH analogue therapy does not result in elimination of premenstrual symptoms, a lack of efﬁcacysuggests a questionable diagnosis rather than a limitation of the therapy.Evidence
level 1 ++
6.3.9 How should women with PMS receiving add-back therapy be managed?
When treating women with severe PMS using GnRH analogues for more than 6 months,
add-back hormone therapy should be used.A
When add-back hormone therapy is required, continuous combined HRT or tibolone isrecommended.A
Women should be provided with general advice regarding the effects of exercise, diet andsmoking on BMD./check
Women on long-term treatment should have measurement of BMD (ideally by dual-energyX-ray absorptiometry [DEXA]) every year. Treatment should be stopped if bone densitydeclines signi ﬁcantly.D
As symptoms return with the onset of ovarian function, therapy may (rarely) have to be continued
indeﬁnitely; GnRH alone is precluded by signiﬁcant trabecular bone loss, which can occur with only6 months of treatment. It should be noted that GnRH analogues are only licensed for use for 6 monthswhen used alone and are not licensed to treat PMS.
101
Continuous combined therapy or tibolone is preferable to sequential combined therapy in order tominimise the risk of reappearance of PMS- like progestogenic adverse effects.
102,103Both of these
methods of add-back HRT combat the hypoestrog enic symptoms apparent with GnRH analogues
but also maintain BMD. The overall SMD favour ed neither GnRH alone nor GnRH with add-back
(SMD 0.12, 95% CI /C00.34 to 0.59), demonstrating there is no reversal of the beneﬁcial effect of GnRH
when using add-back.100Evidence
level 1 ++
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e90 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Meta-analyses104,105have shown smoking and high/low body mass index (BMI) to be risk factors for
fractures. A high BMI in particular is associated with an increased likelihood of osteoporotic fractures andupper arm fractures. A low BMI is linked with hip fractures. A meta-analysis
106involving six RCTs showed
that activity in the form of brief, high impact exercise (less than 30 minutes) improved BMD.Evidence
level 2 ++
DEXA is accepted as the gold standard investigation for assessing BMD.107DEXA scans every year are
considered useful as less frequent scans would delay diagnosis of signiﬁcant bone loss and subsequent
review of GnRH analogue treatment, and more frequent scans may not perceive small changes. National
Institute of Health and Care Excellence guidance108recommends a DEXA scan frequency of every 2 years,
however, this is largely based on monitoring the natural menopause and may not apply in this uniquesituation. Focused research in this area is required.Evidence
level 2 +
6.3.10 Can GnRH analogues be useful in clariﬁcation of diagnostic category?
When the diagnosis of PMS is unclear from 2 months ’prospective DRSP charting, GnRH
analogues can be used to establish and/or support a diagnosis of PMS. /check
Although not licensed for this indication, GnRH analogues are widely used as a diagnostic tool. There is currently no
evidence to support their use in PMS diagnostically but extrapolating from the evidence available for treatment ofPMS with GnRH analogues it seems a logical option.
6.3.11 What is the role for progesterone and progestogen preparations in treating PMS?
There is good evidence to suggest that treating PMS with progesterone or progestogens is
not appropriate.A
There is no evidence to support the use of the LNG-IUS 52 mg alone to treat PMS symptoms.Its role should be con ﬁned to opposing the action of estrogen therapy on the endometrium./check
A systematic review109to evaluate the efﬁcacy of progesterone and progestogens in the management of
PMS concluded, after meta-analyses, that neither treatment demonstrated beneﬁt, despite the fact theyexhibit markedly different physiological and pharmacological effects. Ten trials of progesterone therapy(531 women) and four trials of progestogen therapy (378 women) were reviewed. All the trials ofprogesterone and progestogen (by both routes of administration) showed no clinically signiﬁcant differencebetween progesterone/progestogen and placebo in symptom reduction.
Evidence
level 1 ++
A Cochrane review110has also shown that the evidence for or against the use of progesterone or
progestogens in PMS is equivocal. Seventeen studies were identiﬁed but only two were eligible; however,they could not be combined in a meta-analysis due to differences in study design, participants andprogesterone dose. Overall, these studies were of poor quality. Evidence
level 1 /C0
There is no evidence to support the use of the LNG-IUS 52 mg alone to treat PMS symptoms, and it is
possible that its use may prolong PMS symptomatology. The intrauterine device’s main function in PMSmanagement is to oppose the action of estrogen therapy on the endometrium, ideally without provokingsystemic symptoms. Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e91 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
6.4 Non-hormonal medical management of PMS
6.4.1 How do selective SSRIs work in PMS and how should they be given?
SSRIs should be considered one of the ﬁrst-line pharmaceutical management options in
severe PMS.A
6.4.1.1 What is the efﬁcacy of SSRIs in treatment of PMS?
When treating women with PMS, either luteal or continuous dosing with SSRIs can berecommended.B
Women with PMS have been shown to have low concentrations of serotonin within their platelets and this
varies throughout the menstrual cycle.111Evidence
level 2 +
The exact mode of action of SSRIs is unknown in PMS; however, both estrogen and progesterone have the ability to
regulate the number of serotonin receptors, as shown in rat studies and human positron emission tomography (PET)studies.
112–114
A Cochrane review115analysed data from 31 RCTs comparing SSRIs with placebo. SSRIs compared
included ﬂuoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, escitalopram and citalopram. Nine studies involving1276 women with PMS used a moderate dose SSRI and this showed that symptoms improved whencompared with placebo (SMD /C00.65, 95% CI /C00.46 to /C00.84).
When evaluating continuous dosing versus luteal dosing there was no signiﬁcant difference between the
SSRI regimens.
115SSRIs appear to be effective for both physical and psychological symptoms. There are
also data supporting the use of serotonin –noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) for PMDD.116Evidence
level 1 /C0
6.4.1.2 Is there any evidence on how SSRIs should be discontinued when used in PMS?
SSRIs should be discontinued gradually to avoid withdrawal symptoms, if given on a
continuous basis. /check
Gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, anxiety, dizziness, paraesthesia, sleep disturbances, fatigue, inﬂuenza-like
symptoms and sweating are the most common features of abrupt withdrawal of an SSRI or marked reduction of thedose; the dose should be tapered over a few weeks to avoid these effects (see section 6.4.1.5).
6.4.1.3 What are the risks and adverse effects of SSRIs?
Women with PMS treated with SSRIs should be warned of the possible adverse effects such
as nausea, insomnia, somnolence, fatigue and reduction in libido. /check
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e92 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In the Cochrane review,115women with PMS were more likely to discontinue treatment due to adverse
effects when compared with placebo (OR 2.55, 95% CI 1.84 /C03.53). The most common symptoms were
nausea, asthenia, somnolence, fatigue, decreased libido and sweating. All of these adverse effects are dose-dependent.Evidence
level 1 /C0
6.4.1.4 Is there evidence for improved efﬁcacy with other SSRI regimens?
When using SSRIs to treat PMS, ef ﬁcacy may be improved and adverse effects minimised by
the use of luteal-phase regimens with the newer agents.A
The use of newer SSRIs, such as citalopram, may produce resolution of symptoms where other SSRIs have
failed.117Severe PMS also improves signiﬁcantly with either luteal-phase or symptom-onset dosing of
escitalopram with good tolerability.118A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study119involving
314 women with moderate to severe PMS were randomised to sertraline 25 or 50 mg or placebo.Participants took the medication in the luteal phase for two cycles followed by one cycle of continuousdosing and ending with symptom-onset dosing for the ﬁnal cycle. This showed a signiﬁcant difference in
favour of luteal dosing of sertraline (25 mg and 50 mg) when compared with placebo. Another double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial, involving 118 women with severe PMS or PMDD, compared continuousversus luteal phase sertraline versus placebo for three cycles. There was no difference between continuousand luteal dosing and both regimens were superior to placebo.
120Continuous and symptom-onset dosing
have also been shown to be advantageous.119,121Evidence
level 1 +
Currently, most SSRIs are licensed in the USA for PMDD, but not in the UK.
6.4.1.5 What preconception and early pregnancy advice should be given regarding SSRIs/SNRIs?
Women should be provided with prepregnancy counselling at every opportunity. They
should be informed that PMS symptoms will abate during pregnancy and SSRIs shouldtherefore be discontinued prior to and during pregnancy./check
Women should be informed how to safely stop SSRIs./check
Women with PMS who become pregnant while taking an SSRI/SNRI should be aware of thepossible, although unproven, association with congenital malformations. They should bereassured that if such an association does exist, it is likely to be extremely small whencompared to the general population. B
Women taking luteal phase SSRIs can discontinue the medication safely at any time, whereas women using a
continuous regimen should taper the dose over a period of time, as advised by their doctor.
Previous studies122assessing the risk of birth defects after use of SSRIs or SNRIs (e.g. venlafaxine) in pregnancy have
been conﬂicting. However, many have reported cardiovascular birth defects and other major congenital defects (e.g.anal atresia, cystic kidneys, clubfoot, gastroschisis, hypospadias, limb reduction and omphalocele). The difﬁculty withinterpretation of these studies is that they have been limited by a number of factors including a failure to control forconfounding variables (e.g. socioeconomic status and substance misuse) and low statistical power.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e93 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
A multinational population-based study of over 2.3 million births from ﬁve Nordic countries,123compared
36 772 infants exposed to SSRIs or venlafaxine during the ﬁrst trimester with 2 266 875 non-exposedinfants. Consistent with many of the earlier studies, it found signiﬁcant small increases in the prevalence ofcardiac defects (1.5% versus 1.2%; OR 1.15, 95% CI 1.05 –1.26) and other major congenital defects
(3.7% versus 3.2%; OR 1.13, 95% CI 1.06 –1.20) in those infants exposed to SSRIs or venlafaxine. Crucially,
however, this study also compared data from 2288 infants exposed to SSRIs or venlafaxine with data fromtheir unexposed siblings. This analysis failed to ﬁnd signiﬁcant increases in prevalence of any cardiac birthdefects (OR 0.92, 95% CI 0.72 –1.17) or other major congenital defects (OR 1.06, 95% CI 0.91 –1.24). The
absence of an association in the sibling controlled analyses points against teratogenic effects caused bySSRIs or SNRIs and suggests that the increased risks found in the initial analysis, and many previousstudies, are attributable to the confounding effect of unspeciﬁed familial and/or other lifestyle-relatedfactors.Evidence
level 2 ++
In summary, published data are conﬂicting and it is still possible that SSRI or SNRI use in very early
pregnancy may be associated with a small increased risk of congenital malformations. However, the studyby Furu et al.
123points against a substantial teratogenic risk associated with exposure to these drugs
during the ﬁrst trimester, and suggests that the reported risk is driven by yet to be determinedconfounding factors. In addition, women with PMS are likely to discontinue treatment soon after the ﬁrstmissed period rather than later in the ﬁrst trimester and therefore the risk may be further diminished.Evidence
level 2 +
6.4.2 Are diuretics efﬁcacious in the treatment of PMS?
Spironolactone can be used in women with PMS to treat physical symptoms.C
Two double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over trials124,125have shown improvement in both mood and
physical symptoms. One study124included 35 women who were given spironolactone 100 mg and placebo
for three cycles each. Women taking spironolactone showed improvement in mood and somaticsymptoms when compared with placebo. The other study
125involving 28 women highlighted the beneﬁt
for physical symptoms, in particular reduced weight gain.Evidence
level 1 /C0
6.5 How can PMS be managed surgically?
6.5.1 Can surgical management of PMS be justiﬁed and is it efﬁcacious?
When treating women with severe PMS, hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy has been
shown to be of bene ﬁt.D
When treating women with PMS, hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy can be
considered when medical management has failed, long-term GnRH analogue treatment isrequired or other gynaecological conditions indicate surgery./check
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e94 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy is a permanent form of ovulation suppression, as this removes
the ovarian cycle completely; it also removes the endometrium, allowing the use of estrogen replacementwithout the need for progestogen. Blinded randomised studies cannot be conducted for this intervention.Observational questionnaire data
126suggest a highly beneﬁcial effect in the selected women undergoing
hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy, the majority of whom were highly satisﬁed following thisprocedure.Evidence
level 3
Severe PMS is in most cases treated successfully with medical management, but hysterectomy with bilateral
oophorectomy can be justiﬁed in women in whom medical management has proven unsuccessful, where long-termGnRH analogue treatment would be required, or if gynaecological comorbidities indicate hysterectomy.
6.5.2 Should the efﬁcacy of surgery always be predicted by the prior use of GnRH analogues?
When treating women with PMS, surgery should not be contemplated without preoperative
use of GnRH analogues as a test of cure and to ensure that HRT is tolerated. /check
Preoperative GnRH analogues appear to be of value in predicting the effects of oophorectomy; although
such a strategy has never been tested scientiﬁcally, it would seem important, particularly when surgery isbeing contemplated in women younger than 45 years of age and for PMS alone.
100Evidence
level 1 ++
6.5.3 What is the role of HRT after surgical management?
Women being surgically treated for PMS should be advised to use HRT, particularly if they
are younger than 45 years of age. /check
Following hysterectomy, estrogen-only replacement can be used. The avoidance of progestogen prevents
reintroduction of PMS-type adverse effects. Consideration should also be given to replacing testosterone, as theovaries are a major production source (50%) and deﬁciency could result in distressing low libido (hypoactive sexualdesire disorder).
127
6.5.4 Is there a role for endometrial ablation, oophorectomy or hysterectomy alone?
When treating women with severe PMS, endometrial ablation and hysterectomy with
conservation of the ovaries are not recommended. /check
Bilateral oophorectomy alone (without removal of the uterus) will necessitate the use of aprogestogen as part of any subsequent HRT regimen and this carries a risk of reintroductionof PMS-like symptoms (progestogen-induced PMD)./check
There have been no published studies of bilateral oophorectomy with uterine conservation in PMS. Although it may
be a successful option in selected patients it is not possible to predict in which patients success will be achieved, andin whom there will be a risk of the reintroduction of PMS-like symptoms during the necessary combined HRTtreatment. If such a strategy is employed then women should be counselled regarding the lack of research evidenceand this potential return of symptoms.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e95 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Conservation of the ovaries will lead to persistence of PMS (ISPMD classiﬁcation: PMDs with absent
menstruation).128
An RCT129comparing hysterectomy with the LNG-IUS 52 mg in alleviating PMS symptoms as a secondary
analysis showed beneﬁt. However, the women presented with menorrhagia and diagnosis was notprospectively conﬁrmed using a validated tool.Evidence
level 2 /C0
There is no reliable evidence to support endometrial ablation; however, a cohort study130of 36 women
with menorrhagia and PMS symptoms as rated on DRSP charts showed beneﬁt at 4 –6 months’ follow-up
(mean difference /C05.75; P<0.05). Patients were not randomised on the basis of their PMS and prospective
diagnosis was not established using validated tools.
7. Recommendations for future research
/C15Blinded RCTs comparing complementary therapies (in particular Vitex agnus castus , vitamin B6 and calcium) with
placebo.
/C15More evidence to support the use of CBT for PMS. The difﬁculty remains where studies cannot be double-blinded.
/C15Blinded RCTs comparing different regimens of drospirenone-containing oral contraceptives and long-term dataregarding the risk of continuous use.
/C15Evidence to support/refute the use of estradiol gel and vaginal rings in the treatment of PMS.
/C15Evidence to support/refute the use of LNG-IUS 13.5 mg as endometrial protection in PMS.
/C15Long-term safety data regarding opposed estradiol therapy on breast and endometrial tissue within a PMScohort.
/C15Blinded RCTs comparing tolerance of micronised progesterone versus progestogens when used as estrogenicopposition in women with PMS.
/C15Safety data for SSRIs in the early ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy.
8. Auditable topics
The auditable topics are based on the current ISPMD consensus131and are as follows:
/C15100% of women referred with PMS should have this diagnosis formally conﬁrmed by completion of at least2 consecutive months of a prospective symptom diary, usually the DRSP.
/C15100% of women with PMS should not be offered progestogen therapy alone.
/C15100% of women being considered for surgical treatment should have a trial of GnRH analogue therapy.
9. Useful links and support groups
/C15National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome [http://www.pms.org.uk/].
/C15NHS Choices. Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) [http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/premenstrual-syndrome/Pages/
Introduction.aspx].
/C15Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists . Information for you. Managing premenstrual syndrome (PMS).
London: RCOG; 2009 [https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaﬂets/managing-premenstrual-syndrome-pms/].
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e96 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
References
1. O’Brien S, Rapkin A, Dennerstein L, Nevatte T. Diagnosis and
management of premenstrual disorders. BMJ 2011;342:d2994.
2. O’Brien PM, B €ackstr €om T, Brown C, Dennerstein L, Endicott J,
Epperson CN, et al. Towards a consensus on diagnostic criteria,
measurement and trial design of the premenstrual disorders: the
ISPMD Montreal consensus. Arch Womens Ment Health
2011;14:13 –21.
3. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) , 4th edn. Washington DC: APA;
1994.
4. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-V) , 5th edn. Washington DC: APA;
2013.
5. Pearlstein T. Prevalence, impact on morbidity, and disease
burden. In: O’Brien PM, Rapkin AJ, Schmidt PJ, editors.
The Premenstrual Syndromes: PMS and PMDD . Boca Raton, FL,
USA: CRC Press; 2007. p. 37 –47.
6. Sadler C, Smith H, Hammond J, Bayly R, Borland S, Panay N,
et al.; Southampton Women’s Survey Study Group. Lifestyle
factors, hormonal contraception, and premenstrual symptoms:
the United Kingdom Southampton Women’s Survey. J Womens
Health (Larchmt) 2010;19:391 –6.
7. Yonkers KA, O’Brien PM, Eriksson E. Premenstrual syndrome.
Lancet 2008;371:1200 –10.
8. Endicott J, Nee J, Harrison W. Daily Record of Severity of
Problems (DRSP): reliability and validity. Arch Womens Ment
Health 2006;9:41 –9.
9. Steiner M, Macdougall M, Brown E. The premenstrual symptoms
screening tool (PSST) for clinicians. Arch Womens Ment Health
2003;6:203 –9.
10. National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome. [http://
www.pms.org.uk/support/menstrualdiary]. Accessed 2016 Jun29.
11. Ng CY, Panay N. Management of severe pre-menstrual
syndrome. In: Barter J, Hampton N, editors. The Year in
Gynaecology 2002 . Oxford: Clinical Publishing Services; 2002.
p. 181 –96.
12. Girman A, Lee R, Kligler B. An integrative medicine approach to
premenstrual syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;188 Suppl 2:
S56–65.
13. Yonkers KA, Brown C, Pearlstein TB, Foegh M, Sampson-Landers C,
Rapkin A. Efﬁcacy of a new low-dose oral contraceptive with
drospirenone in premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Obstet Gynecol
2005;106:492 –501.
14. Freeman EW, Kroll R, Rapkin A, Pearlstein T, Brown C, Parsey K,
et al. Evaluation of a unique oral contraceptive in the treatment of
premenstrual dysphoric disorder. JW o m e n sH e a l t hG e n dB a s e d
Med 2001;10:561 –9.
15. Rocha Filho EA, Lima JC, Pinho Neto JS, Montarroyos U.
Essential fatty acids for premenstrual syndrome and their effect
on prolactin and total cholesterol levels: a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled study. Reprod Health 2011;8:2.
16. Dante G, Facchinetti F. Herbal treatments for alleviating
premenstrual symptoms: a systematic review. J Psychosom Obstet
Gynaecol
2011;32:42 –51.
17. Whelan AM, Jurgens TM, Naylor H. Herbs, vitamins and minerals
in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: a systematic review.
Can J Clin Pharmacol 2009;16:e407 –29.
18. van Die MD, Burger HG, Teede HJ, Bone KM. Vitex agnus-castus
extracts for female reproductive disorders: a systematic review
of clinical trials. Planta Med 2013;79:562 –75.19. Di Pierro F, Prazzoli R, Candidi C, Attolico M. [Premenstrual
syndrome: controlled clinical trial with a fast acting form of a
highly standardized extract of Vitex agnus castus. ]G Ital Ostet
Ginecol 2009;31:153 –7. Italian.
20. Canning S, Waterman M, Orsi N, Ayres J, Simpson N, Dye L.
The efﬁcacy of Hypericum perforatum (St John’s Wort) for
the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. CNS Drugs 2010;24:207 –25.
21. Hicks SM, Walker AF, Gallagher J, Middleton RW, Wright J.
The signiﬁcance of “nonsigniﬁcance” in randomized controlledstudies: a discussion inspired by a double-blinded study on St.John’s Wort ( Hypericum perforatum L.) for premenstrual
symptoms. J Altern Complement Med 2004;10:925 –32.
22. Prior JC, Vigna Y, Alojada N. Conditioning exercise decreases
premenstrual symptoms. A prospective controlled three month
trial. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 1986;55:349 –55.
23. Prior JC, Vigna Y, Sciarretta D, Alojado N, Schulzer M.
Conditioning exercise decreases premenstrual symptoms: aprospective, controlled 6-month trial. Fertil Steril 1987;47:402 –8.
24. Steege JF, Blumenthal JA. The effects of aerobic exercise on
premenstrual symptoms in middle-aged women: a preliminarystudy. J Psychosom Res 1993;37:127 –33.
25. Stoddard JL, Dent CW, Shames L, Bernstein L. Exercise training
effects on premenstrual distress and ovarian steroid hormones.
Eur J Appl Physiol 2007;99:27 –37.
26. Oleson T, Flocco W. Randomized controlled study of
premenstrual symptoms treated with ear, hand, and foot
reﬂexology. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82:906 –11.
27. Stokes J, Mendels J. Pyridoxine and premenstrual tension.
Lancet 1972;i:1177 –8.
28. Abraham GE, Hargrove JT. Effect of vitamin B6 on premenstrual
symptomatology in women with premenstrual tension syndromes:A double blind crossover study. Infertility 1980;3:155 –65.
29. Mattes JA, Martin D. Pyridoxine in premenstrual depression.
Hum Nutr Appl Nutr 1982;36:131 –3.
30. Barr W. Pyridoxine supplements in the premenstrual syndrome.
Practitioner 1984;228:425 –7.
31. Williams MJ, Harris RI, Dean BC. Controlled trial of pyridoxine
in the premenstrual syndrome. J Int Med Res
1985;13:174 –9.
32. Hagen I, Nesheim BI, Tuntland T. No effect of vitamin B-6
against premenstrual tension. A controlled clinical study.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1985;64:667 –70.
33. Smallwood J, Ah-Kye D, Taylor I. Vitamin B6 in the treatment of
pre-menstrual mastalgia. Br J Clin Pract 1986;40:532 –3.
34. Kendall KE, Schnurr PP. The effects of vitamin B6
supplementation on premenstrual symptoms. Obstet Gynecol
1987;70:145 –9.
35. Doll H, Brown S, Thurston A, Vessey M. Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
and the premenstrual syndrome: a randomized crossover trial.
J R Coll Gen Pract 1989;39:364 –8.
36. Diegoli MS, da Fonseca AM, Diegoli CA, Pinotti JA. A double-
blind trial of four medications to treat severe premenstrualsyndrome. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1998;62:63 –7.
37. De Souza MC, Walker AF, Robinson PA, Bolland K. A synergistic
effect of a daily supplement for 1 month of 200 mg magnesiumplus 50 mg vitamin B
6for the relief of anxiety-related
premenstrual symptoms: a randomized, double-blind, crossover
study. J Womens Health Gend Based Med 2000;9:131 –9.
38. Kashanian M, Mazinani R, Jalalmanesh S. Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
therapy for premenstrual syndrome. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
2007;96:43 –4.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e97 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
39. Lauritzen C, Reuter HD, Repges R, B €ohnert KJ, Schmidt U.
Treatment of premenstrual tension syndrome with Vitex agnus
castus controlled, double-blind study versus pyridoxine.
Phytomedicine 1997;4:183 –9.
40. Facchinetti F, Borella P, Sances G, Fioroni L, Nappi RE,
Genazzani AR. Oral magnesium successfully relieves
premenstrual mood changes. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:177 –81.
41. Walker AF, De Souza MC, Marakis G, Robinson PA, Morris AP,
Bolland KM. Unexpected beneﬁt of sorbitol placebo in Mg
intervention study of premenstrual symptoms: implications forchoice of placebo in RCTs. Med Hypotheses 2002;58:213 –20.
42. Christie S, Walker AF, Hicks SM, Abeyasekera S. Flavonoid
supplement improves leg health and reduces ﬂuid retention in
pre-menopausal women in a double-blind, placebo-controlledstudy. Phytomedicine 2004;11:11 –7.
43. London RS, Bradley L, Chiamori NY. Effect of a nutritional
supplement on premenstrual symptomatology in women with
premenstrual syndrome: a double-blind longitudinal study. JA m
Coll Nutr 1991;10:494 –9.
44. Stewart A. Clinical and biochemical effects of nutritional
supplementation on the premenstrual syndrome. J Reprod Med
1987;32:435 –41.
45. Chakmakjian ZH, Higgins CE, Abraham GE. The effect of a
nutritional supplement, Optivite
/C226for women, on premenstrual
tension syndromes: II. Effect on symptomatology, using a double-blind, cross-over design. J Appl Nutr 1985;37:12 –7.
46. Thys-Jacobs S, Ceccarelli S, Bierman A, Weisman H, Cohen MA,
Alvir J. Calcium supplementation in premenstrual syndrome: a
randomized crossover trial. J Gen Intern Med 1989;4:183 –9.
47. Thys-Jacobs S, Starkey P, Bernstein D, Tian J; Premenstrual
Syndrome Study Group. Calcium carbonate and the
premenstrual syndrome: effects on premenstrual and menstrualsymptoms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:444 –52.
48. Bryant M, Cassidy A, Hill C, Powell J, Talbot D, Dye L. Effect of
consumption of soy isoﬂavones on behavioural, somatic and
affective symptoms in women with premenstrual syndrome.Br J Nutr 2005;93:731 –9.
49. Burke BE, Olson RD, Cusack BJ. Randomized, controlled trial of
phytoestrogen in the prophylactic treatment of menstrual
migraine. Biomed Pharmacother 2002;56:283 –8.
50. Ma L, Lin S, Chen R, Wang X. Treatment of moderate to severe
premenstrual syndrome with Vitex agnus castus (BNO 1095) in
Chinese women. Gynecol Endocrinol 2010;26:612 –6.
51. Schellenberg R. Treatment for the premenstrual syndrome with
agnus castus fruit extract: prospective, randomised, placebo
controlled study. BMJ 2001;322:134 –7.
52. Zamani M, Neghab N, Torabian S. Therapeutic effect of Vitex
agnus castus in patients with premenstrual syndrome. Acta Med
Iran2012;50:101 –6.
53. Pakgohar M, Moradi M, Jamshidi AH, Mehran A. [Assessment of
Vitex agnus-castus L. extract effect on treatment of premenstrual
syndrome.] J Med Plants 2009;8:98 –107. Persian.
54. He Z, Chen R, Zhou Y, Geng L, Zhang Z, Chen S, et al.
Treatment for premenstrual syndrome with Vitex agnus castus: a
prospective randomized, multi-center placebo controlled study inChina. Maturitas 2009;63:99 –103.
55. Pakgohar M, Ahmadi M, Salehi Surmaghi MH, Mehran A,
Akhondzadeh SH. [Effect of Hypericum peforatum L. for treatment
of premenstrual syndrome.] J Med Plants 2005;3:33 –42. Persian.
56. Ghazanfarpour M, Kaviani M, Asadi N, Ghaffarpasand F,
Ziyadlou S, Tabatabaee HR, et al. Hypericum perforatum for the
treatment of premenstrual syndrome. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
2011;113:84 –5.57. Tamborini A, Taurelle R. [Value of standardized Ginkgo biloba
extract (EGb 761) in the management of congestive symptoms of
premenstrual syndrome.] Rev Fr Gynecol Obstet 1993;88:447 –57.
French.
58. Ozgoli G, Selselei EA, Mojab F, Majd HA. A randomized, placebo-
controlled trial of Ginkgo biloba L. in treatment of premenstrual
syndrome. J Altern Complement Med 2009;15:845 –51.
59. Agha-Hosseini M, Kashani L, Aleyaseen A, Ghoreishi A,
Rahmanpour H, Zarrinara AR, et al. Crocus sativus L. (saffron) in
the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: a double-blind,randomised and placebo-controlled trial. BJOG 2008;115:515 –9.
60. Puolakka J, M €ak€ar€ainen L, Viinikka L, Ylikorkala O. Biochemical
and clinical effects of treating the premenstrual syndrome with
prostaglandin synthesis precursors. J Reprod Med 1985;30:
149–53.
61. Khoo SK, Munro C, Battistutta D. Evening primrose oil and
treatment of premenstrual syndrome. Med J Aust 1990;153:189 –92.
62. Collins A, Cerin A, Coleman G, Landgren BM. Essential fatty
acids in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome. Obstet Gynecol
1993;81:93 –8.
63. Horrobin DF. The role of essential fatty acids and prostaglandins
in the premenstrual syndrome. J Reprod Med 1983;28:465 –8.
64. Guo S. Clinical study on the treatment of premenstrual syndrome by
the Back-Shu and Front-Mu and network points acupuncture
[Master’s thesis]. Harbin: Heilongjiang University of ChineseMedicine; 2004.
65. Habek D, Habek JC, Barbir A. Using acupuncture to treat
premenstrual syndrome. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2002;267:23 –6.
66. Guo S, Sun Y. Comparison between acupuncture and medication
in treatment of premenstrual syndrome. Shanghai J Acupunct
Moxibust 2004;23:5 –6.
67. Kim SC, Kim SN, Lim JA, Choi CM, Shim EK, Koo ST, et al.
[Effects of acupuncture treatment on the premenstrualsyndrome: controlled clinical trial.] J Korean Acupunct Mox Soc
2005;22:41 –60. Korean.
68. Peng L. The Study on the Treatment of Jiaweisiaoyao Coordinate
Acupuncture to Premenstrual Syndrome . Guangzhou: Guangzhou
University of Chinese Medicine; 2009. p. 49.
69. Shin KR, Ha JY, Park HJ, Heitkemper M. The effect of hand
acupuncture therapy and hand moxibustion therapy onpremenstrual syndrome among Korean women. West J Nurs Res
2009;31:171 –86.
70. Hong Y. Clinical therapeutic effect of scalp acupuncture on
premenstrual tension syndrome. Zhongguo Zhen Jiu 2002;22:597 –8.
71. Xu Y. Clinical study on the treatment of acupuncture of Back-Shu on
premenstrual syndrome [Master’s thesis in Chinese]. Harbin:
Heilongjiang University of Chinese Medicine; 2006.p. 1–33.
72. Xu Y, Sun Y. Observation of therapeutic effect of point-through-
point acupuncture method in the back on premenstrual
syndrome. J Clin Acupunct Moxibust 2006;22:37 –8.
73. Yu J.
Preliminary observation based on a systematic review of efﬁcacy
and safety of acupuncture treatment for premenstrual syndrome
[Master’s thesis in Chinese]. Beijing: China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences; 2006. p. 1 –89.
74. Akbarzadeh M, Dehghani M, Moshfeghy Z, Emamghoreishi M,
Tavakoli P, Zare N. Effect of Melissa ofﬁcinalis capsule on the
intensity of premenstrual syndrome symptoms in high school girlstudents. Nurs Midwifery Stud 2015;4:e27001.
75. Khayat S, Fanaei H, Kheirkhah M, Moghadam ZB, Kasaeian A,
Javadimehr M. Curcumin attenuates severity of premenstrual
syndrome symptoms: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Complement Ther Med 2015;23:318 –24.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e98 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
76. Ataollahi M, Akbari SA, Mojab F, Alavi Majd H. The effect of
wheat germ extract on premenstrual syndrome symptoms. Iran J
Pharm Res 2015;14:159 –66.
77. Hunter MS, Ussher JM, Browne SJ, Cariss M, Jelley R, Katz M.
A randomized comparison of psychological (cognitive behavior
therapy), medical (ﬂuoxetine) and combined treatment for
women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder. J Psychosom Obstet
Gynaecol 2002;23:193 –9.
78. Busse JW, Montori VM, Krasnik C, Patelis-Siotis I, Guyatt GH.
Psychological intervention for premenstrual syndrome: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Psychother Psychosom
2009;78:6 –15.
79. Graham CA, Sherwin BB. A prospective treatment study of
premenstrual symptoms using a triphasic oral contraceptive.J Psychosom Res 1992;36:257 –66.
80. Lopez LM, Kaptein AA, Helmerhorst FM. Oral contraceptives
containing drospirenone for premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2012;(2):CD006586.
81. Pearlstein TB, Bachmann GA, Zacur HA, Yonkers KA.
Treatment of premenstrual dysphoric disorder with a new
drospirenone-containing oral contraceptive formulation.Contraception 2005;72:414 –21.
82. Marr J, Heinemann K, Kunz M, Rapkin A. Ethinyl estradiol 20 lg/
drospirenone 3 mg 24/4 oral contraceptive for the treatment of
functional impairment in women with premenstrual dysphoricdisorder. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2011;113:103 –7.
83. Coffee AL, Kuehl TJ, Willis S, Sulak PJ. Oral contraceptives and
premenstrual symptoms: comparison of a 21/7 and extended
regimen. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006;195:1311 –9.
84. Coffee AL, Sulak PJ, Kuehl TJ. Long-term assessment of
symptomatology and satisfaction of an extended oral
contraceptive regimen. Contraception 2007;75:444 –9.
85. Magos AL, Brincat M, Studd JW. Treatment of the premenstrual
syndrome by subcutaneous estradiol implants and cyclical oral
norethisterone: placebo controlled study. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed)
1986;292:1629 –33.
86. Watson NR, Studd JW, Savvas M, Garnett T, Baber RJ.
Treatment of severe premenstrual syndrome with oestradiol
patches and cyclical oral norethisterone. Lancet 1989;ii:730 –2.
87. Smith RN, Studd JW, Zamblera D, Holland EF. A randomised
comparison over 8 months of 100 lg and 200 lg twice weekly
doses of transdermal oestradiol in the treatment of severe
premenstrual syndrome. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1995;102:475 –84.
88. Studd J. Treatment of premenstrual disorders by suppression of
ovulation by transdermal estrogens. Menopause Int 2012;18:
65–7.
89. Panay N, Rees M, Domoney C, Zakaria F, Guilford S, Studd JWW.
A multicentre double-blind crossover study comparing 100mgtransdermal oestradiol with placebo in the treatment of severe
premenstrual syndrome. Menopause Int 2001;7 Suppl 3:19 –20.
90. Panay N, Studd J. Progestogen intolerance and compliance with
hormone replacement therapy in menopausal women. Hum
Reprod Update 1997;3:159 –71.
91. Faculty of Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare. Intrauterine
Contraception . London: FSRH; 2015 [https://www.fsrh.org/docu
ments/ceuguidanceintrauterinecontraception]. Accessed 2016 Jun
29.
92. Baker LJ, O’Brien PM. Potential strategies to avoid progestogen-
induced premenstrual disorders. Menopause Int 2012;18:73 –6.
93. Kroft J, Klostermann NR, Moody JR, Taerk E, Wolfman W.
A novel regimen of combination transdermal estrogen and
intermittent vaginally administered progesterone for relief ofmenopausal symptoms. Gynecol Endocrinol 2010;26:902 –8.94. Di Carlo C, Tommaselli GA, Gargano V, Savoia F, Bifulco G,
Nappi C. Transdermal estradiol and oral or vaginal natural
progesterone: bleeding patterns. Climacteric 2010;13:442 –6.
95. Mansel RE, Wisbey JR, Hughes LE. Controlled trial of the
antigonadotropin danazol in painful nodular benign breast
disease. Lancet 1982;i:928 –30.
96. Watts JF, Butt WR, Logan Edwards R. A clinical trial using
danazol for the treatment of premenstrual tension. Br J Obstet
Gynaecol 1987;94:30 –4.
97. Hahn PM, Van Vugt DA, Reid RL. A randomized, placebo-
controlled, crossover trial of danazol for the treatment ofpremenstrual syndrome. Psychoneuroendocrinology 1995;20:
193–209.
98. O’Brien PM, Abukhalil IE. Randomized controlled trial of the
management of premenstrual syndrome and premenstrualmastalgia using luteal phase –only danazol. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1999;180:18 –23.
99. Brunskill PJ. The effects of fetal exposure to danazol. Br J Obstet
Gynaecol 1992;99:212 –5.
100. Wyatt KM, Dimmock PW, Ismail KM, Jones PW, O’Brien PM.
The effectiveness of GnRHa with and without ‘add-back’ therapyin treating premenstrual syndrome: a meta analysis. BJOG
2004;111:585 –93.
101. Farmer JE, Prentice A, Breeze A, Ahmad G, Duffy JM, Watson A,
et al. Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues forendometriosis: bone mineral density. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2003;(4):CD001297.
102. Leather AT, Studd JW, Watson NR, Holland EF. The prevention
of bone loss in young women treated with GnRH analogues with“add-back” estrogen therapy. Obstet Gynecol 1993;81:104 –7.
103. Di Carlo C, Palomba S, Tommaselli GA, Guida M, Di Spiezio
Sardo A, Nappi C. Use of leuprolide acetate plus tibolone in thetreatment of severe premenstrual syndrome. Fertil Steril
2001;75:380 –4.
104. Kanis JA, Johnell O, Oden A, Johansson H, De Laet C, Eisman JA,
et al. Smoking and fracture risk: a meta-analysis. Osteoporos Int
2005;16:155 –62.
105. Johansson H, Kanis JA, Od /C19en A, McCloskey E, Chapurlat RD,
Christiansen C, et al. A meta-analysis of the association of
fracture risk and body mass index in women.
J Bone Miner Res
2014;29:223 –33.
106. Babatunde OO, Forsyth JJ, Gidlow CJ. A meta-analysis of brief
high-impact exercises for enhancing bone health in
premenopausal women. Osteoporos Int 2012;23:109 –19.
107. Blake GM, Fogelman I. The role of DXA bone density scans in
the diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis. Postgrad Med J
2007;83:509 –17.
108. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Osteoporosis:
Assessing the Risk of Fragility Fracture . NICE clinical guideline 146.
Manchester: NICE; 2012.
109. Wyatt K, Dimmock P, Jones P, Obhrai M, O’Brien S. Efﬁcacy of
progesterone and progestogens in management of premenstrualsyndrome: systematic review. BMJ 2001;323:776 –80.
110. Ford O, Lethaby A, Roberts H, Mol BW. Progesterone for
premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;(3):
CD003415.
111. Ashby CR Jr, Carr LA, Cook CL, Steptoe MM, Franks DD.
Alteration of platelet serotonergic mechanisms and monoamineoxidase activity in premenstrual syndrome. Biol Psychiatry
1988;24:225 –33.
112. Biegon A, Bercovitz H, Samuel D. Serotonin receptor
concentration during the estrous cycle of the rat. Brain Res
1980;187:221 –5.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e99 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
113. Kugaya A, Epperson CN, Zoghbi S, van Dyck CH, Hou Y,
Fujita M, et al. Increase in prefrontal cortex serotonin 2A
receptors following estrogen treatment in postmenopausal
women. Am J Psychiatry 2003;160:1522 –4.
114. Moses-Kolko EL, Berga SL, Greer PJ, Smith G, Cidis Meltzer C,
Drevets WC. Widespread increases of cortical serotonin type
2A receptor availability after hormone therapy in euthymicpostmenopausal women. Fertil Steril 2003;80:554 –9.
115. Marjoribanks J, Brown J, O’Brien PM, Wyatt K. Selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstual syndrome.Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;(6):CD001396.
116. Cohen LS, Soares CN, Lyster A, Cassano P, Brandes M,
Leblanc GA. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of premenstrual use of
venlafaxine (ﬂexible dose) in the treatment of premenstrualdysphoric disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2004;24:540 –3.
117. Freeman EW, Jabara S, Sondheimer SJ, Auletto R. Citalopram in
PMS patients with prior SSRI treatment failure: a preliminary
study. J Womens Health Gend Based Med 2002;11:459 –64.
118. Eriksson E, Ekman A, Sinclair S, S €orvik K, Ysander C, Mattson UB,
et al. Escitalopram administered in the luteal phase exerts a
marked and dose-dependent effect in premenstrual dysphoricdisorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2008;28:195 –202.
119. Kornstein SG, Pearlstein TB, Fayyad R, Farfel GM, Gillespie JA.
Low-dose sertraline in the treatment of moderate-to-severe
premenstrual syndrome: efﬁcacy of 3 dosing strategies. J Clin
Psychiatry 2006;67:1624 –32.
120. Freeman EW, Rickels K, Sondheimer SJ, Polansky M, Xiao S.
Continuous or intermittent dosing with sertraline for patients
with severe premenstrual syndrome or premenstrual dysphoricdisorder. Am J Psychiatry 2004;161:343 –51.
121. Shah NR, Jones JB, Aperi J, Shemtov R, Karne A, Borenstein J.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrualsyndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder: a meta-analysis.Obstet Gynecol 2008;111:1175 –82.
122. Udechuku A, Nguyen T, Hill R, Szego K. Antidepressants in
pregnancy: a systematic review. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2010;44:978 –96.123. Furu K, Kieler H, Haglund B, Engeland A, Selmer R, Stephansson O,
et al. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and venlafaxine in
early pregnancy and risk of birth defects: population based cohortstudy and sibling design. BMJ2015;350:h1798.
124. Wang M, Hammarb €ack S, Lindhe BA, B €ackstr €om T. Treatment of
premenstrual syndrome by spironolactone: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1995;74:
803–8.
125. O’Brien PM, Craven D, Selby C, Symonds EM. Treatment of
premenstrual syndrome by spironolactone. Br J Obstet Gynaecol
1979;86:142 –7.
126. Cronje WH, Vashisht A, Studd JW. Hysterectomy and bilateral
oophorectomy for severe premenstrual syndrome. Hum Reprod
2004;19:2152 –5.
127. Nappi RE, Wawra K, Schmitt S. Hypoactive sexual desire
disorder in postmenopausal women. Gynecol Endocrinol
2006;22:318 –
23.
128. Studd J, Panay N. Hormones and depression in women.
Climacteric 2004;7:338 –46.
129. Leminen H, Heli €ovaara-Peippo S, Halmesm €aki K, Teperi J,
Grenman S, Kivel €a A, et al. The effect of hysterectomy or
levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system on premenstrualsymptoms in women treated for menorrhagia: secondary analysis
of a randomized controlled trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
2012;91:318 –25.
130. Lukes AS, McBride RJ, Herring AH, Fried M, Sherwani A,
Dell D. Improved premenstrual syndrome symptoms after
NovaSure endometrial ablation. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2011;18:
607–11.
131. Nevatte T, O’Brien PM, B €ackstr €om T, Brown C, Dennerstein L,
Endicott J, et al.; Consensus Group of the International Society
for Premenstrual Disorders. ISPMD consensus on themanagement of premenstrual disorders. Arch Womens Ment
Health 2013;16:279 –91.
132. Panay N. Treatment of premenstrual syndrome: a decision-
making algorithm. Menopause Int 2012;18:90 –2.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e100 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in making decisions
about appropriate treatment for speciﬁc conditions’. Each guideline is systematically developed using a standardised
methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG
Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These
recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must beevaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variationsin local populations. It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines intoroutine practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations formulated in a
similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
Classi ﬁcation of evidence levels Grades of recommendations
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews
of randomised controlled trials or randomisedcontrolled trials with a very low risk of biasAAt least one meta-analysis, systematic reviewsor randomised controlled trials rated as 1 ++,
and directly applicable to the targetpopulation; orA systematic review of randomised controlledtrials or a body of evidence consisting principally
of studies rated as 1 +, directly applicable to the
target population and demonstrating overallconsistency of results1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trialsor randomised controlled trials witha low risk of bias
1/C0 Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised
controlled trials or randomised controlled trials
with a high risk of bias
BA body of evidence including studies rated as
2++directly applicable to the target population,
and demonstrating overall consistency ofresults; orExtrapolated evidence from studies rated as1++or 1+2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case –control
or cohort studies or high-quality case –control
or cohort studies with a very low risk ofconfounding, bias or chance and a highprobability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case –control or cohort studies
with a low risk of confounding, bias or chanceand a moderate probability that the relationshipis causal
CA body of evidence including studies rated as 2 +
directly applicable to the target population, anddemonstrating overall consistency of results; orExtrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2 ++
2/C0 Case –control or cohort studies with a high risk
of confounding, bias or chance and a signiﬁcantrisk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case
seriesDEvidence level 3 or 4; orExtrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2 +
4 Expert opinionGood practice point
/checkRecommended best practice based on the
clinical experience of the guidelinedevelopment group
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e101 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix II: Classi ﬁcation of PMS1
Patient presenting with premenstrual symptoms
Patient records menstrual symptoms and effect on daily life for two consecutive menstrual cycles
Symptoms cyclical and
 relieved by menstruationSymptoms cyclical and
 relieved by menstruationSymptoms cyclical and
 relieved by menstruationSymptoms cyclical 
Symptom-free weekAffects quality of lifeNo menstruationNo additional factorsSymptoms cyclical and
 relieved by menstruationNon-cyclical symptoms
No symptom-free weekConstant influence on quality of lifeSymptom-free week
Affects quality of life
Menstruation
Progestogen treatmentMenstruation
No additional factors
M
M M M M M M M MM M M M
P
P M P MSymptom-free weekNo influence on quality of lifeSymptom-free week
Affects quality of lifeNo symptom-free week
Affects quality of life
Menstruation
No additonal factors
Physiological (mild)
premenstrual disorder
Counselling and
reassurance required, no
need for treatmentCore premenstrual disorder
(premenstrual syndrome
or premenstrual dysphoric
disorder)
Consider all alternative
approaches to treatmentPremenstrual
exacerbationPremenstrual disorder
with absent menstruationProgestogen induced
premenstrual disorderUnderlying psychological
disorder, not
premenstrual disorder
Psychiatric referral Alternative progesterone 
treatmentTreat as core
premenstrual disorderTreatment should aim to
treat underlying medical,
physical. or psychiatric
condition or suppress
ovulation (or both)Effect on
quality of life
Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycle Day of menstrual cycleEffect on
quality of life
Effect on
quality of life
Effect on
quality of life
Effect on
quality of life
Effect on
quality of lifeMenstruation
No additonal factorsMenstruation
Existing non-menstrual condition
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e102 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix III: Daily Recording of Severity of Problems (DRSP) symptom diary
DAILY RECORD OF SEVERITY OF PROBLEMS
Please print and use as many sheets as you need for at
least two FULL months of ratings.Name or Initials
Month/Year
Each evening note the degree to which you experienced each of the problems listed below. Put an “x” in the box which correspond s to the
severity: 1 - not at all, 2 - minimal, 3 - mild, 4 - moderate, 5 - severe, 6 - extreme.
Enter day (Monday-“M”, Thursday-“R”, etc) >
Note spotting by entering “S” >
Note menses by entering “M” >
Begin rating on correct calendar day >
1Felt depressed, sad, “down” or “blue”,
or felt hopeless; or felt worthless orguilty
Felt anxious, tense, “keyed up” or
“on edge”
Had mood swings (i.e. suddenly feel-
ing sad or tearful) or was sensitive torejection or feelings were easily hurt
Felt angry or irritable
Had less interest in usual activities
(work, school, friends, hobbies)
Had difficulty concentrating
Felt lethargic, tired or fatigued; or
had lack of energy
Had increased appetite or overate;
or had cravings for specific foods
Slept more, took naps, found it hard to
get up when intended; or had troublegetting to sleep or staying asleep
Felt overwhelmed or unable to cope;
or felt out of control
Had breast tenderness, breast swelling,
bloated sensation, weight gain,headache, joint or muscle pain, orother physical symptoms
At work, school, home or in daily routine,
at least one of the problems noted abovecaused reduction of productivity orinefficiency
At least one of the problems noted above
caused avoidance of or less participationin hobbies or social activities
At least one of the problems noted above
interfered with relationships with others2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
111
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
123456
12345623456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7 2 8 2 9 3 0 31
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e103 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix IV: How PMS is treated –a decision-making algorithm132
First line Exercise, cogni Ɵve behavioural therapy, vitamin B6
Combined new genera Ɵon pill (cyclically or con Ɵnuously)
ConƟnuous or luteal phase (day 15–28) low dose SSRIs, e.g. citalopram/escitalopram 10 mg
Second line Estradiol patches (100 micrograms) + micronise d progesterone (100 mg or 200 mg [day 17–28],
orally or vaginally) or LNG-IUS 52 mg 
Higher dose SSRIs con Ɵnuously or luteal phase, e.g. citalopram/escitalopram 20–40 mg
Third line GnRH analogues + add-back HRT (con Ɵnuous combined estrogen + progesterone
[e.g. 50–100 micrograms estradiol patches or2–4 doses of estradiol gel combined with
micronised progesterone 100 mg/day] or Ɵbolone 2.5 mg) 
Fourth line Surgical treatment ± HRT
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e104 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by:
Dr LJ Green MRCOG, Wolverhampton; Professor PMS O’Brien FRCOG, Stoke-on-Trent;
Mr N Panay MRCOG, London; and Dr M Craig FRCOG, London
and peer reviewed by:
Professor Z Alﬁrevic FRCOG, Liverpool; British Gynaecological Cancer Society; Dr J Brown, Auckland, New Zealand;Dr KM Clement MRCOG, Newcastle-upon-Tyne; Dr M Deeny MRCOG, Glasgow, Scotland; Dr J Endicott, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, USA; Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare; Mrs O Ford, South Petherton;
Mr MAH Habiba FRCOG, Leicester; Professor M Hunter PhD CPsychol FBPsS, London; Professor M Kashanian,Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Dr VJ Kay FRCOG, Dundee, Scotland; Professor SK Khoo FRCOG,
Brisbane, Australia; Dr AS Lukes, Women’s Wellness Clinic, Durham, North Carolina, USA; National Association for
Premenstrual Syndrome; Dr LH Pedersen, Aarhus University, Denmark; Professor JM Rymer FRCOG, London;Mr JA Smallwood, University Hospital Southampton; Dr D van Die, University of Melbourne, Australia; Mr JF Watts FRCOG,Worcester; and Dr CP West FRCOG, Edinburgh, Scotland.
The literature search was performed by Mr JP Curtis BSc (Hons) DipIM MCLIP, Site Librarian, Shrewsbury and Telford
Hospital NHS Trust.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr CJ Crowe MRCOG, London; and Dr BA Magowan FRCOG, Melrose, Scotland.
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta
1MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen2FRCOG, Glasgow, Scotland;
and Dr AJ Thomson1MRCOG, Paisley, Scotland.
1co-chairs from June 20142until May 2014.
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conﬂicts of interest. A statement summarising any conﬂicts
of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/guidelines/gtg48/ .
The ﬁnal version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.
The review process will commence in 2019, unless otherwise indicated.
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice.
They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration byobstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular
clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented
by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to be
prescriptive directions deﬁning a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols orguidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 48 e105 of e105 ª2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 3, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14260 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License