BJOG . 2024;131:e31–e80. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bjo | e31
© 2024 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.RCOG GREEN- TOP GUIDELINES
Investigation and Care of a Small- for- Gestational- Age Fetus and a 
Growth Restricted Fetus (Green-top Guideline No. 31)
R. Katie Morris | Edward Johnstone | Christoph Lees | Victoria Morton | 
Gordon Smith | on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsPublished online: 13 May 2024
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.17814 
This is the third edition of this guideline. It 
replaces the previous editions published in 
February 2013 and November 2002 under the 
same title. Correspondence
Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, 10–18 Union Street, London 
SE1 1SZ, UK.
Email: clinicaleffectiveness@rcog.org.ukKey recommendations
• All women should be assessed at booking (by 14 weeks) for risk factors for fetal 
growth restriction (FGR) to identify those who require increased surveillance 
using an agreed pathway [Grade GPP]. Findings at the midtrimester anomaly 
scan should be incorporated into the fetal growth risk assessment and the risk 
assessment updated throughout pregnancy. [Grade GPP]
• Reduce smoking in pregnancy by identifying women who smoke with the assistance 
of carbon monoxide (CO) testing and ensuring in- house treatment from a trained 
tobacco dependence advisor is offered to all pregnant women who smoke, using an 
opt- out referral process. [Grade GPP]
• Women at risk of pre-eclampsia and/or placental dysfunction should take as -
pirin 150 mg once daily at night from 12+0–36+0 weeks of pregnancy to reduce 
their chance of small-for-gestational-age (SGA) and FGR. [Grade A]
• Uterine artery Dopplers should be carried out between 18+0 and 23+6 weeks for 
women at high risk of fetal growth disorders [Grade B]. In a woman with normal 
uterine artery Doppler and normal fetal biometry at the midtrimester scan, serial 
ultrasound scans for fetal biometry can commence at 32 weeks. Women with an 
abnormal uterine artery Doppler (mean pulsatility index > 95th centile) should 
commence ultrasound scans at 24+0–28+6 weeks based on individual history. 
[Grade B]
• Women who are at low risk of FGR should have serial measurement of symphysis 
fundal height (SFH) at each antenatal appointment after 24+0 weeks of pregnancy 
(no more frequently than every 2 weeks). The first measurement should be carried 
out by 28+6 weeks. [Grade C]
• Women in the moderate risk category are at risk of late onset FGR so require 
serial ultrasound scan assessment of fetal growth commencing at 32+0 weeks. 
For the majority of women, a scan interval of four weeks until birth is appro -
priate. [Grade B]
• Maternity providers should ensure that they clearly identify the reference charts 
to plot SFH, individual biometry and estimated fetal weight (EFW) measure -
ments to calculate centiles. For individual biometry measurements the method 
used for measurement should be the same as those used in the development of the 
individual biometry and fetal growth chart [Grade GPP]. For EFW the Hadlock 
three parameter model should be used. [Grade C]
• Maternity providers should ensure that they have guidance that promotes the 
use of standard planes of acquisition and calliper placement when performing 
ultrasound scanning for fetal growth assessment. Quality control of images 
and measurements should be undertaken. [Grade C]
e32 | 
MORRIS et al .
1 | PURPOSE AND SCOPE
The purpose of this guideline is to provide advice, based on 
the best evidence available, to guide clinicians regarding the 
investigation and care of the small-for-gestational-age (SGA) 
fetus and growth restricted fetus. The guideline reviews the risk 
factors for these conditions and provides recommendations 
regarding surveillance, diagnosis, and management, including 
recommendations for fetal monitoring and birth. Large for ges -
tational age (LGA) is outside the scope of this guidance.
This guideline is for healthcare professionals who care for 
women, non- binary and trans people with a SGA fetus or with 
fetal growth restriction (FGR). Within this document we use 
the terms woman and women's health. However, it is import-
ant to acknowledge that it is not only women for whom it is 
necessary to access women's health and reproductive services 
in order to maintain their gynaecological health and repro -
ductive wellbeing. Gynaecological and obstetric services and 
delivery of care must therefore be appropriate, inclusive and 
sensitive to the needs of those individuals whose gender iden -
tity does not align with the sex they were assigned at birth.
1.1 | Population and setting
Women at low risk of fetal growth problems in community set -
tings.Women at moderate or high risk of fetal growth problems 
(determined based on past obstetric history, current medical 
disorders, or ultrasound diagnosis) in hospital settings.The 
guideline does not address multiple pregnancies or pregnancies 
with fetal anomalies (chromosomal or structural).1.2 | Interventions to be studied
Comparison of modalities for surveillance and diagnosis of a 
SGA fetus or FGR. Comparison of modalities to monitor fe -
tuses with concerns regarding growth.
2 | DEFINITIONS
The most common definitions used and either agreed by consensus of 
experts or other national guidance
Terminology Definition Notes
Appropriate for 
gestational ageFetal size between the 10th 
and 90th centile
Small- for- gestational- 
ageFetal size <10th centile
Fetal growth 
restrictionFetal size or abdominal 
circumference <3rd 
centile or <10th 
centile with Doppler 
abnormalities• FGR can be 
described as early 
(detected before 31+6 
weeks) or late (from 
32+0 weeks) and are 
characterised by 
different clinical, 
ultrasound and 
pathological 
characteristics
• FGR determined by 
sub- optimal fetal 
growth has varying 
definitions (see 
Section 7.3.2 .)• Ultrasound biometry should be carried out every 2 weeks in fetuses identified 
to be SGA [Grade C]. Umbilical artery Doppler is the primary surveillance tool 
and should be carried out at the point of diagnosis of SGA and during follow-
 up as a minimum every 2 weeks. [Grade B]
• In fetuses with an EFW between the 3rd and 10th centile, other features must 
be present for birth to be recommended prior to 39+0 weeks, either maternal 
(maternal medical conditions or concerns regarding fetal movements) or fetal 
compromise (a diagnosis of FGR based on Doppler assessment, fetal growth 
velocity or a concern on cardiotocography [CTG]) [Grade C]. For fetuses with 
an EFW or abdominal circumference less than the 10th centile where FGR has 
been excluded, birth or the initiation of induction of labour should be consid -
ered at 39+0 weeks after discussion with the woman and her partner/family/
support network. Birth should occur by 39+6 weeks. [Grade B]
• Pregnancies with early FGR (prior to 32+0 weeks) should be monitored and 
managed with input from tertiary level units with the highest level neonatal 
care. Care should be multidisciplinary by neonatology and obstetricians with 
fetal medicine expertise, particularly when extremely preterm (before 28 weeks) 
[Grade GPP]. Fetal biometry in FGR should be repeated every 2 weeks [Grade 
B]. Assessment of fetal wellbeing can include multiple modalities but must in -
clude computerised CTG and/or ductus venous. [Grade B]
• In pregnancies with late FGR, birth should be initiated from 37+0 weeks to be 
completed by 37+6 weeks [Grade A]. Decisions for birth should be based on fetal 
wellbeing assessments or maternal indication. [Grade GPP]
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e33
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
Terminology Definition Notes
Static growth No forward growth 
velocity in EFW, or 
AC measured at least 
14 days apart
Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, 
fetal growth restriction.
Fetal size is measured at a single time point in pregnancy 
and assessed via individual biometric measurements (e.g. 
head circumference [HC], abdominal circumference [AC], 
and femur length [FL]) or measurements combined as es-
timated fetal weight (EFW) using different formulas. Fetal 
growth is a dynamic process occurring throughout the preg-
nancy requiring multiple assessments and a minimum of at 
least two assessments of fetal size. Additional information 
that can be considered includes maternal history and symp-
toms, amniotic fluid assessment and Doppler velocimetry. 
Any measurement obtained (biometry or EFW) can only 
be interpreted when plotted on a growth chart to determine 
both the centile of the measurement but also any change in 
growth trajectory. Growth charts are discussed further in 
section  7.2.1.
An appropriate for gestational age (AGA) fetus is one 
whose size is within a normal range for its gestational age. 
This is typically defined as between the 10th and 90th cen -
tiles. A fetus is considered SGA when individual biometric 
measurements or a combination of measurements used to 
estimate fetal weight fall below set parameters and requires 
accurate assessment of gestational age. Commonly, the defi -
nition of SGA refers to a fetus with a predicted weight or an 
AC measurement less than the 10th centile. SGA at birth is 
commonly diagnosed based on a birthweight below the 10th 
centile and often birthweight charts are adjusted for the sex 
of the baby.
FGR implies a pathological restriction of the genetic 
growth potential.1-2 Some, but not all, growth restricted 
fetuses/infants are SGA. The likelihood of FGR is higher 
in fetuses that are smaller.3 Growth restricted fetuses may 
manifest evidence of fetal compromise (abnormal Doppler 
studies, reduced liquor volume).
Defining FGR and thus diagnosing it in a current preg -
nancy is challenging because of the need to determine 
growth potential. Similarly, risk assessing whether FGR ex -
isted in a previous pregnancy presents a different challenge. 
There is a need to focus on those fetuses at risk of adverse 
outcome and thus those that are FGR rather than SGA using 
varying parameters such as sequential ultrasound measure -
ments, Doppler assessments, and biomarkers. FGR can also 
be subdivided clinically into early and late depending on the 
gestational age, with variation in gestational thresholds be -
tween 32 and 37 weeks.A Delphi consensus- based definition of FGR ( Table  1) 
has been suggested for use both in clinical practice and in 
research for early (defined in the Delphi consensus as before 
32+0 weeks) and late onset FGR.4-5
Saving Babies Lives Care Bundle version 3 (SBLCBv3) 
suggests practical definitions for FGR in a previous preg -
nancy, FGR in the current pregnancy, and suboptimal 
growth.6 It highlights that absent or reversed end diastolic 
flow in the umbilical artery is a feature of early onset FGR, 
but importantly that absence of this feature (for example, 
a normal umbilical artery Doppler) from 32+0 weeks of 
gestation does not mean that the fetus is not growth re -
stricted and does not rule out the possibility of fetal 
compromise.
Definition of FGR in a previous pregnancy as a risk factor 
is defined as any of the following:
• Birthweight below 3rd centile in a previous pregnancy.
• Early onset pre- eclampsia or FGR necessitating birth be -
fore 34+0 weeks in a previous pregnancy.
• Birthweight below 10th centile with evidence of placental 
dysfunction (defined as below for current pregnancy).
Definition of FGR in a current pregnancy is defined as 
either of the following:
• EFW or AC below the 3rd centile
• EFW or AC below the 10th centile with evidence of pla -
cental dysfunction (either):
• Abnormal uterine artery Doppler (mean pulsatility 
index [PI] above 95th centile7) and/or
• Abnormal umbilical artery Doppler (absent or reversed 
end diastolic flow or PI above 95th centile).
TABLE 1 Consensus based definitions for early and late fetal growth 
restriction (FGR) in absence of congenital anomalies5
Early FGR: Gestational 
age < 32 weeks, in absence of 
congenital anomaliesLate FGR: Gestational 
age ≥ 32 weeks, in absence of 
congenital anomalies
AC/EFW < 3rd centile or 
UA- AEDFAC/EFW < 3rd centile
Or Or at least two out of three of 
the following:
AC/EFW <10th centile combined 
with either:1. AC/EFW <10th centile
1. UtA- PI >95th centile and/or 2. AC/EFW crossing centiles >two 
quartiles on growth centiles *
2. UA- PI >95th centile 3. CPR <5th centile or UA- PI 
>95th centile
*Growth centiles are non- customised centiles. AC, fetal abdominal circumference; 
CPR, cerebroplacental ratio; EFW, estimated fetal weight; PI, pulsatility index; UA, 
umbilical artery; UtA, uterine artery.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e34 | 
MORRIS et al .
Suboptimal fetal growth may also be indicative of FGR 
and can be diagnosed when a previously well- grown fetus 
(i.e. size 10th centile or above) fails to maintain adequate 
fetal growth during pregnancy. Suboptimal growth is 
difficult to define, with SBLCBv3 defining it as a pat -
tern of slowing growth velocity (i.e. a downward trend 
in the centile).6 The Delphi consensus defines it as AC/
EFW crossing centiles greater than two quartiles on non- 
customised growth centiles ≥32+0 weeks (equivalent to 
50 centiles).5 Static growth can be defined as no forward 
growth velocity in EFW, or AC measured at least 14 days 
apart. Suboptimal fetal growth is further addressed in 
section  7.3.2 .
Low birthweight (LBW) refers to an infant with a birth -
weight less than 2500 g regardless of gestation. This is no 
longer used in clinical practice as the majority of pregnan -
cies have an early dating scan therefore birthweight can be 
adjusted for gestational age. This definition is included for 
interpretation of older research papers only. FGR has previ -
ously been described as symmetrical or asymmetrical and it 
has been proposed that it may help determine possible aeti -
ology. However, this feature can vary and is not prognostic 
of outcome8 so should no longer be used as a description of 
FGR.
3 | INTRODUCTION 
AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Small fetuses are divided into normal (constitutionally 
small), non-placenta mediated growth restriction (e.g. 
structural, or chromosomal anomaly, inborn errors of 
metabolism and fetal infection), and placenta mediated 
growth restriction (placental dysfunction). Maternal fac -
tors such as low pre-pregnancy weight, undernutrition, 
substance misuse or severe anaemia can affect placental 
transfer of nutrients. Medical conditions can also affect 
placental implantation and vasculature and hence trans -
fer (pre- eclampsia, autoimmune disease, thrombophilias, 
renal disease, diabetes, cardiac disease, and essential 
hypertension).
The underlying aetiology as well as timing of onset is 
important when considering the risk of adverse outcome 
in pregnancy. Early onset FGR is associated with signifi -
cant and abnormal placentation that results in increased 
hypoxia and cardiovascular adaptions9 and therefore car -
ries an increased risk of adverse perinatal mortality and 
morbidity.10 Early FGR also often coexists with maternal 
manifestations of placental dysfunction (hypertensive dis -
orders of pregnancy) or maternal medical conditions and 
thus is easier to detect through screening pathways. In late 
onset FGR, the deficit in placentation is milder, with less 
cardiovascular adaption and a lower risk of adverse events. 
However, late FGR is more common, and it is more difficult 
to identify fetuses that may be at risk (on ultrasound scan 
[USS]) and thus detect, and therefore these pregnancies account for a significant proportion of adverse outcomes. 
They are, therefore, an important area for effective surveil -
lance and management.
Serial symphysis fundal height (SFH) measurement is a 
method of surveillance for fetal size, however, it has a low 
sensitivity for detecting SGA/FGR fetuses.11 Suspicion of 
a fetal growth disorder usually relies on ultrasound mea -
surement of fetal AC or estimation of fetal weight. Care 
of the SGA/FGR fetus is directed at timely birth. Several 
surveillance tests are available, including cardiotocogra -
phy (CTG), Doppler and USS to assess biophysical activity, 
but there is controversy about which test or combination 
of tests should be used to time birth in late onset FGR and 
SGA.
The NHS England SBLCB (a care bundle for reducing 
perinatal mortality) was first published in 2016 and fo -
cussed on detection and management of SGA (rather than 
FGR) and recommended birth at 37+0 to 37+6 weeks for 
SGA, as did the 2013 version of this RCOG guidance.12 
The SpiRE evaluation of the SBLCB version 1 demon -
strated a measurable difference in antenatal detection of 
SGA babies across England.13 The evaluation also demon -
strated an increase in USS and inductions of labour at 
early term (37+0–38+6 weeks). Thus, by seeking to capture 
all babies at risk, interventions increased in women who 
were only marginally at increased risk of FGR- related 
stillbirth, with risks to the babies of early term induction 
(namely increased risk of admission to the neonatal unit 
and potential long- term adverse effects, e.g. increased 
risk of special educational needs).14-15 This was partly ad -
dressed in version 2 of the bundle (2019), with different 
management strategies for SGA and FGR to try and re -
duce unnecessary intervention in SGA babies not at risk 
of adverse outcome.16 SBLCBv3, and this guideline, ad -
dresses this further with a focus on detecting FGR and 
targeting intervention (i.e. birth) for those at increased 
risk of perinatal death.6
4 | IDENTIFICATION AND 
ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE
The Cochrane Library and electronic databases (DARE, 
EMBASE, Trip, MEDLINE and PubMed) were searched 
using the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, 
including all subheadings and synonyms, and this was com -
bined with a keyword search and was limited to humans 
and English language; search terms included ‘fetal growth 
retardation’, ‘fetal growth restriction’ and ‘infant, small for 
gestational age’. The search was restricted to articles pub -
lished from 2011 until December 2022. The full search strat -
egy is available to view online as supporting information 
(Appendix S1 and S2). Papers identified by peer reviewers 
and the developers which fall outside the literature searches 
and may be more recent have also been included in the evi -
dence base for the guideline.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e35
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
This guideline was developed using the standard meth -
odology for Green- top Guidelines.17 Where possible, recom -
mendations are based on available evidence. In the absence 
of published evidence, these have been annotated as ‘good 
practice points’. Further information about the assessment 
of evidence and the grading of recommendations may be 
found in Appendix  I.
5 | WHAT ARE THE RISK FACTORS 
FOR FETAL GROWTH DISORDERS IN 
PREGNANCY?
Risk assessment is a fundamental part of care in the ma -
ternity pathway and should be a dynamic process with 
continual assessment throughout the pregnancy. Risk as -
sessment must always consider previous medical history, 
obstetric history and current pregnancy history with in -
formation obtained from the woman, review of medical 
notes and contact with previous care providers as nec -
essary.18 All pregnant women should have a risk assess -
ment for FGR carried out by 14 weeks of gestation using an 
agreed pathway.6
The likelihood of a FGR or FGR- related stillbirth occur -
ring in a pregnancy is influenced by many factors. When 
considering risk assessment, the following are important: a 
priori risk (this is the probability of an event occurring that 
the woman has as she enters the pregnancy based on pre -
vious history); absence of risk factors (e.g. if a certain risk 
factor is not present does this reduce the risk overall and the 
influence of other risk factors that are present); if multiple 
risk factors are present how do these interplay and change 
the level of risk. This information is not known in sufficient 
detail for many conditions in pregnancy nor related to risk 
factors for FGR.
Risk assessment in FGR is also challenged by the fact 
that many analyses of risk factors for fetal growth disor -
ders identify newborns with a birthweight less than the 
10th centile as a proxy for FGR, with the majority of these 
births occurring at term and thus including a significant 
proportion of heathy smaller babies. Hence, studies using 
SGA as a proxy for FGR may underestimate the risk of ad -
verse outcomes associated with FGR. This makes evidence 
assimilation difficult to identify which women should 
have increased surveillance.
There have been several risk assessment models designed 
for the prediction of pre- eclampsia that have been used for 
SGA prediction. There are data from the ASPRE randomised 
controlled trial (RCT; model for prediction of pre- eclampsia 
and aspirin administration) and SPREE study (prediction 
of pre- eclampsia) related to SGA prediction that identifies 
a high proportion of cases of preterm SGA that can be pre -
vented by the prophylactic use of aspirin.19 As these models 
are designed for pre- eclampsia prediction, they can be ex -
pected to have utility in prediction of FGR associated with placental dysfunction and pre- eclampsia but cannot as -
sess all risk factors for FGR. These are discussed further in 
section  5.2.4 .
Tools used to assess risk should provide a structured, 
consistent approach that can adapt throughout the preg -
nancy and support the pregnant woman and her clinician 
in making decisions about her care by making person -
alised care recommendations using clinically validated 
machine learning algorithms. Checklists for the presence 
of risk factors cannot weigh or assess this interaction be -
tween risk factors as described above, they also address 
risk as a binary function of present or absent and cannot 
consider all the information available from the presence 
and “level” of the risk. They also do not provide infor -
mation in a way that can support decision making. Thus, 
it is imperative that future research addresses develop -
ment of prediction models that are designed specifically 
for FGR and importantly FGR with adverse outcome, 
so that they can be incorporated into tools such as the 
Tommy's App,20 a clinical decision tool being developed 
by Tommy's and the RCOG and other electronic patient 
record systems.
Within this section, the known risk factors for FGR and 
relevant evidence are discussed. A pathway for assessing 
risk and subsequent management is shown in Appendix  II. 
It is recognised that this pathway has some of the limitations 
of the checklist approach as discussed above. However, this 
pathway attempts to incorporate all the risk factors detailed 
below for FGR and provide an assessment of level of risk 
in keeping with the National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) guideline [CG62] for pathways of care.18 
It is recognised that maternity providers may wish to use 
technology platforms and validated prediction models for 
pre- eclampsia and placental dysfunction prediction. Where 
this is the case, providers must ensure that risk assessment 
for other FGR risks not related to pre- eclampsia can be 
facilitated.
Women must also be assessed at booking for condi -
tions where SFH measurements are not appropriate (e.g. 
raised body mass index [BMI] of 35 kg/m2 or above at 
booking; presence of fibroids in uterus [based on clinical 
judgement]).
5.1 | Booking history
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All women should 
be assessed at 
booking (by 
14 weeks) for risk 
factors for FGR to 
identify those who 
require increased 
surveillance using 
an agreed pathway.3 GPP Risk assessment at 
the beginning 
of pregnancy 
allows women to 
make informed 
choices about 
their care and 
for planning of 
antenatal care.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e36 | 
MORRIS et al .
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
The birthweight, 
gestation and 
birthweight centiles 
of all previous 
pregnancies 
should be recorded 
at the booking 
appointment.3 GPP This allows accurate 
risk assessment.
The proposed plan of 
assessment should 
be altered based 
on the specific 
combination of 
risk factors and 
this should inform 
further targeted 
tests (such as 
uterine artery 
Doppler when 
available) and/or 
serial ultrasonic 
surveillance (see 
section  7).3 GPP Plans should be 
modified in 
the presence of 
multiple risk 
factors.
5.1.1 | Previous FGR/SGA newborn
Determining the recurrence risk of a fetal growth disorder 
is limited by the definitions used to identify FGR and SGA 
within research studies. Women who had evidence of placental 
dysfunction in a previous pregnancy have a risk of recurrence 
and subsequent FGR affected pregnancy.21 In a large cohort 
study evaluating the risk of recurrence of an SGA pregnancy 
(defined in this study as a newborn below 5th centile) there was 
an increased risk of a subsequent SGA below the 5th centile 
(adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 8.1, 95% CI 7.8–8.5).22 [Evidence 
level 2+]
Therefore, a careful risk assessment must be carried out 
to identify women who had previous affected FGR pregnan -
cies and need increased surveillance for early onset FGR. 
Where there is evidence of a previous SGA infant without 
identified FGR, early assessment of placental dysfunction 
and early onset growth restriction is not required.
5.1.2 | Previous stillbirth
A systematic review summarises the evidence evaluating 
the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes following expo -
sure to one of stillbirth, preterm birth (PTB) or SGA in 
a previous pregnancy.23 Previous stillbirth is associated 
with an increased risk of SGA in a subsequent pregnancy, 
with the association greater when there was evidence of 
FGR in association with the stillbirth.23 This observation 
is supported by other studies24-25 with an increased risk 
of a SGA infant following a previous pregnancy with a 
placentally related stillbirth (OR 2.3, 95% CI 1.2–4.2).25 
[Evidence level 2+]
Stillbirth is a multifactorial condition and can occur 
because of a variety of reasons including maternal, fetal 
and placental factors. Where there is evidence of placental dysfunction, FGR or pre- eclampsia in association with a 
stillbirth, additional screening should be carried out.26
5.1.3 | Previous preterm birth
Women with a previous PTB (before 37+0 weeks) have an in -
creased risk of SGA/FGR; this effect is greater after extreme 
PTB (20+0–27+6 weeks). Most studies did not differentiate 
between iatrogenic or spontaneous PTB, thus it is possi -
ble that this association is secondary to birth for maternal 
medical conditions such as pre- eclampsia or indeed placen -
tal dysfunction leading to FGR, rather than an independent 
association with spontaneous PTB and subsequent SGA/
FGR.23 No evidence was identified that evaluated the risk of 
fetal growth disorders following a history of second trimes -
ter pregnancy loss. A retrospective cohort study of 133 136 
women in Scotland demonstrated a risk of unexplained still -
birth in women with a previous PTB.27 It is recommended 
in any women with a history of PTB or second trimester 
pregnancy loss that a detailed history is undertaken to de -
termine whether placental dysfunction was implicated and 
thus whether ultrasound surveillance for FGR and aspirin is 
required. [Evidence level 2++]
5.1.4 | Previous pregnancy loss
The evidence regarding recurrent miscarriage is conflicting 
and comes mainly from retrospective cohort studies. The 
largest study to date demonstrated no increased risk of SGA 
(aOR 1.07, 95% CI 0.93–1.23).28 As recurrent miscarriage can 
be caused by a heterogenous group of conditions and some 
of these are associated with pregnancy complications them-
selves, it is important to look at the group with unexplained 
recurrent miscarriage as these women may have underlying 
abnormal placentation.29 Another retrospective study found 
an increased risk of SGA below 10th centile but this was not 
adjusted for other confounders (OR 2.82, 95% CI 1.32–6.04).30 
There is thus a need for further prospective research, to eval -
uate the relationship between unexplained recurrent miscar -
riage and SGA/FGR. [Evidence level 2–]
Second trimester medical termination of pregnancy 
(MTOP) is not a risk factor for an SGA infant, with this 
being explored in a large cohort study comparing the out -
comes of PTB, LBW, SGA and placental complications in 
women undergoing first trimester versus second trimester 
MTOP.31 [Evidence level 2+]
5.1.5 | Previous pregnancy with 
placenta- mediated complications
Women who have had a previous pregnancy affected by a 
placenta- mediated complication (e.g. hypertensive disorders 
of pregnancy, placental abruption or abnormal fetal growth) 
are at greater risk of recurrence of these complications in 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e37
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
subsequent pregnancies, with the risk increasing with each 
pregnancy affected.32 [Evidence level 2–]
NICE recommends aspirin 75–150 mg daily from 12+0 
weeks until the birth of the baby, to reduce the risk of hyper -
tensive disorders of pregnancy related to placental dysfunc -
tion, particularly pre-eclampsia.33 [Evidence level 1++]
In women with previous FGR (including those born 
preterm), clinicians should determine whether placental 
dysfunction may have been a contributory factor and, if so, 
advise low dose aspirin 150 mg from 12+0 weeks of gesta -
tion.6-34 Aspirin may be more effective if taken at night.35 
[Evidence level 4]
In some circumstances this may not be appropriate and 
lower doses (60–75 mg) may be used (for example, women 
with hepatic or renal disease).
5.1.6 | Maternal characteristics and 
medical history
Maternal medical conditions associated with an in -
creased risk of a fetal growth disorder include diabetes with 
vascular disease,36 moderate and severe renal impairment 
(especially when associated with hypertension),37 antiphos -
pholipid syndrome,38 chronic hypertension39 and systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE).40 [Evidence level 2– to 2++]
Maternal congenital heart disease (CHD) has a varying 
association with SGA, and the largest prospective series to 
date demonstrated that SGA was mainly seen in women with 
complex CHD (OR 2.29, 95% CI 1.49–3.51) and symptom -
atic patients (New York Heart Association class III– IV) (OR 
2.39, 95% CI 0.72–7.95). Multivariable analysis revealed that 
women with valvular disease, stenotic lesions (OR 2.31, 95% 
CI 1.33–4.03) and anticoagulant use (OR 2.16, 95% CI 1.24–
3.78) had an increased risk of SGA. Thus, women with com -
plex CHD and/or ventricular dysfunction should be offered 
fetal monitoring by ultrasound.41 [Evidence level 2+] 
A significant number of women with cardiac disease in 
pregnancy will be taking multiple medications with the most 
common being beta-blockers. The mechanism underpinning 
the relationship between cardiac dysfunction and FGR is com-
plex and concomitant use of medicines, especially beta-blockers 
may play a role. Thus, medication use should also be considered 
when assessing the need for growth scans.42 [Evidence level 2+]
The associations with asthma, anaemia, inflammatory 
bowel disease and depression are less strong. Meta- analyses 
of observational studies have demonstrated weak or no as -
sociations with SGA (less than 50% increase in risk) for 
asthma,43 inflammatory bowel disease44, anaemia45 and 
depression.46,47 Therefore, if uncomplicated and adequately 
treated, these are not considered important risk factors for 
an SGA fetus.48,49 [Evidence level 2++]
Advanced maternal age of 40 years or more is associated 
with increased risk of SGA and FGR although this is smaller 
than previously thought (SGA OR 1.20, 95% CI 1.07–1.33; 
FGR birthweight below 5th centile OR 1.53, 95% CI 1.07–
2.20).50 [Evidence level 1–]Maternal pre- pregnancy BMI and gestational weight gain 
have been evaluated in an individual patient data (IPD) meta- 
analysis of 265 270 singleton pregnancies.51 Maternal pre- 
pregnancy BMI of 20–30 kg/m2 was associated with a lower 
risk of SGA (P < 0.05) (reference group 20.0–22.4 kg/m2). 
Women with excessive weight gain had a lower risk for SGA 
(OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.60–0.65). Women with a BMI lower 
than 18.5 kg/m2 and low gestational weight gain (Z scores 
of −1.1SD or less Institute of Medicine Guidelines) had the 
highest risk for SGA birth (OR 3.12, 95% CI 2.75–3.54).51 
NICE guideline [CG62] recommends that women are of -
fered a height and weight measurement at booking and BMI 
calculated,18 but they are not routinely, repeatedly weighed 
during pregnancy.52 Therefore, women with a low BMI at 
booking (below 18.5 kg/m2) and who have features which 
indicate that the maternal stature is not physiological, e.g. 
those with eating disorders or medical disorders affecting 
nutrition, should be considered at increased risk and serial 
USS undertaken.53 [Evidence level 2++]
Bariatric surgery appears to increase the risk of SGA 
independent of BMI associated risks, with gastric bypass 
(malabsorptive) associated with a higher risk compared with 
gastric bands (restrictive) (gastric bypass: OR 2.39, 95% CI 
1.94–2.94; gastric bands: OR 1.38, 95% CI 0.90–2.10).54-56 
Hence, women who have undergone gastric bypass surgery 
should be considered at moderate risk of fetal growth disor -
ders regardless of their BMI, whereas women with a gastric 
band should not. [Evidence level 2++]
Ethnicity, specifically Southeast Asian, African and Black 
African Caribbean, have been reported to be associated 
with an increased risk of SGA.57-59 The relationship between 
ethnicity and adverse pregnancy outcomes is complex and 
multifaceted. The evidence base is limited because of its ob -
servational nature, lack of relevant classification, and lack 
of adjustment for confounders, e.g. geographical location, 
healthcare system, coexisting disease, malnutrition, inequal -
ity, etc. However, perinatal mortality and adverse outcomes 
are higher in some groups, such as women who are Black and 
Asian. A national cohort study in England demonstrated 
that socioeconomic and ethnic inequalities were responsible 
for a substantial proportion of stillbirths, PTBs, and births 
with FGR. Population attributable fractions indicated that 
23.6% (95% CI 16.7–29.8) of stillbirths, 18.5% (16.9–20.2) of 
PTBs, and 31.1% (28.3–33.8) of births with FGR could be 
attributed to socioeconomic inequality, and these fractions 
were substantially reduced when adjusted for ethnic group, 
smoking, and BMI (11.6% for stillbirths, 11.9% for PTBs, and 
16.4% for births with FGR). The largest inequalities were in 
Black and South Asian Women in the most socioeconomi -
cally deprived quintile (FGR 71.7% in South Asian Women 
and 55% in Black women).60
One recommendation is for high- quality research ad -
dressing health inequality, racial bias, and ethnic disparities 
and for maternity providers to use local data to understand 
their populations and the health inequalities they face. This 
need for understanding local populations is further high -
lighted by one of the secondary findings of the DESiGN trial 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e38 | 
MORRIS et al .
which demonstrated that unidentified SGA (in women with 
no ultrasound surveillance) was more common among white 
women than Asian women (aOR 0.58, 95% CI 0.69–0.93).61 
Local maternity and neonatal systems and trusts should re -
port data on the distribution of fetal growth outcomes with 
relation to maternal reported ethnicity and use this data to 
determine whether ethnicity should be included in local risk 
assessment pathways. [Evidence level 4]
Maternity services and healthcare providers have an im -
portant role to play in ensuring that all women are provided 
with a risk assessment at booking for fetal growth disor -
ders and all modifiable contributory factors are addressed. 
[Evidence level 2+]
Nulliparity, social deprivation, unmarried status, ma -
ternal SGA, a short (less than 6 months) or long (over 
60 months) inter- pregnancy interval have all been shown to 
have minor associations with SGA.62-66 The effect of some of 
these risk factors is reduced once adjusted for other factors. 
[Evidence level 2++]
An IPD meta- analysis did not support an association be -
tween moderate to vigorous physical activity and the risk of 
SGA.67 [Evidence level 2++]
Congenital uterine anomalies are associated with adverse 
pregnancy outcomes, which include an increased risk of FGR 
(OR 3.75, 95% CI 1.88–7.46). The level of risk is associated 
with the categorisation and severity of the defect, with the 
greatest risk being for women with septate and bicorporeal 
uteri.68 These women are high risk for other adverse outcomes 
in particular PTB and the uterine circulation can often be 
affected by the anomaly, making uterine artery Doppler as -
sessment and interpretation more challenging. These women 
should thus be considered outside the context of the manage -
ment guidance in section  7.3. It is however reasonable to offer 
these women growth scans from 28+0 weeks. [Evidence 2++]
The interaction of multiple maternal risk factors is un -
known and is an important area for further research.
5.1.7 | Antenatal risk factors
Several maternal exposures have a seemingly causative rela -
tionship with fetal growth disorders. A systematic review from 
2011 reported a dose–response relationship with maternal al -
cohol consumption and SGA, with no association with low lev -
els of alcohol consumption, a small association with one drink 
per day and a doubling of risk at approximately 4 drinks per 
day.69 A more recent systematic review concluded that there 
is limited evidence on the effects of drinking 32 g/week or less 
(two UK units up to twice per week). There was some evidence 
that light prenatal alcohol consumption was associated with 
the risk of having an SGA infant (OR 1.08, 95% CI 1.02–1.14) 
but there is a lack of evidence about the effect of alcohol con -
sumption at different stages of conception and pregnancy. It 
was concluded that guidance could advise abstention as a pre -
cautionary principle, but clinicians should explain this is based 
on limited evidence.70 [Evidence level 2++]Drug misuse is associated with being born SGA, specif -
ically cocaine use (OR 3.23, 95% CI 2.43–4.30) with crack 
cocaine use increasing the risk further (OR 4.00, 95% CI 
1.74–9.18).71-72 Data regarding fetal growth with marijuana 
exposure demonstrates an association with all placental dys -
function conditions and therefore as a principle should be 
avoided.73 It must be noted that often studies of marijuana 
use are hampered by inadequate reporting of usage and con -
comitant tobacco use.73 [Evidence level 2++]
Smoking increases the risk of SGA and the effects 
of smoking are dose dependent and greater in older 
women.74-75 Multiple cohort studies have demonstrated that 
smoking throughout pregnancy approximately doubles the 
risk of SGA.76-78 The risk of preterm SGA which is more 
strongly associated with FGR is also increased (OR 1.39, 
95% CI 1.35–1.42).78 Women who are able to stop smoking 
can reduce their risk of SGA. If able to stop by 15 weeks of 
gestation, they can return to the pregnancy risk status of 
similar non- smoking women of preterm and term SGA. 
Less is known about the impact of secondhand smoke on 
SGA rates.75,76,79[Evidence level 2+]
The relationship between use of e- cigarettes and the risk 
of fetal growth disorders is complex, pregnancy is unique in 
that women are motivated to alter behaviour to reduce risk 
to the fetus. Women may completely or partially substitute 
cigarettes in pregnancy for e- cigarettes. In women who used 
e- cigarettes prior to pregnancy and can stop tobacco use 
during pregnancy, the risk of SGA has been shown to return 
towards background risk. The continued use of e- cigarettes 
in pregnancy, in prior users, is associated with an increased 
risk of SGA compared with non-users in one large study, but 
there was also evidence that women who exclusively smoke 
cigarettes and change to e- cigarettes lower their risk of fetal 
growth disorders.80[Evidence level 2+]
For women who use nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), 
the evidence from a systematic review and meta- analysis 
suggests that most of the harmful effects of smoking on 
birthweight are not related to the nicotine and that any risk 
from using NRT are much lower than those of smoking.81,82 
These available studies do not currently provide enough 
evidence to say that there are no harmful effects from NRT 
for the fetus. [Evidence level 1]
However, evidence from an RCT where women who 
smoked in pregnancy were randomised to e- cigarettes or 
NRT found that e- cigarettes were more effective than NRT 
for smoking cessation and the infants born to women in the 
e- cigarette group were less likely to be of LBW than those 
randomised to NRT (14.8% versus 9.6% relative risk [RR] 
0.65, 95% CI 0.47–0.90, P = 0.01).82[Evidence level 1+]
Women who use e- cigarettes or NRT who have carbon 
monoxide test > 4 ppm should be offered scan assessment on 
the moderate risk pathway as for smokers. [Evidence level 4]
More evidence is required on the short- and long- term 
benefits and risks of e- cigarettes and NRT as discussed in 
the NICE guideline [NG209].83 Section  6.1 discusses support 
for women who smoke or use e- cigarettes in pregnancy.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e39
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
Maternal caffeine consumption of 300 mg/day or more in 
the third trimester has been associated with SGA, with evi -
dence suggesting that even lower consumption has an asso -
ciation with SGA (OR 1.9, 95% CI 1.3–2.8).84-85 The current 
recommended daily maximum caffeine intake in pregnancy 
is 200 mg/day (two mugs of instant coffee).86 [Evidence level 
2+]
A systematic review assessing in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) has shown an 
association with these techniques and SGA (RR 1.39, 95% 
CI 1.27–1.53).87 However, the underlying reason for fertility 
treatment, maternal and paternal (sperm donor) health and 
the techniques used all alter the risk of fetal growth disor -
ders, and therefore currently it is difficult to determine ac -
curate risk assessments. [Evidence level 2++]
There is increasing interest on the paternal influence on 
adverse pregnancy outcomes.88 A systematic review of 36 
studies on paternal factors and birth outcomes concluded 
that extreme paternal ages (below 20 and above 40 years), 
height and paternal birthweight had no association with 
SGA.88,89 Changing paternity has been associated with an 
increased risk of a SGA infant (aOR 2.25, 95% CI 1.13–1.47) 
and pre- eclampsia even after taking into account con -
founders related to changing paternity such as social and 
behavioural changes.90 Further research is needed to eval -
uate the potential mechanism between paternity change 
and SGA/pre- eclampsia.90 [Evidence level 2++]
5.2 | Current pregnancy risk factors
5.2.1 | Biochemical markers used for 
aneuploidy screening
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
When low pregnancy- 
associated 
plasma protein A 
(PAPP–A) levels 
or raised alpha 
fetoprotein (AFP) 
levels and/or 
raised inhibin A 
are incidentally 
detected following 
first or second 
trimester screening 
for aneuploidy, it 
is recommended 
women should be 
offered additional 
ultrasound 
surveillance for 
SGA/FGR.2+ B Low PAPP- A, raised 
AFP and raised 
inhibin are risk 
factors for SGA 
and FGR.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women with a low 
PAPP- A or raised 
beta-hCG level 
should be offered 
aspirin as per 
section 6.24 GPP There are no studies 
assessing the 
effectiveness 
of aspirin for 
this indication. 
However, 
as these are 
placental 
biomarkers 
and associated 
with adverse 
outcomes related 
to placental 
mediated disease 
it is appropriate 
to offer women 
low dose aspirin.
Low (below 5th centile or below 0.415 Multiples of Median 
[MoM] if local data reference data unavailable) pregnancy as-
sociated plasma protein A (PAPP- A) levels are an indepen-
dent risk factor for SGA, with the odds of SGA decreasing 
as PAPP- A increases.91 Low PAPP- A levels are also strongly 
associated with stillbirth owing to placental dysfunction, de-
fined as abruption or unexplained stillbirth associated with 
growth restriction (incidence rate: 11.7 versus 0.3 per 10 000 
women per week, respectively; hazard ratio 46.0, 95% CI, 
11.9–178.0).92 A large meta- analysis of 32 studies (175 240 
pregnancies) demonstrated that low PAPP- A is associated 
with SGA below 10th centile (OR 2.08, 95% CI 1.8–2.29), SGA 
below 5th centile (OR 2.83, 95%CI 2.52–3.18).93 Raised alpha 
fetoprotein (AFP) (above 2 MoM) and raised inhibin A (above 
2 MoM) are also associated with SGA/FGR.94 A large UK ob-
servational study of 1079 women, which included women 
with low PAPP- A or raised AFP and/or raised inhibin A, con-
firmed the increased risk of SGA (24.5%) and FGR (10.3%) 
and demonstrated that most of the increased risk is FGR after 
34+0 weeks of gestation with only 2.3% (27/1079) requiring 
birth before this gestation.95 90.6% of cases of early FGR were 
identified by performing uterine artery Doppler assessment 
and ultrasound EFW in the early third trimester (LR- 0.14; 
0.06–0.35) supporting earlier studies.96 Risks of SGA and FGR 
were similar in low PAPP- A, raised AFP and raised inhibin 
A populations and risks increased as levels deviated further 
from the median. This finding is supported by other observa -
tional studies and as a result additional surveillance for FGR 
should be offered if abnormal levels of any of these biochem -
ical markers are detected.95,97 Information on low estriol lev -
els (below 0.5 MoM) is too limited to draw firm conclusions 
because of rarity in chromosomally typical fetuses. Raised 
human chorionic gonadotrophin (beta-hCG; above 4 MoM) 
is not reliably associated with SGA/FGR and does not need 
to precipitate additional monitoring in isolation, although if it 
occurs in association with other raised midtrimester markers 
(AFP and/or inhibin A) then this may indicate even higher 
risk of SGA and FGR.98 [Evidence level 2++]
Low PAPP- A, raised AFP and/or inhibin A thus should 
initiate uterine artery Doppler screening and serial growth 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e40 | 
MORRIS et al .
scans with frequency dependent upon the result.99 [Evidence 
level 2+]
Although when incidentally detected, low PAPP- A or 
raised AFP and/or raised inhibin A are strongly associated 
with SGA and FGR, systematic reviews and observational 
studies have not supported their use in isolation as primary 
detection tools for FGR because of their low sensitivity.94-101 
Thus their use as a screening tool in isolation is not currently 
recommended. [Evidence level 2++]
A prospective, observational study of 60 875 women with 
a singleton pregnancy, undergoing first trimester ultra -
sound and PAPP- A measurement, assessed the predictive 
performance of a model using maternal characteristics and 
PAPP- A measurements. The analysis used a Bayesian ap -
proach and variables and outcomes as continuous factors 
rather than an arbitrary categorisation. External validation 
of this model is required but presents an opportunity for 
maximising the information available in each pregnancy in 
a personalised approach.102
There are no prospective studies demonstrating the effec -
tiveness of the use of aspirin in women with an isolated low 
PAPP- A or raised beta-hCG. However, as these are placental 
biomarkers and associated with adverse outcomes related to 
placental mediated disease it is appropriate to offer women 
low dose aspirin.103-104 [Evidence level 4]
Anomalous screening results can be used to contribute to 
risk assessment for that pregnancy and help determine sur -
veillance pathways for fetal growth.104 [Evidence level 2+]
5.2.2 | Findings at midtrimester anomaly scan
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Findings at the midtrimester 
anomaly scan should 
be incorporated into 
the fetal growth risk 
assessment at the next 
planned review.4 GPP The review following 
the anomaly scan 
appointment 
presents an 
opportunity 
to review 
maternal medical 
conditions, fetal 
condition and 
size and thus 
reassess risk for 
a fetal growth 
disorder.
Uterine artery Dopplers should 
be carried out between 18+0 
and 23+6 weeks for women 
at high risk of fetal growth 
disorders:
• Previous FGR
• Previous 
pre- eclampsia
• Previous SGA 
stillbirth
• Maternal medical 
conditions
• Abnormal 
biomarkers (P APP-A, 
AFP , inhibin A)2++ B In high- risk 
populations 
uterine artery 
Doppler has 
a moderate 
predictive value 
for early onset 
SGA.
Please see 
section 7.3.1RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
When the following 
are identified on 
midtrimester anomaly 
scan, uterine artery 
Dopplers should be 
carried out to assess the 
risk of early onset FGR:
• Echogenic bowel
• Single umbilical artery2+
2–C
CFetal echogenic bowel 
is associated with 
an increased risk 
of SGA.
Studies have 
demonstrated 
an association 
between isolated 
single umbilical 
artery and the 
risk of growth 
restricted 
stillbirths
• Fetal biometry if 
EFW < 10th centile4 GPP A uterine artery 
Doppler should 
be carried 
out to assess 
for placental 
dysfunction and 
risk of early onset 
FGR
At the time of the midtrimester fetal anomaly scan, cer -
tain normal variants and incidental findings may be ob -
served as well as fetal anomalies detected. The Fetal Anomaly 
Screening Programme (FASP) provides guidance as to how 
these findings should be classified and whether referral for 
further assessment as for other suspected fetal anomalies 
should occur.105 The guidance below discusses the associa -
tion of these with fetal growth disorders and stillbirth and 
thus consideration as to whether the surveillance pathway 
for fetal growth should be amended.
Fetal echogenic bowel
Fetal echogenic bowel has been shown to be independently as -
sociated with a SGA newborn (aOR 2.1, 95% CI 1.5–2.9) and 
intrauterine fetal death (aOR 9.6, 95% CI 5.8–15.9).106 A pro -
spective study of 22 000 women with ultrasound findings of 
unknown significance at the 20- week anomaly scan included 
50 cases of isolated echogenic bowel. There was an association 
with an increased risk of stillbirth but when restricted to live 
births with birthweight below 3rd centile no conclusion could 
be made.107 [Evidence level 2+]
Single umbilical artery
A meta- analysis of 11 observational studies including 1731 
pregnancies demonstrated an almost three- fold risk of SGA 
associated with isolated single umbilical artery.108-109 Further 
studies have also demonstrated an association between iso -
lated single umbilical artery and the risk of growth restricted 
stillbirths.110-111 Finally, a retrospective analysis of over 200 000 
pregnancies, excluding those with structural or chromosomal 
anomalies, reported an odds ratio of 8.1 for stillbirth with iso -
lated single umbilical artery.112 [Evidence level 2–]
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e41
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
Fetal biometry
At the time of the midtrimester scan fetal biometry is mea -
sured and an EFW calculated. Where the EFW is <10th cen -
tile, uterine artery Doppler should be performed to assess for 
placental dysfunction and risk of early onset FGR. If the uter -
ine artery Doppler is normal re- scan in 3–4 weeks and if the 
uterine artery Doppler is abnormal arrange obstetric review 
for individualised care plan. [Evidence level 4]
The FASP guidance suggests that fetuses with measure-
ments significantly less than the 5th centile at the midtrimes-
ter anomaly scan should be referred for further assessment.113 
This may include fetal medicine assessment for fetal anomaly 
or medical assessment for review of risk of fetal growth disor -
ders and change of surveillance pathway (see section 8).
5.2.3 | Risk factors developing in pregnancy
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should be 
reassessed for 
their risk of a fetal 
growth disorder 
throughout 
pregnancy and 
after any antenatal 
admission.4 GPP Risk assessment should 
be a continuous 
process. The 28- 
week appointment 
presents a universal 
opportunity to review 
the pregnancy (and 
thus risk assessment) 
at the start of the 
third trimester. 
Antenatal admissions 
will be prompted by 
a change in maternal 
or fetal condition and 
thus should prompt 
a reassessment of 
the fetal growth 
monitoring plan.
Women with 
hypertensive 
disorders of 
pregnancy need 
to be assessed 
in line with the 
NICE guideline 
Hypertension in 
Pregnancy [NG133] 
to determine if 
growth scans and 
pathways need to be 
applied.2+ C Women with 
hypertensive 
disorders of 
pregnancy can be 
at increased risk 
of fetal growth 
disorders. The 
nature and severity 
of the hypertensive 
disorder determines 
the risk.
Women who have 
been seriously or 
critically unwell 
from COVID- 19 
should be offered 
an ultrasound 
scan to assess the 
fetal biometry. It 
seems reasonable 
to arrange the 
first scan within 
the first 14 days 
following recovery 
and to consider 
further ultrasound 
monitoring on an 
individual basis.4 GPP For women who have 
been acutely unwell 
with COVID- 19 
there is a risk that 
the severity of the 
illness may affect 
fetal growth.Bleeding in the first trimester is common and a systematic 
review demonstrated an association with threatened miscar -
riage and growth restriction (OR 1.54, 95% CI 1.18–2.0), but 
with no consistent definition of the outcome and significant 
heterogeneity in results.114 [Evidence level 2++]
Previous evidence regarding association between bleed -
ing in the second half of pregnancy and fetal growth disor -
ders has been conflicting with heterogeneity in definitions of 
bleeding and outcomes with the need for large, prospective 
studies able to adjust for confounders.115 [Evidence level 2–]
Current RCOG guidance for care of women following 
an antepartum haemorrhage (APH) recommends serial 
scans for fetal growth stating “Following APH from placen-
tal abruption or unexplained APH, the pregnancy should 
be reclassified as ‘high risk’ and antenatal care should be 
consultant- led. Serial ultrasound for fetal growth should be 
performed” . It is not possible to determine whether there 
needs to be a certain amount of bleeding to confer a risk of 
FGR and thus a pragmatic definition is an APH that requires 
hospitalisation or repeated episodes of bleeding (i.e. bleeding 
on more than one occasion). Placenta praevia not compli -
cated by APH is not a significant risk factor for SGA.116
A population- based study assessed the risk of SGA in 
women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Women 
who develop hypertensive disorders of pregnancy had an 
increased risk of an SGA newborn compared with normo-
tensive women (gestational hypertension no proteinuria RR 
1.5, 95% CI 1.47–1.6, P < 0.001; gestational hypertension with 
proteinuria RR 3.3, 95% CI 3.0–3.9, P < 0.001; pre- existing 
hypertension were RR 2.5, 95% CI 2.1–2.9, P < 0.001).117 
There is a dose–response relationship between SGA and 
hypertension with increases in diastolic blood pressure in 
women with non- proteinuric hypertension in pregnancy 
associated with an increased risk of SGA (severe pregnancy 
induced hypertension diastolic ≥110mHg RR 2.5, 95% CI 
2.3–2.8).117-119 NICE guideline [NG133] recommends that 
women with chronic hypertension, severe gestational hyper -
tension (BP≥160/110 mmHg) and pre- eclampsia have ultra-
sound assessment for fetal growth and for women with mild 
hypertension if clinically indicated.33 [Evidence level 2+]
Maternal COVID- 19 infection probably increases the 
risk of FGR. A published systematic review of 42 studies 
reported an increased risk of LBW (OR 1.89, 95% CI 1.14–
3.12)120 associated with maternal COVID- 19 infection, and 
a large multinational study also reported a higher LBW rate 
(RR 1.58, 95% CI 1.29–1.94) among women with COVID- 19 
infection but no effect on SGA probably reflecting the high 
prematurity rate.121 RCOG COVID- 19 guidance recom -
mends that women who have been seriously or critically un -
well from COVID- 19 should be offered an ultrasound scan 
to assess the fetal biometry. It seems reasonable to arrange 
the first scan within the first 14 days following recovery and 
to consider further ultrasound monitoring on an individual 
basis.122
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e42 | 
MORRIS et al .
5.2.4 | Risk stratification for FGR and 
prediction models
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Prediction models 
should not be 
used as the only 
method for 
determining 
ultrasound 
surveillance.2+ C Despite moderate 
predictive ability, 
these models have 
not been shown 
to have sufficient 
clinical utility to 
determine which 
women should 
have ultrasound 
surveillance.
Multiparameter 
competing 
risk models for 
pre- eclampsia 
and placental 
dysfunction can 
be used to help 
reduce the risk of 
preterm SGA and 
identify those who 
can benefit from 
a prescription of 
aspirin.1– B Pre- eclampsia 
prediction 
models can 
identify a high 
proportion of 
cases of preterm 
SGA that can be 
prevented using 
aspirin.
Implementation of 
these models 
requires sufficient 
local resources, 
training, and 
quality control 
to support 
implementation.4 GPP
There are several published prediction models for SGA 
based on combinations of maternal characteristics, biomark -
ers and ultrasound features.123-128 However further analysis 
has demonstrated that while the models have moderate pre -
dictive value for SGA below the 5th centile, the clinical util -
ity is limited because of the heterogeneous aetiology of fetal 
growth disorders.129
Data from the ASPRE RCT and SPREE study using pre- 
eclampsia prediction models demonstrated that these mod -
els identify a high proportion of cases of preterm SGA that 
can be prevented by the prophylactic use of aspirin.19
A competing risks model for SGA based on a combination 
of maternal risk factors, EFW and uterine artery pulsatility 
index was compared with a stillbirth specific risk model and 
the risk factors within the previous version of this guideline 
to predict placental dysfunction related stillbirth. This was a 
prospective observational study in 131 514 women at 19–24 
weeks. At a screen positive rate of 21.8% (defined in RCOG 
2013) the competing risks model predicted 71% (at any ges -
tation), 76% (<37 weeks) and 79% (<32 weeks) of placental 
dysfunction related stillbirths compared with 40%, 44% and 
42%. 130[Evidence level 1– ]
As these models were developed primarily for placental 
dysfunction and pre- eclampsia, they do not encompass all 
the known risk factors for FGR and in particular late FGR. Thus, at present these models are not sufficient to be used as 
the sole method of determining which women should have 
ultrasound surveillance. [Evidence level 2+]
However, where local resources, training and quality 
control can support their implementation, the use of mul -
tiparameter competing risk models for pre- eclampsia and 
placental dysfunction can be used to help reduce the risk of 
preterm SGA and identify those who can benefit from a pre -
scription of aspirin [Evidence level 4]
6 | HOW CAN THE RISK OF 
FETAL GROWTH DISORDERS IN 
PREGNANCY BE REDUCED?
6.1 | General population
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Reduce smoking 
in pregnancy 
by identifying 
women who 
smoke with the 
assistance of 
carbon monoxide 
(CO) testing and 
ensuring in- house 
treatment from a 
trained tobacco 
dependence 
advisor is offered 
to all pregnant 
women who 
smoke, using an 
opt- out referral 
process.4 GPP Smoking increases the 
risk of SGA and 
women who can 
stop smoking can 
reduce their risk 
of SGA.
All women should 
continue to take 
the recommended 
10 micrograms/
day of vitamin 
D (throughout 
pregnancy) and 
400 micrograms/
day of folic acid 
(preconception 
and for the first 
3 months of 
pregnancy).1– B The benefit of vitamin 
D and folic acid 
supplementation 
in pregnancy to 
reduce the risk of 
pre- eclampsia, SGA 
or FGR remains 
uncertain and 
thus all women 
should follow 
general pregnancy 
guidance to prevent 
other pregnancy 
complications.
6.1.1 | Dietary modification
Balanced energy/protein supplementation has been associated 
with a reduction of SGA (RR 0.79, 95% CI 0.69–0.90) and an 
increase in mean birthweight (+40.96 g, 95% CI 4.66–77.26; 
11 trials, 5385 women).131 The same meta- analysis examined 
whether high protein supplementation alone was beneficial. 
Only one study of 1051 women was included and appeared to 
show an increase in SGA (RR 1.58, 95% CI 1.03–2.41). However, 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e43
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
the evidence was of low quality, therefore high protein supple -
mentation is not recommended.131 [Evidence level 1–]
A single- centre Spanish RCT investigated whether structured 
interventions based on a Mediterranean diet or mindfulness- 
based stress reduction in high- risk pregnancies can reduce the 
percentage of newborns who were born SGA and other adverse 
pregnancy outcomes. Primary endpoint was SGA at birth and 
demonstrated that SGA occurred in 88 newborns (21.9%) in the 
control group, 55 (14.0%) in the Mediterranean diet group (OR, 
0.58, 95% CI, 0.40–0.84; risk difference −7.9, 95% CI, −13.6 to 
−2.6; P = 0.004). However, there were significant limitations 
and confounders within this study and so neither intervention 
should be recommended routinely.132 [Evidence level 1– ]
6.1.2 | Dietary supplements, minerals, 
micronutrients, and vitamins
Supplementation with omega- 3 long chain polyunsaturated 
fatty acids has not been shown to reduce SGA or intrauterine 
growth restriction (RR 1.01, 95% CI 0.90–1.13; eight RCTs, 
6907 participants).133 Multiple micronutrient supplementation 
in pregnancy has been addressed in a Cochrane review of 21 
trials involving 142 496 women. Micronutrient supplementa -
tion appeared to reduce the risk of SGA (RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.88–
0.97).134 However, all but one of these studies was conducted in 
low or middle income countries and the only UK study failed 
to demonstrate any significant effect.135 [Evidence level 1–]
High dose folic acid supplementation has been previously 
suggested to reduce the risk of SGA, but the FACT study did 
not demonstrate any reduction in SGA or FGR rates over the 
standard preconceptual dose (400 microgram/day).136 Calcium 
supplementation has been suggested to reduce the incidence of 
pre- eclampsia although a Cochrane review reported a modest 
8% reduction at best and a high quality RCT did not demonstrate 
an effect.137-139 The Cochrane review did not re- consider the ef-
fect of calcium on reducing the prevalence of SGA.137 An NIHR 
funded RCT in the UK commenced in 2022 (CaPE NIHR27325) 
and is considering maternal and fetal outcomes. Magnesium sup-
plementation to reduce the incidence of SGA has been extensively 
investigated, but a Cochrane review (10 trials, 9090 women) con-
cluded there was no effect.140 [Evidence level 1–]
6.1.3 | Vitamin D supplementation
The benefit of vitamin D supplementation to reduce the risk of 
pre- eclampsia, SGA or FGR in pregnancy remains uncertain. 
Several systematic reviews have not found evidence of a reduced 
pre- eclampsia or stillbirth risk, but have found some evidence 
of a reduced risk of LBW (below 2500 g) and/or SGA.141-143 
Another systematic review suggested that vitamin D supple -
mentation may be useful in preventing pre- eclampsia.144 At 
present therefore, there is insufficient evidence to recommend 
high dose supplementation for pregnant women at risk of FGR 
and women should continue to take the 10 microgram/day 
recommended for all UK pregnant women,18 unless there are other reasons to increase daily dose independent of pregnancy, 
e.g. cultural skin coverage, in which case dose should be deter -
mined by local prescribing policy. [Evidence level 1–]
6.1.4 | Tobacco dependency treatment
Smoking increases the risk of SGA and women who can 
stop smoking can reduce their risk of SGA. If able to quit by 
15 weeks of gestation, they can return to the pregnancy risk 
status of similar non- smoking women of preterm and term 
SGA.75-145 [Evidence level 1–]
The NICE guideline [CG62] has detailed recommendations 
for treating tobacco dependence in pregnant women including 
behavioural support and nicotine replacement therapy. There 
is insufficient evidence for the effectiveness of e- cigarettes to 
help stop smoking in pregnancy or whether they have poten-
tial harm for the fetus or child after birth.18 However, the risk 
is very likely to be less than for cigarettes. Thus, while women 
should be advised to try and avoid use of e- cigarettes in preg-
nancy, it is appreciated that for some women they will not be 
able to maintain a smoke- free pregnancy without e- cigarettes 
and these women should be supported to use e- cigarettes.81,146
SBLCBv3 Element 1 supports maternity care providers 
to reduce smoking in pregnancy.6 Smoking is the most im -
portant modifiable risk factor for poor pregnancy outcomes. 
Ideally, women would be supported to stop smoking and 
provide a smoke- free environment prior to pregnancy via 
pre- pregnancy counselling.
6.2 | Women at risk of fetal growth disorders
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Taking folic acid 
and vitamin D 
doses above the 
recommended 
dose does 
not appear to 
provide any 
additional 
benefit to 
women at risk of 
FGR.1– B Dietary modification/
supplement 
interventions for the 
prevention of FGR in 
an at- risk population 
have yielded 
conflicting results, but 
have consistently failed 
to show benefit when 
tested with adequately 
powered RCTs.
Women at risk of 
pre-eclampsia 
and/or placental 
dysfunction 
should take 
aspirin 150 mg 
once daily at 
night from 
12+0–36+6 weeks 
of pregnancy 
to reduce their 
chance of SGA 
and FGR.1++ A There is good evidence 
of aspirin safety and 
efficacy at 150 mg 
and doses below 
100 mg should 
only be considered 
in the presence 
of other relative 
contraindications to 
prescription.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e44 | 
MORRIS et al .
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
LMWH should not 
be prescribed 
to reduce the 
risk of SGA or 
FGR in at-risk 
women.1+ A RCT evidence has failed 
to demonstrate a 
reduction in FGR 
in any at- risk group 
including those 
with inherited 
thrombophilias.
6.2.1 | Maternal micronutrients
A Cochrane review published in 2003 and updated in 2010 
reported four studies of 165 women and did not find evi -
dence of improved outcomes or enhanced fetal growth.147 
[Evidence level 1–]
6.2.2 | Antiplatele t agents
Antiplatelet agents have been extensively investigated in women 
at varying levels of risk for pre- eclampsia, with SGA and/or 
FGR as outcomes, in multiple meta- analyses.148,149 These stud -
ies have suggested a reduction in SGA and FGR birth with the 
use of aspirin in women at risk of pre- eclampsia, driven by a 
reduction in the incidence of pre- eclampsia in treated women.19 
Prevention of pre- eclampsia with aspirin is most effective when 
aspirin is initiated between 11+0 weeks and 16+6 weeks of gesta -
tion.150 A meta- analysis demonstrated administration before 
16 weeks was associated with a reduction in SGA (RR 0.76, 
95% CI 0.61–0.94; 13 trials, 6393 women), where after 16 weeks 
there was no significant effect (RR 0.95, 95% CI 0.84–1.08; 18 
trials, 14 996 women).151 Meta- analysis supported the concept 
of a dose–response relationship for SGA prevention favouring 
a dose of 100–150 mg/day.152 There is good evidence of aspirin 
safety and efficacy at 150 mg.34 Thus, doses below 100 mg should 
only be considered in the presence of other relative contraindi -
cations. Two RCTs have demonstrated that administration of 
aspirin in the evening or night is more effective at lowering am -
bulatory blood pressure and reducing the risk of pre- eclampsia, 
than in the morning or day.34,153 [Evidence level 1++]
NICE guideline Hypertension in Pregnancy [NG133] rec-
ommends that aspirin is continued until birth for prevention 
of hypertensive disorders, while other international guidelines 
recommend stopping at 36 weeks.33 Aspirin may be associated 
with an increased risk of postpartum haemorrhage and thus 
the suggestion that aspirin should be stopped at 36 weeks, or 
even at the end of the second trimester.148,154 However, it is 
not clear whether stopping aspirin earlier at 36 weeks reduces 
the risk of bleeding. Thus, in the context of this guideline as -
pirin should be ideally commenced at 12–16 weeks and con-
tinued until at least 36 weeks.155 [Evidence level 4]
6.2.3 | Antithrombotic therapy
Antithrombotic therapy using low- molecular- weight heparin 
(LMWH) has been trialled repeatedly in women at risk of FGR, 
usually in association with pre- eclampsia, with or without coexis-
tent thrombophilias. Previous systematic reviews have suggested 
a potential benefit in reducing the risk of SGA with the use of LMWH and aspirin (RR 0.41, 95% CI 0.27–0.61; seven studies, 710 
women; RR 0.41, 95% CI 0.20–0.93).156,157 However, prospective 
studies have failed to identify any benefit in reducing placental me-
diated disease. In the HEPEPE trial, 257 women with a previous 
history of early onset (before 34 weeks) severe pre- eclampsia were 
randomised to aspirin 100 mg with or without enoxaparin 4000 iu/
day from early pregnancy.158 There was no difference in the rate of 
SGA (RR 0.78, 95% CI 0.50–1.22) or FGR (defined below the 5th 
centile; RR 0.65, 95% CI 0.36–1.18). The EPPI study randomised 
156 women with a history of either early onset pre- eclampsia 
(before 36 weeks) or early onset SGA (before 36 weeks) to aspirin 
100 mg with or without enoxaparin 4000 iu/day.159 There was no 
difference in the rate of SGA (aOR 1.17, 95%CI 0.56–2.47) or FGR 
(defined <3rd centile; aOR 1.19, 95% CI 0.40–3.52). Martinelli et al. 
randomised 135 women with a previous history of pre- eclampsia 
and showed no difference in the incidence of FGR (16%, P = 0.3).160 
A secondary analysis of the FRUIT- RCT which examined the risk 
of SGA in women with a history of previous pre- eclampsia and an 
inherited thrombophilia, treated with or without enoxaparin, could 
also find no reduction in risks.161 Finally, an IPD meta- analysis of 
963 women from eight eligible studies (published prior to HEPEPE 
and EPPI and therefore not including their participants) failed to 
find any reduction in any placentally mediated outcome (RR 0.64, 
95% CI 0.36–1.11).162 [Evidence level 1+]
In summary, evidence does not support the use of LMWH 
as an effective treatment to prevent SGA or FGR, even in the 
presence of heritable thrombophilia.
6.2.4 | Progesterone
Secondary outcome analyses of studies on progesterone to pre -
vent PTB have shown no effect on the risk of pre-eclampsia or 
FGR.163-165 [Evidence level 1+]
6.2.5 | Hydroxychloroquine
Studies examining the effects of hydroxychloroquine on the 
risk of FGR are small and of low quality and meta- analysis 
failed to show significant benefit.166 Hydroxychloroquine has 
also been suggested as treatment for women with previous 
placental chronic histiocytic intervillositis, but no prospective 
RCT data are currently available and therefore is not recom -
mended outside a research setting.167,168 [Evidence level 1–]
6.2.6 | Antihypertensive use
Antihypertensive drug therapy for hypertension in pregnancy 
does not seem to increase the risk of having an SGA newborn 
(aRR 0.96, 95% CI 0.78–1.18; 21 trials, 2686 women).169 The ev -
idence regarding the association of SGA and beta-blockers in 
women who are hypertensive is inconclusive. While some studies 
identify a significant association, others suggest that the SGA is 
associated with the maternal hypertensive disease regardless of 
the treatment. There does appear to be an increased risk of SGA 
in pregnant women who use beta-blockers in pregnancy for an 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e45
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
indication other than hypertension, again this may relate to the 
underlying condition rather than the drug.170 [Evidence level 1–]
7 | WHAT IS THE OPTIMUM 
SURVEILLANCE PATHWAY FOR 
WOMEN ACCORDING TO THEIR 
RISK FOR FGR AND HOW TO 
DIAGNOSE FETAL GROWTH 
DISORDERS?
The risks of a pregnant woman developing early or late onset 
FGR are strongly linked to concurrent pregnancy risk fac -
tors. As a result of this, the prevalence of FGR varies dramat -
ically in different pregnant populations directly influencing 
the performance of prediction and detection methods. Early 
onset FGR is a relatively uncommon condition (~0.3%) with 
late onset FGR being more common.
7.1 | Low risk of FGR
Women who are assessed as being at a low risk for FGR 
should have serial assessment of fetal growth using antenatal 
SFH measurements performed by healthcare professionals 
trained in their use and plotted on appropriate charts.6 All 
staff performing these measurements should be competent 
in measuring, plotting, interpreting appropriately and re -
ferring when indicated, and measurements should be per -
formed as per NICE guidelines.6-18 [Evidence level 2+]
7.1.1 | Clinical examination and fundal height 
measurement
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Abdominal palpation 
has limited 
accuracy for the 
prediction of an 
SGA newborn 
and thus should 
not be routinely 
carried out in 
this context.2+ C Studies in both low 
and high- risk 
populations have 
consistently 
shown abdominal 
palpation to be of 
limited accuracy 
in the detection of 
an SGA newborn.
Serial measurement 
of SFH is 
recommended 
at each antenatal 
appointment 
after 24+0 weeks 
of pregnancy (no 
more frequently 
than every 
2 weeks). The first 
measurement 
should be carried 
out by 28+6 weeks.2+ C SFH remains a 
valuable, although 
limited tool for 
the detection 
of SGA. Serial 
measurement may 
improve predictive 
accuracy.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women with a single 
SFH which plots 
below the 10th 
centile or serial 
measurements 
which 
demonstrate 
suboptimal 
fetal growth (no 
apparent fetal 
growth over 2 
weeks) should 
be referred for 
ultrasound 
measurement of 
fetal size.4 GPP Owing to the limited 
accuracy of SFH, 
abnormal SFH 
measurements 
should prompt 
assessment of 
the fetus with 
ultrasound.
Women in whom 
measurement 
of SFH is less 
accurate (e.g. 
BMI of 35 
kg/m2 or above, 
large fibroids, 
polyhydramnios) 
should be 
referred for 
serial assessment 
of fetal size using 
ultrasound.
Providers should 
determine which 
charts they are 
going to use 
antenatally to 
record SFH and 
staff should be 
trained in the use 
of these. Charts 
should be able to 
be incorporated 
within electronic 
maternity 
records.4
4GPP
GPPMaternal obesity, 
abnormal fetal 
lie, large fibroids, 
hydramnios and 
the extent of fetal 
head engagement 
contribute to the 
limited predictive 
accuracy of SFH 
measurement
There is insufficient 
evidence to 
recommend a 
particular chart 
for recording SFH.
Studies in low risk populations have consistently shown 
abdominal palpation to be of limited accuracy in the detec -
tion of a SGA newborn (sensitivity 19–21%, specificity 98%) 
and severely SGA newborn (less than 2.3rd centile, sensitivity 
28%).171,172 In mixed risk populations, the sensitivity increases 
to 32–44%.173,174 In high risk populations sensitivity is re -
ported as 37% for a SGA newborn and 53% for severe SGA.175 
A Cochrane meta- analysis in 2015 did not find evidence that 
measurement of SFH was superior to abdominal palpation, but 
only included one study of 1639 women.176 A large retrospective 
cohort study of 42 018 women in Sweden found improved over -
all sensitivity (47%) for SGA.177 Thus, SFH measurement would 
seem superior to palpation in detecting fetuses at risk, although 
both methods have significant limitations. The Swedish study 
also demonstrated that SFH performs best nearer term.
NICE reviewed the evidence for SFH and fetal biometry 
using ultrasound to predict birthweight at term in unselected 
or low- risk pregnancies to inform the NICE guideline [CG62].18 
They included 19 studies (cohort and case–control) and con -
cluded that for SFH carried out more than 7 days before birth 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e46 | 
MORRIS et al .
had very poor sensitivity for SGA (one study, high quality evi -
dence) and moderate specificity for SGA (one study, high quality 
evidence). It was noted that there was very little evidence avail -
able on the accuracy of SFH measurements (one small study 
looking at SGA) and particularly on the accuracy of repeated 
measurements as opposed to a one- off assessment. While USS 
was noted to be more sensitive than SFH and when carried out 
close to birth it still was not very sensitive for SGA. They con -
cluded that while SFH measurement is not very sensitive, SFH 
measurement is easily performed, with little resource impli -
cations and essentially no adverse effects (in terms of the test 
itself, inaccurate results will still have adverse effects). If SFH 
measurement was not undertaken routinely, it would make the 
selective choice of who should receive a USS more challenging. 
Thus, SFH remains a reasonable tool for monitoring growth in 
low- risk pregnancies.18 [Evidence level 2+]
Charts for recording of SFH commence at 24+0 weeks and 
thus measurements can be taken and recorded from this ges -
tation. It is recognised that performing measurements rou -
tinely between 24+0 and 26+7 weeks will result in a high rate 
of referral for USS assessment because of the relationship of 
the centiles at these earlier gestations. Thus, while in some 
circumstances measurement would be appropriate, e.g. as 
part of assessment of fetal growth due to maternal condi -
tion or concerns regarding fetal movement, routine assess -
ment for surveillance of fetal growth should not commence 
until 26+0–28+6 weeks to coincide with the routine 28- week 
appointment. SBLCBv3 recommends that the first measure -
ment should be taken before 28+6 weeks.6 The timing of the 
first routine SFH measurement is determined by the sched -
ule of antenatal appointments for all pregnant women and 
nulliparous women. If not undertaken at 28 weeks for all 
pregnant women, then the next routine antenatal contact 
would be 34 weeks. [Evidence level 4]
Maternal BMI greater than 35 kg/m2, abnormal fetal lie, 
large fibroids, hydramnios and fetal head engagement contrib-
ute to the limited predictive accuracy of SFH measurement. 
SFH is associated with significant intra- and inter- observer 
variation and serial measurement may improve predictive 
accuracy.178,179 Women must be assessed at booking for con-
ditions where SFH measurements are not appropriate (e.g. 
raised BMI 35 kg/m2 or above at booking; presence of fibroids 
in uterus [based on clinical judgement]).
SFH should be measured from the fundus (variable 
point) to the symphysis pubis (fixed point) with the mea -
surement hidden from the examiner.174 Women with 
a single SFH which plots below the 10th centile should 
be referred for further investigation with ultrasound as -
sessment (Appendix  II). There are no high- quality data 
that enable recommendations on how reducing SFH ve -
locity should be defined, but if measurements more than 
2 weeks apart do show not any increase in SFH then 
women should be referred for a single ultrasound assess -
ment of fetal growth. The urgency of this ultrasound as -
sessment will depend on additional clinical findings, for 
example fetal movements and maternal blood pressure.18 
[Evidence level 4]Standard, population, and customised charts to plot SFH 
are available (adjusted for maternal characteristics) and were 
assessed in a Cochrane review. No trials were identified that 
compared different types of SFH charts and thus evidence 
for their effectiveness on outcomes such as perinatal mor -
bidity/mortality is lacking.176 The introduction of a custom -
ised SFH chart has been associated with improved detection 
of SGA (29%–48%), yet this is in the context of a training 
 programme which included the standardisation of the per -
formance of SFH measurements and robust referral pathways 
when abnormalities were detected, and therefore it is difficult 
to determine if the customisation of the SFH chart or the pro -
gramme improved detection rates.180 The Intergrowth SFH 
charts181,182 (published in 2015) were designed with robust 
methodology and can be downloaded and incorporated into 
electronic patient records. However, there is limited assess -
ment of their performance within a heterogenous population. 
Providers should determine which charts they are going to 
use antenatally to record SFH and staff should be trained in 
the use of these. [Evidence level 4]
7.1.2 | Universal ultrasound
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Routine 
measurement 
of fetal AC or 
EFW in the 
third trimester 
does not reduce 
the incidence 
of an SGA 
newborn nor 
does it improve 
perinatal 
outcome.1– A While studies have 
demonstrated an 
increase in detection 
of SGA with 
universal rather than 
selective ultrasound, 
this has not been 
demonstrated 
in clinical trials 
to translate into 
improved outcome.
A Cochrane meta- analysis of 13 trials assessing univer -
sal late pregnancy ultrasonography in low risk or unselected 
women demonstrated no beneficial effect, with the recommen -
dation that it should not be offered routinely in the third tri -
mester.183 There are several criticisms of the included studies in 
the Cochrane review including variation in the definition of a 
“screen positive”, no diagnostic assessment of the test element, 
wide variation in gestational age and no studies included an 
intervention that could then have an impact on outcomes.184 
NICE reviewed the evidence for the antenatal care guideline 
up to September 2020. They came to the same conclusion that 
at present the evidence did not demonstrate an effect on out -
comes of routine third trimester USS in uncomplicated single -
ton pregnancies.185 Other studies suggest increased detection 
of SGA with routine third trimester ultrasound assessment 
of growth.186 In a pragmatic screening study in nulliparous 
women, SGA was detected in 57% with routine third trimester 
USS compared with 20% with USS by clinical indication, but 
it is only when fetal growth velocity was combined with fetal 
biometry that a subset of SGA fetuses at risk of increased neo -
natal morbidity was identified.187 Studies published since the 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e47
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
NICE review have similarly demonstrated an unclear effect on 
perinatal mortality,188,189 and a systematic review of diagnos -
tic performance concluded that for a fixed 10% false positive 
rate sensitivity was higher for AC than EFW and better per -
formance when the scan was carried out near term and to de -
tect FGR rather than SGA.190 The NICE committee did note 
that the evidence in their review was overall moderate to low 
quality and that within their recommendation not to offer rou -
tine third trimester USS there is an inherent assumption that 
risk assessment and selective scanning is being appropriately 
applied. They also noted a lack of evidence for the impact on 
maternal anxiety.185 [Evidence level 1–]
A further important consideration is the potential to 
cause harm for those women who are screen false positive 
on ultrasound and then have an unwarranted intervention 
such as induction of labour (IOL) causing iatrogenic prema -
turity. A French study evaluating implementation of univer -
sal third trimester ultrasound demonstrated that there was 
an increased risk of iatrogenic preterm and early term birth 
for true and false positives and an increased risk of adverse 
outcome in the false negatives (although not statistically sig -
nificant).191 [Evidence level 2–]
A health technology assessment assessed other compo -
nents of a universal late pregnancy ultrasound (umbilical 
artery Doppler, cerebroplacental ratio (CPR), severe/border -
line oligohydramnios) for the prediction of adverse outcome 
and cost- effectiveness. It concluded that the primary liter -
ature on the diagnostic effectiveness of ultrasound in late 
pregnancy is weak and does not support universal ultrasonic 
screening for fetal growth disorders. Cost- effectiveness anal -
ysis was limited by uncertainty around costs related to the 
difference between an induced birth and expectant manage -
ment.184 Further research is thus recommended (section  13).
7.2 | Moderate risk
7.2.1 | Ultrasound biometry
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Maternity providers 
should ensure 
that they have 
guidance that 
promotes the use 
of standard planes 
of acquisition and 
calliper placement 
when performing 
USS for fetal growth 
assessment. Quality 
control of images 
and measurements 
should form part 
of the monitoring 
process.2+ C There is a significant 
association between 
the quality of 
the biometric 
ultrasound images 
and EFW accuracy.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women in the moderate 
risk category are 
at risk of late onset 
FGR and so require 
serial assessment 
of fetal growth 
commencing at 
32 weeks. For the 
majority of women, 
a scan interval 
of 4 weeks is 
appropriate.2++ B Early onset FGR is 
uncommon. 
Ultrasounds can 
thus commence at 
32 weeks but should 
continue until 
birth because of the 
risk of late onset 
FGR. An interval 
of 4 weeks between 
scans has a low false 
positive rate.
If two EFW 
measurements 
are to be used to 
estimate velocity, 
they should ideally 
be a minimum of 
3–4 weeks apart 
to minimise false 
positive rates for 
diagnosing FGR.2++ B Performing scans at 
intervals shorter 
than 14 days 
increases the false 
positive rate for 
diagnosing FGR.
Assessment of the fetal 
AC may help in 
determining the 
fetus that is FGR.2+ C AC and AC growth 
velocity can help 
determine those at 
increased risk of 
neonatal morbidity.
When assessing fetal size 
the Hadlock formula 
should be used with 
HC, AC and FL.2+ C The Hadlock formula 
performed the best 
in evaluation of 
optimal formula for 
predicting EFW.
Changing EFW formula 
during growth 
monitoring can lead 
to an artefactual 
change in growth 
trajectory and 
should be avoided 
where possible or 
the potential impact 
of such a change 
on growth velocity 
recognised if the 
formula is changed.2– C There is a difference 
between EFW 
calculated using 
HC, AC and FL 
results and EFW 
calculated using 
AC and FL results 
alone, depending on 
fetal proportions.
Maternity providers 
should ensure that 
they clearly identify 
the reference charts 
to plot individual 
biometry and EFW 
measurements to 
calculate centiles. 
For individual 
biometry 
measurements 
the method used 
for measurement 
should be the same 
as those used in the 
development of the 
individual biometry 
and fetal growth 
chart.4 GPP
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e48 | 
MORRIS et al .
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
When determining 
which charts are to 
be used to plot EFW 
the following should 
be considered:
• Fetal growth charts 
must be based 
on sonographic 
EFW not newborn 
birthweight 
standards.
• Fetal growth charts 
should be developed 
using methodology 
that is of the lowest 
bias with population 
level data, 
ideally obtained 
prospectively 
and related to 
prescriptive fetal 
growth.
• Universal reference 
charts may need 
to be adjusted to 
local or regional 
populations, either 
for population 
characteristics, or 
the centile that is 
used to determine 
further surveillance 
and investigation for 
growth concerns.2–
4
2–C
GPP
CNewborn birthweight 
standards will 
include babies born 
prematurely.
Studies comparing 
different charts with 
adverse outcomes 
have demonstrated 
that different centile 
thresholds had to be 
used to determine 
the same risk of 
adverse outcome.
Maternity providers may 
wish to evaluate 
the impact of 
different reference 
charts in their local 
population to ensure 
that the reference 
chart is appropriate 
or how it should be 
adjusted using local 
data sets.4 GPP
Maternity providers 
should ensure that 
they monitor the 
number of fetuses 
considered < 3rd 
centile to ensure 
that their growth 
pathway and growth 
chart is appropriate.4 GPP
Ultrasound is a core component of fetal growth surveil -
lance and management. In this context it may be carried 
out by several different practitioners including doctors, 
midwifery sonographers, maternal fetal medicine spe -
cialists and ultrasonographers. A diagnosis of a growth 
disorder, or decision about management based on fetal 
wellbeing, should be informed by high quality measure -
ments and reports. This requires appropriate training, 
time for the examination, quality assurance and audit. The 
British Medical Ultrasound Society (BMUS) have produced 
detailed guidance on performance of fetal growth scans192 
and in collaboration with the Society of Radiographers 
(SoR) have produced Guidelines for Professional Ultrasound 
Practice .193When and how often should USS surveillance be 
undertaken?
Serial scanning is recommended for women at increased risk 
of fetal growth disorders. Women at moderate risk of FGR do 
not require uterine artery Doppler assessment as they do not 
have risk factors for early onset FGR but are still at risk of later 
onset FGR so require serial ultrasound assessment of fetal 
growth from 32 weeks. Although a scan at 32 weeks can iden -
tify 90% of SGA below the 5th centile being born preterm, it 
only identifies 60% of SGA births near term (for a 10% false 
positive rate). An ultrasound scan at 36 weeks improves the 
detection of term SGA (SGA below the 5th centile at 37 weeks 
or more) from 58% to 70% but this is at the expense of missing 
preterm SGA.194 Thus, the recommendation for surveillance 
for late FGR and SGA is to commence at 32 weeks. It is rec -
ognised that these women will have an antenatal appointment 
at 28 weeks at which SFH may be measured if appropriate. In 
this group of women, the planned surveillance is by USS and 
thus SFH should cease after USS surveillance begins.
The interval between scans should be no more frequent 
than every 14 days, with optimum assessment for growth ve -
locity being 21–28 days.195 Mongelli et al. used a mathemat -
ical model to estimate the impact of time interval between 
examinations on the false positive rates for FGR (defined 
as no apparent growth in fetal AC between two consecu -
tive examinations).196 When the initial scan was performed 
at 32 weeks of gestation, the false positive rates were 30.8%, 
16.9%, 8.1% and 3.2% for intervals of 1, 2, 3 and 4 weeks re -
spectively. False positive rates were higher when the first 
scan was carried out at 36 weeks of gestation (34.4%, 22.1%, 
12.7% and 6.9% respectively). These findings suggest that if 
two measurements are to be used to estimate velocity, they 
should be a minimum of 3 weeks apart to minimise false 
positive rates for diagnosing FGR.195,196 This recommenda -
tion does not preclude more frequent ultrasound measure -
ments of AC/EFW to predict fetal size at birth but rather 
indicates which measurements should be used to interpret 
growth. For many pregnancies in the moderate risk category 
or in those unsuitable for SFH measurements, an interval 
of 4 weeks is appropriate and reducing scan interval (from 
4 weeks to 2 weeks) has not been demonstrated to improve 
pregnancy outcome.197 [Evidence level 2++]
How should fetal biometry be assessed?
Three systematic reviews have assessed the accuracy of ul -
trasound biometric measures, both as individual measures, 
as ratios, and combined (as the EFW).198-200 The most recent 
study demonstrated that AC is comparable to EFW in predict -
ing SGA.200 The largest prospective study within the system -
atic review demonstrated that prediction of SGA provided by 
the fetal AC is better than HC or FL, but inferior to the three 
measurements combined as EFW.201 Within the prospective 
Pregnancy Outcome Prediction (POP) study, the addition 
of AC growth velocity was the only biometric measure that 
identified babies at increased risk of neonatal morbidity.187 
[Evidence level 2+]
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e49
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
The largest study to assess formulas for calculation of 
EFW202 suggested that the most accurate model was that of 
Hadlock et al. incorporating HC, FL and AC.203 The addition 
of biparietal diameter (BPD) to the Hadlock equation was not 
shown to increase accuracy and studies have shown that there 
is considerable variation in BPD ranges across different popu -
lations. Comparative studies have indicated that the Hadlock 
equation may more accurately estimate fetal size than the 
original Intergrowth 21 equation,204 including both analy -
sis of routinely collected unblinded ultrasound scans and a 
prospective cohort study of blinded ultrasound scans at 28 
and 36 weeks of gestational age.205 Given this and the much 
greater experience of its use, the Hadlock equation is recom -
mended for the estimation of fetal weight. [Evidence level 2+]
How to ensure high quality measurements?
Those performing USS for biometry should be aware of the 
need for appropriate training in fetal biometry assessment, 
time for the examination, quality assurance and audit.192 All 
measurements should be taken following the same methodol -
ogy as that used in the studies which produced the reference 
curves being used. [Evidence level 4]
As an example, when plotting individual measurements 
(HC, AC, FL) if these are to be plotted on Chitty charts 
then the appropriate section for HC would be the trans -
ventricular.206 When using EFW and the Hadlock formula 
then the ellipse methods would be used for HC (transtha -
lamic section) and AC and plotted on a reference chart 
developed using EFW derived from Hadlock equation. 
[Evidence level 4]
Of note, BMUS recommends the two diameter meth -
ods for AC and the International Society for Ultrasound 
in Obstetrics and Gynaecology (ISUOG) recommends 
the ellipse method.207 It should be appreciated that there 
is likely to be a difference between EFW calculated using 
HC, AC and FL results and EFW calculated using AC and 
FL results only, depending on fetal proportions.208 Thus, 
changing formula during growth monitoring can lead to 
an artefactual change in growth trajectory and when a 
change in formula has to be used (e.g. late gestation and 
unable to get HC) this needs to be taken into account when 
comparing with previous assessments of EFW. [Evidence 
level 4]
Maternity providers should ensure that they have guid -
ance that promotes the use of standard planes of acquisition 
and calliper placement as this has been shown to improve 
reproducibility of measurements.209 [Evidence level 2+]
Quality control of images and measurements should form 
part of the assessment. [Evidence level 4]
It is important that the imprecision of EFW is recognised 
when interpreting results. Imprecision can be caused by the 
accuracy of the equation used to calculate EFW, most fall 
within +/−10% with the error greater at extremes of fetal 
weight and gestation.210,211 There is also a significant asso -
ciation between the quality of the biometric ultrasound im -
ages and EFW accuracy.212 There are published scores that 
have been used to assess quality.209,213Which fetal growth charts should be used?
Integral to the assessment of fetal size, determined by EFW, 
is being able to interpret the measurement relative to a given 
expected growth standard using a fetal growth chart with ref -
erence curves. There are several types of charts available with 
reference ranges being either descriptive (how a population 
has grown at a particular time) or prescriptive (how a popula -
tion should grow). Another important distinction is between 
universal and customised charts. Prescriptive charts assume 
that under optimal conditions all fetuses will have the same 
growth potential and the only difference observed in growth 
across populations will be due to environmental factors, ex -
amples are World Health Organization (WHO) fetal charts 
(with country specific charts)214 and Intergrowth 21st (uni -
versal charts).182 Customised charts have been proposed as an 
alternative to universal charts and are based on the premise 
that fetal growth varies across countries and ethnicities and 
that adjustment should occur at a population level for these 
factors, e.g. National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development (NICHD) charts with separate charts for white, 
Black, Hispanic and Asian women.215 Another approach, often 
also called customisation is to adjust for other variables (e.g. 
maternal height, weight, parity and fetal sex as well as ethnic -
ity) at an individual level, e.g. GROW.215-217 The GROW soft -
ware can incorporate ethnicity, height, weight, parity +/−fetal 
sex to calculate the predicted optimal weight at 40 weeks for 
each individual fetus.218-219 The customised growth curve is 
then determined retrospectively, based on a proportionality 
growth function derived from the ultrasound based Hadlock 
standard.220 However, there are concerns that these are fac -
tors at an individual level that are associated with pathological 
fetal growth and thus customisation at an individual level risks 
normalising pathology. It should be noted that the GROW 
software allows selection of variables that are used in the ad -
justment, and when all variables are removed the charts default 
to a population standard. This is retrospectively derived from 
a database of 2.7 million pregnancies characterised as low risk 
in a UK population.218
Individual trajectories for the fetus can be developed and 
this is discussed further in section 7.3.2 .
A number of studies have investigated the association 
of individual customised charts with adverse outcome and 
different charts and rates of SGA and FGR in populations. 
Several studies have found that customised charts perform 
better at predicting stillbirth and adverse neonatal outcomes, 
including a study that analysed 10 years of stillbirth data in 
England between 2008 and 2017 and demonstrates an over -
all reduction in stillbirths, with the steepest decline in units 
with complete implementation of the GAP programme.221 
Other studies have demonstrated no benefit.222-224 Further 
analysis of the POP cohort (a prospective cohort of nullipa -
rous women in UK 2018–2013) demonstrated that previous 
findings of the beneficial effects of customisation are likely 
to relate to more preterm infants being classified as SGA 
by customised standards, and the women giving birth to 
these infants more likely to have a higher BMI.180 This raises 
concerns that customisation may “account” for apparent 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e50 | 
MORRIS et al .
physiologic determinants of growth that actually are causal 
and associated with risk of adverse outcome.180
The DESiGN trial was a cluster RCT to assess the effec -
tiveness of the GAP programme with the primary outcome 
being antenatal detection of SGA.225 The trial was not de -
signed to evaluate the customised charts of GROW compared 
with population growth charts. It concluded that there was no 
effect observed of GAP on antenatal detection of SGA com -
pared with standard care (25.9% versus 27.7%, adjusted dif -
ference 2.2%, 95% CI − 6.4% to 10.7%) but noted the variable 
implementation of GAP.225 Concerns have been raised about 
certain aspects of the methodology and execution of the trial 
including: an inadequate control group (trial coincided with 
the role out of SBLCBv2 with a fetal growth element), imple -
mentation of the GAP programme not meeting predefined 
criteria in all participating units, and the trial period being 
too short so that implementation was incomplete in some 
units. Other concerns have been raised related to the cluster 
summary approach used.226 An analysis of all trial partici -
pants demonstrated a reduction in both stillbirth and neona -
tal mortality; however these were secondary outcomes and it 
is difficult to attribute this to any single intervention due to 
the concerns discussed above. A significant and incremental 
increase of detection of SGA was seen in the GAP DESiGN 
centres after trial data collection had ceased227 but this cannot 
be compared with the outcomes in the standard care centres.
As recommended by the WHO, there is a need to un -
derstand local population characteristics, as even under 
optimal nutritional and environmental conditions there 
appears to be variation in fetal growth. EFW centiles on 
the INTERGROWTH- 21st chart are lower than those on 
the Hadlock et al., WHO and FMF charts.203,204,228,229 The 
consequences of this were highlighted by Francis et al. who 
showed that in a normal population the INTERGROWTH- 
21st chart identified only 4.4% of babies as SGA (below 
10th centile) and 20.6% of babies as large for gestational 
 age (above 90th centile).230 Thus, universal charts should 
not be employed without consideration of local population 
variation and consideration of adjusting thresholds to avoid 
under or over detection of SGA.228 This will require mater -
nity providers to understand and monitor their local data 
for metrics such as the number of fetuses considered <3rd 
centile and statistically validate these.231 The international 
populations for which the WHO and Intergrowth 21 charts 
were produced may not represent local populations in which 
they may be applied for conventional centile cut-offs (< 10th 
or < 3rd) and thus heterogeneous populations require alter -
ations of thresholds for delivery recommendations based on 
local perinatal mortality and morbidity. This is illustrated 
in a Swedish study comparing birthweight centile thresh -
olds for adverse perinatal outcomes across population, cus -
tomised and Intergrowth charts, where the association was 
markedly increased, i.e. doubling at the 10th centile for pop -
ulation and customised and the 25th centile for Intergrowth 21 and thus highlights the considerations needed in deter -
mining the growth charts used within maternity systems.231 
[Evidence level 2– ]
Importantly, the development of charts should be with 
high quality methodology and evidence suggests that this 
is true for only a limited number of descriptive, popula -
tion or universal charts.232 The WHO describes criteria to 
be considered when developing growth charts as described 
in ISUOG guidance.207 These criteria were used in the de -
velopment of international standards for fetal biometry, 
describing optimal growth in fetuses at low risk of FGR in 
Intergrowth 21182 and WHO fetal charts.228 These charts 
also have a birthweight standard which is important when 
assessing detection of abnormal growth antenatally and de -
termining postnatal management particularly when born 
preterm.
What should maternity providers ensure?
Maternity providers should ensure that they have clear 
guidance and processes for the following:
• Individual measurements for fetal biometry (HC, AC, 
FL) with standard planes of acquisition and calliper 
placement.
• When assessing fetal size and calculating EFW the 
Hadlock formula should be used with HC, AC and FL.
• Quality control of images and measurements should be 
undertaken.
• Clearly identify the reference charts to be used for indi -
vidual biometry measurement and the components for 
EFW calculation. These should be based on those used in 
the development of the chosen reference charts for fetal 
growth.
• Maternity providers may wish to evaluate the impact of 
different reference charts in their local population to en -
sure that it is appropriate and whether there needs to be 
adaptation to the local population.
• Maternity providers should ensure that they monitor the 
number of fetuses considered <3rd centile to ensure that 
their growth pathway and growth chart is appropriate. 
[Evidence level 4]
7.2.2 | Other ultrasound measurements
There is some contradictory evidence for whether the precision 
of EFW can be improved by 3D ultrasound volumetry.233-235 
Fractional limb volume combined with 2D biometry has been 
shown to improve the precision of EFW and serve as an index 
of nutritional status.236-237 Evidence suggests that EFW using 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be more accurate 
than ultrasound in the prediction of both SGA and LGA new -
borns but needs more research to overcome poor interobserver 
agreement.238,239 [Evidence level 2–]
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e51
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
7.3 | High risk
7.3.1 | Uterine artery Doppler waveform
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
In high- risk 
populations 
uterine artery 
Doppler should 
be carried out at 
the time of the 
routine anomaly 
scan to determine 
when ultrasound 
surveillance 
of fetal 
growth should 
commence. 
Subsequently 
repeating uterine 
artery Doppler is 
of limited value 
in this situation.2++ B In high- risk populations 
uterine artery 
Doppler at 
20+0–24+6 weeks 
of pregnancy 
has a moderate 
predictive value for 
early onset SGA. 
In women with an 
abnormal uterine 
artery Doppler at 
20+0–24+6 weeks 
of pregnancy, 
subsequent 
normalisation of 
flow velocity indices 
is still associated 
with an increased 
risk of an SGA 
newborn.
Woman who are at a 
high risk with a 
normal uterine 
artery Doppler 
midtrimester 
and normal fetal 
biometry serial 
scanning for 
fetal biometry 
can commence 
at 32 weeks. 
Women with an 
abnormal uterine 
artery Doppler 
can commence 
at 24+0–28+6 
weeks and should 
be determined 
individually.2++ B For women with a 
normal uterine 
artery Doppler 
PI (mean ≤ 95th 
centile) the risk of 
these disorders is 
low and thus serial 
scanning for fetal 
biometry can be 
commenced in the 
third trimester 
(from 32 weeks).
FGR, particularly when severe (birthweight below the 3rd 
centile) or necessitating birth before 36 weeks of gestation, 
is characterised by lack of adequate trophoblast invasion of 
the myometrial uterine spiral arteries and reduced uteropla -
cental blood flow resulting in persistent notching or abnor -
mal flow velocity ratios.240 However, reduced endovascular 
trophoblast invasion of decidual spiral arteries has been as -
sociated with the same waveform abnormalities as early as 
10–14 weeks of pregnancy.241 [Evidence level 2+]
Uterine artery Doppler has been incorporated into first 
trimester screening algorithms and combined with maternal 
risk factors/characteristics and biomarkers to predict adverse 
pregnancy outcomes related to SGA births.242 However, 
studies where aspirin is administered to test positive women 
while demonstrating a reduction in preterm pre-eclampsia 
did not demonstrate any effect on birthweight. This observa -
tion highlights the fact that much of the benefit of uterine ar -
tery Doppler risk assessment for FGR is through identifying 
women at risk for early- onset pre-eclampsia.242 [Evidence 
level 2+]In women with a low risk/who were unselected, uterine 
artery Doppler has insufficient predictive ability as a test,243 
in either the first or second trimester, to be clinically useful 
as shown in RCTs and large cohort studies.244,245 [Evidence 
level 1+]
Using uterine artery Doppler alongside maternal factors 
and fetal biometry at a midtrimester scan (19+0–24+6 weeks) 
has been shown to be able to detect 89% of very preterm SGA 
below the 5th centile (10% false positive rate before 32 weeks) 
with 77% detected with uterine artery Doppler alone.246-247 
Thus, although the predictive value of abnormal uterine 
Doppler is limited, it can be used in the second trimester 
(18+0–24+6 weeks alongside the routine fetal anomaly scan) 
to further determine the risk of placental dysfunction and 
therefore risk of hypertensive disorders or early onset FGR 
for women at high risk, including those with abnormal 
serum analytes.248 While there are no effective interventions 
to reduce this risk, the uterine artery Doppler can help deter -
mine further growth surveillance pathways.249 For women 
with a normal uterine artery Doppler PI (mean 95th centile 
or below) the risk of these disorders is low and thus serial 
scanning for fetal biometry can be commenced in the third 
trimester (from 32 weeks). Women with a poor obstetric his -
tory or the presence of a significant background risk may 
benefit from a bespoke scan schedule and the evidence pre -
sented here forms the basis of the minimal recommended 
standard.250 [Evidence level 2++]
Abnormal uterine artery Doppler may normalise later 
in the second trimester, while normalisation is associated 
with improved outcomes compared with women with per -
sistently abnormal waveforms, there is still an increased risk 
in those women in whom there is normalisation.251-253 Thus 
at present the evidence suggests that repeating uterine artery 
Doppler later in the second trimester appears to be of limited 
value. [Evidence level 2–]
The mean uterine artery PI is recommended as the index 
of measurement.254 The assessment of uterine artery notch -
ing is not recommended as it is a qualitative assessment, it 
is not uncommon in the first trimester of pregnancy (43% 
of cases) and notching in the second trimester has similar 
sensitivity to increased PI but with a higher screen positive 
rate.243,255,256 It should be noted that there are reference 
ranges available for uterine artery Doppler PI throughout 
pregnancy and thus while offering alongside the fetal anom -
aly scan is appropriate (for resource use and convenience), 
the measurement may be performed at other times during 
pregnancy.7 [Evidence level 2+]
Third trimester uterine artery Doppler is not an effective 
risk assessment tool in unselected pregnancies,257 but has 
been used to help identify where cases of FGR are because 
of placental dysfunction when diagnosed later in pregnancy, 
and is moderately useful in predicting adverse outcome in 
pregnancies with suspected SGA in the third trimester but 
not as a standalone test.258 [Evidence level 2++]
For women at high risk with a normal uterine artery 
Doppler, serial scans are recommended to commence at 
32 weeks and for women with an abnormal uterine artery 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e52 | 
MORRIS et al .
Doppler these can commence at 24+0–28+6 weeks and should 
be determined individually. Scans should be undertaken 
every 2–4 weeks with the scan interval confirmed following 
the first assessment for fetal growth. For women in the high 
 risk group, in whom uterine artery Doppler assessment has 
not been undertaken, serial scans should be commenced 
from 28 weeks.
7.3.2 | Ultrasound biometry
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Fetal size alone is 
not sufficient to 
identify FGR, 
unless AC or EFW 
is below the 3rd 
centile.2– C Many fetuses with 
growth below 
the 10th centile 
are healthy and 
constitutionally 
small.
Fetal growth disorders 
are suspected 
when there is 
sub optimal, 
reduced growth 
velocity and static 
growth. FGR can 
be diagnosed when 
there is a drop 
of more than 50 
centiles in EFW or 
AC. This should 
prompt a full 
review.4 GPP When assessing fetal 
growth, a pattern 
of slowing growth 
velocity (i.e. a 
downward trend 
in the centiles) 
indicates an 
increased risk of 
morbidity and 
stillbirth and should 
necessitate review. 
This review should 
include assessment 
of all fetal biometry 
measurements since 
the anomaly scan to 
identify potentially 
erroneous single 
measurements and 
also the presence 
or absence of other 
risk factors for FGR. 
Particular attention 
should be paid to a 
downward trend in 
AC growth velocity. 
A further assessment 
of maternal and 
fetal wellbeing and 
re- evaluation of 
fetal monitoring 
plans should be 
undertaken.
Doppler velocimetry 
of uteroplacental 
circulation may 
be used to help 
distinguish 
between SGA and 
FGR in the third 
trimester.4 GPP For fetal growth 
disorders diagnosed 
in the third 
trimester, uterine 
artery Dopplers 
can be used to 
assess for placental 
dysfunction and 
are moderately 
useful in predicting 
adverse outcome in 
pregnancies with 
suspected SGA in the 
third trimester but 
not as a standalone 
test.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
When a fetal growth 
disorder is 
diagnosed an 
assessment of fetal 
wellbeing should 
be made to include 
a discussion 
regarding fetal 
movements and a 
computerised CTG 
(cCTG) where 
there are concerns. 
A maternal 
assessment should 
be made to include 
a blood pressure 
and proteinuria 
assessment.4 GPP Management of a fetal 
growth disorder 
needs to be 
individualised, but it 
is important to make 
an initial assessment 
of fetal wellbeing and 
maternal wellbeing, 
owing to association 
with hypertensive 
disorders of 
pregnancy
It is intuitive to consider that assessment of growth would im -
prove the diagnosis of FGR and of those at greater risk of adverse 
outcome and there is some evidence that this is true in high risk 
women, particularly in the SGA group.187,259,260 However, the 
optimal approach to interpret the information from serial mea -
surements of the same fetus remains unclear and is hampered 
by the non- linear growth across pregnancy. Several approaches 
are available including fetal growth velocity (change in fetal size 
between two time points), conditional centiles (calculation of 
EFW centile expected at time point is determined by previous 
weight estimation of same fetus earlier in pregnancy), projec -
tion based methods (models to predict EFW at a later point 
in gestation are based on two or more observations of EFW 
combining size and velocity information) and defining abnor -
mal growth velocity by limiting the false positive rate.261-264 A 
study using customised centiles developed and tested a model 
for defining normal limits of growth velocity specific to the 
fetal weight measurement. This demonstrated that cut- offs for 
normal growth rate varied with length of measurement inter -
val at a fixed positive rate of 10%. Slow growth was associated 
with stillbirth and neonatal death and particularly between the 
last highest when slow growth and SGA were present.264 These 
data have been incorporated into a fetal growth calculator when 
using customised charts.265 All of these approaches require in -
formation on the mean and standard deviations of fetal growth 
at different gestations and have methodological limitations in -
cluding the spacing of the USS and inherent error in measure -
ments. Further research is required to quantify the predictive 
accuracy of different methods, to determine the optimal timing 
of the first ultrasound, the optimal interval between scans and 
the cost- effectiveness of a screening programme with appropri -
ate neonatal outcomes. [Evidence level 2–]
Thus, the following are advised are based on the fact that 
fetal size alone is not sufficient to identify FGR, unless AC or 
EFW is below the 3rd centile:
• When assessing fetal growth, a pattern of slowing growth 
velocity (i.e. a downward trend in the centile) indicates 
an increased risk of morbidity and stillbirth and should 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e53
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
necessitate review. This review should include assessment 
of all fetal biometry measurements since the anomaly scan 
to identify potentially erroneous single measurements and 
also the presence or absence of other risk factors for FGR. 
Particular attention should be paid to a downward trend 
in AC growth velocity.
• When a fetal growth disorder is suspected or diag -
nosed an assessment of fetal wellbeing should be made 
to include a discussion regarding fetal movements and a 
cCTG where there are concerns. A maternal assessment 
should be made to include a blood pressure and protein -
uria assessment.
• For fetal growth disorders diagnosed in the third tri -
mester, uterine artery Dopplers can be used to assess for 
placental dysfunction and are moderately useful in pre -
dicting adverse outcome in pregnancies with suspected 
SGA in the third trimester but not as a standalone test.258
Further guidance regarding management of SGA and 
FGR is given in section 10 .
7.4 | Other methods
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Clinical tests that 
measure placental 
growth factor 
(PlGF), soluble 
fms-like tyrosine 
kinase-1 (s- flt1) or 
the ratio between 
the two are now 
clinically available 
and recommended 
for the diagnosis 
of pre-eclampsia. 
Although SGA/
FGR are strongly 
associated with 
pre-eclampsia 
and placental 
dysfunction, the 
use of PlGF/s- flt1 
testing for the 
prediction and 
diagnosis in non- 
hypertensive women 
is not routinely 
recommended.2++ B In the absence of 
features of maternal 
hypertensive disease 
there are limited data 
to support performing 
angiogenic marker 
testing unless 
there is diagnostic 
uncertainty regarding 
the presence or 
absence of placental 
dysfunction as a 
cause of FGR (e.g. 
in circumstances 
where fetal growth 
is suggestive of 
genetically small 
fetuses in conjunction 
with uterine artery 
Doppler features 
of placental 
dysfunction).
7.4.1 | Placental morphology and biometry
FGR that results from placental dysfunction is known to 
be associated with placentas that have smaller diameters 
and increased depth,266 lower volumes267 and irregular 
shapes.268 As a result of these findings there have been 
multiple studies examining whether antenatal assessment 
of placental morphometry using either ultrasound or MRI 
can predict early and late FGR.91,266,267,269,270 [Evidence 
level 2+]In low risk populations the addition of placental biome -
try has not been shown to be effective at predicting SGA or 
FGR as there are relatively weak associations between pla -
cental size and birthweight.271 In high risk women with ab -
normal uterine artery doppler PI between 20 and 24 weeks, 
abnormal placental morphometry is associated with an in -
creased risk of birth before 32 weeks (OR 4.7, CI 1.4–15.1).272 
However, concerns have been raised around the reliability 
and reproducibility of 2D ultrasound techniques,273 and it 
remains unclear what role the measurement of 2D placental 
biometry should have in current clinical models used to pre -
dict FGR. [Evidence level 2–]
MRI can overcome some of the potential accuracy dif -
ficulties in assessing placental volume/shape with ultra -
sound274 and can provide placental functional data that 
further delineate FGR from non- FGR babies and SGA preg -
nancies,275 but at present the high cost and time required for 
each examination limits its clinical applicability outside of 
research studies. [Evidence level 2–]
7.4.2 | Biomarkers
There are several biomarkers that have been proposed as 
adjuncts to serial ultrasound measurements to identify 
women at high risk of SGA and stillbirth. Addition of these 
biomarkers within the serial ultrasound screening pathway 
and the use of the biomarkers to delineate who needs serial 
scans has been evaluated in both high and low risk women. 
There is significant interest in placental function biomark -
ers to identify women at risk of SGA, pre-eclampsia and 
stillbirth. Potential biomarkers include human placental 
lactogen (hPL), oestriol, Placental growth factor (PIGF), 
urinary oestriol and soluble fms- like tyrosine kinase- 1 (s- 
flt1). A Cochrane review demonstrated that USS had the 
best diagnostic test accuracy for SGA than biomarkers 
alone to identify pregnancies that will end in the birth of 
an SGA neonate. However, biomarkers show promise in the 
ability to improve diagnostic test accuracy of ultrasound 
for SGA and stillbirth.276 [Evidence 2++]
PlGF is a member of the vascular endothelial growth 
factor family produced in pregnancy by the placenta; in the 
circulation it binds to s- flt1.277 The observation that women 
with pre-eclampsia have high circulating levels of s- flt1 has 
been extensively investigated and it is recognised that low 
levels of PlGF and/or high levels of s- flt1 are strongly associ -
ated with placental dysfunction and pre-eclampsia.100,278,279 
Clinical tests that measure PlGF, s- flt1 or the ratio between 
the two are now clinically available and recommended for 
the diagnosis of pre-eclampsia.279 Although SGA/FGR are 
strongly associated with pre-eclampsia and placental dys -
function, the use of PlGF/s- flt1 testing for the prediction and 
diagnosis of FGR in non- hypertensive women remains un -
certain. [Evidence level 2++]
Meta- analysis of first trimester measurement in women 
destined to give birth to SGA babies shows low sensitiv -
ity (27%, CI 20–36) and specificity (90%, CI 83–94).101 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e54 | 
MORRIS et al .
Measurement of PlGF/s- flt1 in the second trimester is 
similarly hampered by low sensitivity when distant from 
disease.280 However, if measured near disease in the third 
trimester, PlGF/s- flt1 levels may be more clinically useful 
particularly when used in combination with EFW or uterine 
artery Doppler or other indicators of FGR.281,282 A study of 
9360 women who had PlGF combined with EFW measure -
ment at 30–34 weeks demonstrated 85% sensitivity for SGA 
and 92% sensitivity for FGR (at a fixed 10% false positive 
rate) for infants born within 5 weeks of the test.283 More re -
cently, a large study in a low risk population of 3737 women 
demonstrated that the combination of EFW below the 10th 
centile with PlGF/s- flt1 resulted in dramatically improved 
specificity in SGA infant with complicating features sugges -
tive of FGR compared with EFW below the 10th centile alone 
(97.8%, CI 97.3–98.3 versus 86.9%, CI 85.8–88.0), but at the 
expense of sensitivity.284 It may therefore be that PlGF/s- flt1 
testing enables the antenatal identification of early and late 
onset FGR within SGA and even within non- SGA cohorts. 
The addition of placental function test in 19 209 singleton 
pregnancies between 35 and 36+6 weeks demonstrated only 
marginal improvement in the prediction of SGA above the 
standard use of USS EFW, Dopplers and maternal factors.285 
A study investigating the role of placental biomarkers in the 
second trimester demonstrated that the combination of 
maternal risk factors, EFW, uterine artery PI and PlGF pro -
vided effective second trimester prediction of SGA. Serum 
PlGF was found to be useful for predicting a SGA neonate 
with birthweight <3rd centile born <30 weeks after an in -
clusive assessment by maternal risk factors and biophysical 
markers.286 However, this requires confirmation with pro -
spective RCTs and cost- effectiveness evaluations. [Evidence 
level 2++]
8 | WHICH PREGNANCIES 
COMPLICATED BY FETAL GROWTH 
DISORDERS SHOULD BE FURTHER 
INVESTIGATED?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Offer referral to fetal 
medicine if EFW 
is below the 3rd 
centile or below the 
10th centile with 
abnormal uterine 
artery Doppler at 
the midtrimester 
anomaly scan.4 GPP To assess the risk 
of aneuploidy 
a detailed 
anatomical 
survey and 
assessment for 
uteroplacental 
insufficiency is 
carried out.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Invasive diagnostic 
testing should be 
offered in severely 
SGA fetuses 
with structural 
anomalies and 
considered in 
non- anomalous 
fetuses detected 
before 23 weeks 
of gestation, 
especially if uterine 
artery Doppler is 
normal. Analysis 
should include 
a microarray 
to detect 
microdeletions and 
microinsertions. 
Prenatal exome 
sequencing 
should only be 
considered in cases 
with multi system 
abnormalities or 
isolated short long 
bones.2++ B Invasive testing 
for aneuploidy 
would generally 
be reserved 
for those with 
other structural 
anomalies 
following 
a detailed 
anatomical 
survey.
Serological screening 
for congenital 
cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) and 
toxoplasmosis 
infection should be 
offered in severe 
SGA.2– B Fetal infections are 
responsible for 
up to 5% of SGA 
fetuses.
Testing for malaria 
and Zika should be 
considered in high 
 risk populations.4 GPP Fetal infections 
are responsible 
for up to 5% of 
SGA fetuses, of 
which the most 
common causes 
are CMV and 
toxoplasmosis. 
For those that 
have had recent 
travel to relevant 
areas Zika and 
malaria should 
be considered.
Historically, identification of severe SGA (either EFW below 
the 3rd or 5th centile) was used as a marker for aneuploidy and 
studies which predated widespread population based screening 
for aneuploidy reported aneuploidy rates of up to 20%.287-289 
These data are less applicable in modern practice, because of the 
widespread use of population- based screening for aneuploidy. 
However, invasive testing should be considered in the context 
of severe SGA because of the possibility of other chromosomal 
abnormalities which can be detected using DNA microarrays. 
A systematic review and meta- analysis demonstrated that 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e55
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
in fetuses undergoing invasive testing for FGR with no other 
structural anomalies there was a 4% incremental yield of chro -
mosomal microarray analysis (CMA) over karyotyping and a 
10% incremental yield in FGR with associated fetal malforma -
tions.290 [Evidence level 2++]
Prenatal exome sequencing has limited incremental yield 
over standard karyotyping and microarray in fetuses with 
isolated FGR. [Evidence 2++]
A large population- based study from Israel reported a 3% 
detection rate of pathological abnormalities using microar -
ray in the context of FGR, and only a single case out of 13 
was an aneuploidy, underlining the transformative effect of 
population screening for aneuploidy on this association.291 
Therefore, when invasive testing is undertaken in the context 
of SGA fetal biometry, analysis of specimens should include 
CMA for the detection of micro deletions and micro insertions. 
In early onset FGR CMA demonstrated an incremental yield 
over karyotyping of 4.8% in isolated FGR, 10% in FGR with 
non- structural anomalies and 10.5% in FGR with structural 
anomalies.292 [Evidence level 2+]
A retrospective cohort study reported the associations 
with a below the 5th centile FL at the time of a 17–22- week 
anomaly scan (with or without other features).293 The pos -
itive likelihood ratio for trisomy 21 was 8.8, for 13/18 it 
was 6.5 and for other unbalanced structural chromosomal 
abnormalities it was 17.4, with an absolute risk of 1 in 339. 
There was an approximate four- fold subsequent risk of both 
PTB and birth of an SGA infant. This has been confirmed 
in a systematic review, which demonstrated that an isolated 
short FL is significantly associated with SGA (OR 4.04, 
95% CI 3.63–4.50) and PTB (OR 3.09, 95% CI 1.57–6.08).294 
[Evidence level 2++]
A case series of 158 fetuses with an AC of the 5th cen -
tile or below during a detailed scan at 18–24 weeks (isolated 
feature) demonstrated two cases of trisomy 21 and a single 
case of an unbalanced structural chromosomal abnormality 
(detected by SNP array).295 [Evidence level 2–]
Hence, invasive diagnostic testing (amniocentesis, fetal 
blood sampling or placental biopsy/chorionic villus sam -
pling) should be offered in severely SGA fetuses with struc -
tural anomalies and considered in non- anomalous fetuses 
detected before 23 weeks of gestation, especially if uterine 
artery Doppler is normal.
Follow-up scans should also be arranged given the associ -
ation with subsequent birth of an SGA infant and the timing 
of commencement and frequency individualised following 
the additional investigations.
Fetal infections are responsible for up to 5% of SGA 
fetuses.296 The most common pathogens are reported to 
be cytomegalovirus (CMV), toxoplasmosis, malaria and 
syphilis, although a multicentre study found no associa -
tion between congenital toxoplasmosis and incidence of a 
SGA infant.296,297 A full maternal TORCH screen is unnec -
essary and testing should be based on history and presen -
tation.298 Malaria is a significant cause of PTB and LBW 
worldwide and it should be considered in those from, or 
who have travelled in, endemic areas.299 In congenital Zika virus infection, FGR is seen in 10% of affected pregnancies, 
and a femur- sparing pattern of FGR is commonly seen.300 
[Evidence level 2–]
9 | WHAT INTERVENTIONS 
SHOULD BE CONSIDERED WHEN 
A FETAL GROWTH DISORDER HAS 
BEEN DIAGNOSED?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
LMWH should not 
be prescribed to 
women in whom 
fetal growth 
disorders have 
been diagnosed.1++ A Prospective trial 
evidence has failed 
to demonstrate a 
reduction in FGR in 
any at- risk group 
including those with 
heritable clotting 
disposition.
Women should not 
be prescribed 
phosphodiesterase 
5 (PDE5) 
inhibitors to treat 
FGR outside of 
RCTs.1+ A There is no evidence 
in human studies, 
with a low risk of 
bias, of benefit from 
PDE5 inhibitors 
prescription.
There are no proven interventions in SGA and FGR other 
than birth of the baby. Experimental treatments under in -
vestigation in early phase clinical trials/studies include 
maternal VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) gene 
therapy, melatonin and for pre- eclampsia with the poten -
tial to impact on fetal growth; statins, nitric oxide donors, 
proton pump inhibitors and N- acetycysteine. Preclinical 
investigations are underway in nanoparticles, microRNAs, 
hydrogen sulphide and creatinine.301
PDE5 inhibitors have been tested in women with early 
onset placental disease, including FGR pregnancies to de -
termine if they can improve outcomes. Most studies have 
focused on sildenafil (Viagra) which was shown to improve 
Doppler parameters in animal models and suggested in case 
series to be effective in increasing human fetal growth veloc -
ity.302,303 A small RCT of sildenafil (50 mg three times daily 
[TDS]) in women with early onset pre-eclampsia reported 
a prolongation of pregnancy by 4 days, although only 60% 
of participants had recorded SGA and there was no effect 
of treatment on birthweight.304 However, prospective RCTs 
focusing on FGR have failed to show any benefit. Results 
from the international STRIDER collaboration did not show 
any prolongation in pregnancy or improvement in outcome 
from sildenafil (25 mg TDS) treatment.305,306 The Dutch arm 
of STRIDER study was stopped early because of safety con -
cerns, although meta- analysis of outcomes from the three 
studies has failed to show a conclusively detrimental effect.307 
Tadalafil, a longer acting PDE5 inhibitor has also been tested 
in case reports with reported improved neonatal outcome 
and no adverse effects, but no RCT evidence is currently 
available.308,309 Therefore although some studies have sug -
gested benefit using PDE5 inhibitors to improve outcomes in 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e56 | 
MORRIS et al .
FGR pregnancies, the negative results from STRIDER do not 
support the use of these drugs outside of clinical trials for the 
treatment or prevention of FGR. [Evidence level 1+]
RCT evidence does not support the use of LMWH as an 
effective treatment to prevent SGA or FGR, even in the pres -
ence of heritable thrombophilia, and should only be used in 
women at risk of thromboembolic disease.158,159,161,162 There 
is insufficient evidence that administration of LMWH to 
pregnancies with FGR prolongs or improves pregnancy 
outcome.310 [Evidence level 1++]
10 | WHAT IS THE OPTIMAL 
METHOD AND FREQUENCY OF 
FETAL SURVEILLANCE WHEN A 
FETAL GROWTH DISORDER HAS 
BEEN DIAGNOSED AND WHEN 
SHOULD BIRTH OCCUR?
10.1 | SGA fetuses
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Ultrasound biometry 
should be carried 
out every 2 weeks in 
fetuses identified to 
be SGA.2– C More frequent 
measurements 
increase the false 
 positive rate for 
diagnosing FGR.
Umbilical artery 
Doppler is 
the primary 
surveillance tool 
and should be 
undertaken at the 
point of diagnosis 
of SGA and during 
follow- up as a 
minimum every 
2 weeks.2+ B Use of umbilical artery 
Doppler in high risk 
pregnancy has been 
shown to reduce 
perinatal morbidity 
and mortality, 
reduce antenatal 
admissions and 
inductions of 
labour.
In fetuses with an EFW 
between the 3rd and 
10th centile, other 
features must be 
present for birth to 
be recommended 
prior to 39 weeks: 
either maternal 
(maternal medical 
conditions or 
concerns regarding 
fetal movements) or 
fetal compromise 
(a diagnosis of FGR 
based on Doppler 
assessment or a 
concern on CTG).2– C Timing of birth should 
be optimised to 
ensure balance of 
risks. The risks 
to be considered 
include those for 
person giving birth 
and baby (fetal and 
neonatal).RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
For fetuses with an EFW 
or AC less than the 
10th centile where 
FGR has been 
excluded, birth 
or the initiation 
of IOL should 
be considered at 
39+0 weeks after 
discussion with 
the woman and her 
partner/family/
support network. 
Birth should occur 
by 39+6 weeks.1+ B Timing of birth should 
be optimised to 
ensure balance of 
risks. The risks 
to be considered 
include those for 
person giving birth 
and baby (fetal and 
neonatal).
For women who are 
recommended for 
IOL or planned 
birth after 39+0 
weeks for SGA 
but who wish 
to continue 
the pregnancy, 
counselling must 
include a discussion 
regarding evidence 
that there is no 
additional risk 
for the baby or for 
the woman from 
planned birth/
induction at this 
gestation when 
compared with 
expectant care. An 
individual plan for 
the continuation of 
the pregnancy must 
be made.4 GPP There is no evidence 
to determine 
how fetuses with 
SGA/FGR should 
be monitored 
if pregnancy 
continues in this 
context.
After 37+0 weeks, 
an abnormal 
middle cerebral 
artery (MCA), 
cerebroplacental 
ratio (CPR) or 
umbilico-cerebral 
ratio (UCR) can 
be used to guide 
timing of birth. A 
normal MCA, CPR 
or UCR does not 
provide reassurance 
that the fetus is not 
compromised and 
in all cases birth is 
recommended prior 
to 39+6 weeks.2+ C In the term SGA fetus 
with normal 
umbilical artery 
Doppler, an 
abnormal MCA 
Doppler (PI<5th 
centile) has 
moderate predictive 
value for acidosis 
at birth and should 
be used to time 
delivery.
IOL is not 
contraindicated in 
the SGA fetus.2– C Compared with non- 
SGA babies, SGA 
fetuses are at greater 
risk of fetal heart 
rate abnormalities 
in labour and 
thus unplanned 
(emergency) 
caesarean birth.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e57
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
SGA fetuses (see section  2) are those whose AC or EFW is 
below the 10th centile but with normal growth velocity and 
do not exhibit Doppler changes, where there are normal fetal 
movements and normal amniotic fluid. For these pregnan -
cies where there are no additional maternal risk factors (for 
example maternal hypertension) ultrasound surveillance 
every 2 weeks is appropriate.311 Some cases of SGA progress 
to FGR depending on gestation at diagnosis, this risk being 
greater with SGA detected early on. [Evidence level 2–]
Umbilical artery Doppler is the primary surveillance 
tool. Its use in high risk pregnancy has been shown to reduce 
perinatal morbidity and mortality, reduce antenatal admis -
sions and inductions of labour.312 [Evidence level 2+]
Amniotic fluid can be assessed by the single deepest ver -
tical pocket (SDVP) or amniotic fluid index (AFI) meth -
ods; although both correlate poorly with actual amniotic 
fluid volume.313 A Cochrane systematic review compared 
the two methods and concluded that there was no evidence 
that one method was superior in the prevention of adverse 
perinatal outcomes. However, compared with a SDVP less 
than 2 cm, when an AFI of 5 cm or less was used more cases 
of oligohydramnios were diagnosed and more women had 
IOL without an improvement in perinatal outcome.314 In 
a prospective study of pregnancies with FGR and oligohy -
dramnios monitored for 8 weeks after the initial diagnosis of 
oligohydramnios, mean EFW centile did not change signifi -
cantly (remaining on 3rd centile in SGA fetuses) suggesting 
that oligohydramnios in this context is not associated with 
an increased risk of progression.315 Systematic reviews of 
observational and RCT data have demonstrated that while 
there is an association with oligohydramnios and SGA and 
adverse pregnancy outcome, it is not significant as a predic -
tive test and in RCTs was only shown to be associated with an 
abnormal 5 minute Apgar but not acidosis or perinatal death 
in SGA.316-317 Thus while ultrasound assessment of amniotic 
fluid volume can be used as a form of monitoring to inform 
overall assessment of fetal wellbeing, it should not be used 
to determine management in isolation. [Evidence level 2++]
For SGA fetuses the recommendations for birth are based 
on the findings of the Disproportionate Growth Intervention 
Trial at Term Study (DIGITAT) and consideration of data 
related to morbidity related to “early term” (37–38 week) 
birth.318 In DIGITAT 650 women with suspected growth 
disorder (defined as fetal AC below the 10th centile, EFW 
below the 10th centile, flattening of the growth curve in the 
third trimester [as judged by a clinician], or the presence of 
all three factors) above 36 weeks were randomised to induc -
tion or expectant management with twice weekly surveil -
lance. There was no difference between the groups in severe 
neonatal morbidity or in caesarean birth but there was an 
increase in neonatal unit admission with induction before 
38 weeks. The trial was not powered to assess perinatal mor -
tality. Longer term childhood adverse outcomes were related 
to severe FGR (birthweight less than 2.3 centile).319 A health 
economics analysis demonstrated lower costs with induction 
at 38 weeks compared with earlier.320 It is noted that in the 
expectant management group more babies were likely to be born with a birthweight less than 3rd centile, reflecting the 
difficulty in distinguishing between FGR and SGA at term, 
and these were the babies at greatest risk of adverse neonatal 
outcome. [Evidence level 1+]
A Cochrane review of the management of ‘compromised 
babies’ at term showed no difference in perinatal or long- 
term outcome with a policy of early birth versus expectant 
management.321 Only three trials were included: two in -
cluded small babies, both part of the DIGITAT study.318,322 
The third included babies with reduced amniotic fluid.323 
[Evidence level 1+]
Stock et al. compared the risk of neonatal unit admission 
with IOL at each given week (compared with the previous 
week) and demonstrated that at 37 weeks the risk was aOR 
2.01 (95% CI 1.80–2.25) and at 38 weeks aOR 1.53 (95% CI 
1.41–1.67).15 While, there was a decreased odds of perinatal 
mortality with planned induction (37 weeks aOR 0.05 [0.03–
0.68] and 38 weeks 0.23 [0.09–0.58]) 10 inductions would 
lead to one additional baby being admitted for neonatal care 
and it would require more than 700 inductions to prevent 
each perinatal death.15 There is also an association with early 
term birth and risk of subsequent special educational needs 
(SEN). After adjusting for maternal and obstetric character -
istics, and expressed relative to birth at 40 weeks, the risk of 
SEN was increased by 36% at 37 weeks, by 19% at 38 weeks 
and by 9% at 39 weeks.14 The ARRIVE trial randomised 
low risk nulliparous women to IOL at 39 weeks or expect -
ant management and while it did not result in a significantly 
lower frequency of a composite perinatal outcome, there 
was a lower frequency of caesarean birth in the induction 
group.324 [Evidence level 2+]
Thus, IOL between 37+0 and 38+6 weeks must only be 
considered as an intervention for fetuses at significantly 
increased risk of perinatal mortality (maternal or fetal 
compromise). For all fetuses with an EFW or AC less than 
the 10th centile where FGR has been excluded, birth or the 
initiation of IOL should be considered at 39+0 weeks after 
discussion with the woman and her partner/family/sup -
port network. Birth should occur by 39+6 weeks.325 There 
are studies that have reported a protocol for management 
of “low risk cases” of SGA with expectant management up 
to 41 weeks and demonstrated a reduced adverse neona -
tal outcome in this group.326,327 Larger numbers and RCT 
data are needed to assess any impact on perinatal mor -
tality and thus for women who do not wish induction of 
labour, counselling must include a discussion regarding 
evidence that there is no additional risk for the baby or 
for the woman from planned birth/induction at this ges -
tation when compared with expectant care. An individual 
plan for the continuation of the pregnancy must be made. 
[Evidence level 4]
10.2 | FGR fetuses
FGR fetuses defined as those whose AC or EFW below 
the 10th centile with Doppler changes (as described in the 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e58 | 
MORRIS et al .
definitions of FGR) or AC/EFW less than the 3rd centile, or 
growth crossing 50 centiles are a higher risk category and, 
in contrast to SGA, FGR is more frequently associated with 
maternal hypertension (occurring in 70% of early onset [be -
fore 32 weeks] FGR cases).328 While early and late FGR are 
in reality a continuum, there are important differences with 
respect to the sequencing of Doppler, CTG and amniotic 
fluid changes and therefore it is important to differentiate 
between them with respect to surveillance for fetal wellbe -
ing.329,330 Most experts differentiate early from late FGR at 
32–34 weeks of gestation. Prior to 32 weeks the care for FGR 
is informed by RCT evidence.328 After this time the evidence 
is inconclusive. The high variability in Doppler reference 
ranges and indices used has a major clinical impact on pre -
natal diagnosis, monitoring, decision making around timing 
of birth, reproducibility and comparison of findings between 
research studies, efficacy of clinical policies and protocols, 
and many other aspects.331 A study by Ruiz- Martinez ex -
ploring the variation in the proposed cut offs demonstrated 
significant variability. The MCA- PI showed the greatest var -
iability, with differences of up to 51% in the 5th centile value 
at term. Additionally, variability in the 95th centile of UA- PI 
and the 5th centile of CPR at each gestational week ranged 
from 21% to 41% and 15% to 33%, respectively, when these 
charts were used in simulation analysis; these differences in 
Doppler cut- off values were associated with large variation 
in the clinical management of SGA fetuses.332 [Evidence 2++]
Maternity providers should ensure that there is consis -
tency of the Doppler charts used across systems used within 
different departments (e.g., radiology, fetal medicine). 
[Evidence level 4]
10.2.1 | Early FGR
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Pregnancies with 
early FGR should 
be monitored 
and managed 
with input from 
tertiary level units 
with the highest 
 level neonatal care. 
Care should be 
multidisciplinary 
by neonatology 
and obstetricians 
with fetal 
medicine 
expertise, 
particularly when 
extremely preterm 
(before 28 weeks).4 GPP When considering 
birth of a preterm 
fetus with FGR, 
particularly when 
very preterm before 
28 weeks and 
severe, counselling 
of the parents by 
an experienced 
obstetrician and 
neonatologist should 
occur. Decisions for 
birth should consider 
predictors of survival 
and morbidity (i.e. 
weight, gestation).
Biometry in FGR 
should be repeated 
every 2 weeks.1– B More frequent 
measurements 
increase the false- 
positive rate for 
diagnosing FGR.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
In early FGR, the 
frequency of 
assessment of fetal 
wellbeing will 
be based on the 
severity of FGR 
and UA Doppler 
assessment with 
a minimum of 
weekly, when 
there are no other 
concerns, and 
2–3 times weekly 
when there are UA 
abnormalities. 
Assessment of 
fetal wellbeing can 
include multiple 
modalities but 
must include 
cCTG and/or 
ductus venosus.1– B The frequency of 
monitoring in 
early FGR has not 
been subjected to 
any prospective 
randomised studies. 
Nevertheless, 
analysis of TRUFFLE 
and other early FGR 
cohorts suggests that 
sudden deterioration 
can occur.
Maternity providers 
should ensure 
that there is 
consistency across 
departments in 
the reference 
charts used for 
fetal Doppler 
assessment.
cCTG analysis 
using the 
Dawes- Redman 
CTG system is 
recommended 
with the short- 
term variation 
(STV) being the 
key parameter.4
2–GPP
CHigh variability in Doppler 
reference ranges and 
indices used has a 
major clinical impact 
on prenatal diagnosis, 
monitoring, decision 
making around 
timing of birth and 
reproducibility.
A large prospective 
observational 
study of early 
FGR compared 
monitoring 
parameters and 
found that the ductus 
venosus and cCTG 
changes were most 
discriminatory 
in relation to the 
timing of birth. 
Of all parameters 
measured, the most 
marked changes 
immediately prior to 
birth were of raised 
ductus venosus 
pulsatility index for 
veins (PIV) and low 
cC TG ST V.
MCA CPR/UCR 
can inform 
monitoring 
strategy and 
frequency. MCA 
CPR/UCR should 
not be used to 
determine birth 
decisions prior to 
37+0 weeks.4 GPP A weak relationship 
between cerebral 
redistribution and 
adverse perinatal and 
2 year outcome was 
found with MCA PI 
and, for the latter, 
UCR but not CPR.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e59
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Birth should be based 
on fetal wellbeing 
assessment 
or maternal 
indication (e.g. 
severe pre-
eclampsia), as 
follows:
• Owing to a lack of 
RCT evidence care 
of fetuses before 
26 weeks needs to 
be personalised.
• From 26+0 weeks, 
birth if any of 
the following is 
present:
• Spontaneous 
repeated 
persistent 
unprovoked 
fetal heart rate 
decelerations;
• 26+0 to 28+6 
weeks: birth if 
ductus venosus 
a- wave is at or 
below baseline 
or STV is below 
2.6 ms;
• 29+0 to 31+6 
weeks: birth if 
ductus venosus 
a- wave is at or 
below baseline 
or STV is below 
3.0 ms;
• 32+0 to 33+6 
weeks (consider 
after 30+0 
weeks): birth 
if UA- EDF is 
reversed or STV 
is below 3.5 ms;
• From 34+0 weeks 
(consider after 
32+0 weeks): 
birth if UA- EDF 
is absent or STV 
is below 4.5 ms.4
1+GPP
BA comparative analysis 
of the GRIT and 
TRUFFLE studies 
suggested that 
long- term (2 year) 
outcomes were best 
in those women 
who were cared 
for based on cCTG 
and ductus venosus 
Doppler changes and 
thus timing of birth 
should be based on 
these parameters 
prior to 32 weeks.
Consensus management 
of late preterm FGR 
following TRUFFLE 
suggests birth if the 
umbilical artery 
EDF is reversed at 
32 weeks and absent 
at 34 weeks. Birth 
can be considered 
from 30 weeks and 
32 weeks respectively 
and, if continuing to 
the later gestation, 
monitoring should 
be carried out with 
DV and cCTG.
Abnormal umbilical 
vein Doppler with 
pulsations may be 
seen in early FGR 
and should prompt 
assessment of the 
ductus venosus 
waveform.4 GPP
In early FGR a 
woman's subjective 
assessment of 
reduced fetal 
movements or 
reduced or absent 
movements 
on ultrasound 
should prompt an 
assessment with 
cCTG.4 GPPPregnancies with early FGR should be monitored and 
managed with input from tertiary level units with the high -
est level neonatal care. Care should be multidisciplinary 
by neonatology and obstetricians with fetal medicine ex -
pertise, particularly when very preterm (before 28 weeks). 
Management of early FGR requires regional network spe -
cialist fetal medicine input to determine the most appropri -
ate monitoring for fetal wellbeing and timing of birth where 
fetal compromise is demonstrated needs sub- speciality 
input.6 [Evidence level 4]
A large prospective observational study of early FGR 
compared monitoring parameters and found that the ductus 
venosus and cCTG changes were most discriminatory in re-
lation to the timing of birth.333 Of all parameters measured, 
the most marked changes immediately prior to birth were 
of raised ductus venosus pulsatility index for veins (PIV) 
and low cCTG short- term variability (STV); these were of a 
greater magnitude than changes in the umbilical and MCA 
Dopplers, and amniotic fluid. In a later study relating these 
findings to adverse outcome, only ductus venosus contrib -
uted in a multivariable model.334 [Evidence level 2+]
Assessment of fetal heart rate variability is an import -
ant parameter in assessment of fetal wellbeing. However, 
visual inspection of conventional CTG is subjective and 
associated with low intra- and interobserver reproduc -
ibility. The fetal heart rate STV is a biophysical parameter 
obtained by cCTG. It reflects autonomic nervous system 
function and in the context of fetuses with FGR can re -
flect changes in autonomic activity induced by hypoxia; 
this has been validated with invasive testing demonstrat -
ing fetal hypoxaemia and acidaemia.335 [Evidence level 3]
The optimum management of early FGR has largely been 
defined by the TRUFFLE (trial of umbilical and fetal flow in 
Europe) study.328,336 In this study of growth restriction diag -
nosed between 26 and 32 weeks, abnormal umbilical artery 
Doppler defined entry to the study (to confirm diagnosis 
of FGR), but did not play a part in management until after 
32 weeks. Women were randomised to one of three groups 
with triggers for birth: a) reduced short- term variation (STV) 
using gestation specific thresholds; b) early changes in the DV 
waveform (DV- PI >95th centile or CTG- STV below a “safety 
net” and c) late changes in the DV waveform (DV ‘a’ wave at 
or below baseline or CTG- STV safety net). There were statis-
tically significantly more neurologically intact 2- year- old ba-
bies in the group randomised to late DV changes (or owing to 
the CTG- STV safety net) compared with those randomised 
to CTG: the proportion without neurodevelopmental impair -
ment at 2 years was 85% in the CTG- STV group, 91% in the 
early- DV group and 95% in the late- DV group. This improve-
ment in neurodevelopmental outcome was accompanied by 
a non- significant increase in perinatal and infant mortality. 
The overall perinatal death rate was 8% and cerebral palsy 
rate 1%.328 The earlier GRIT randomised controlled study 
did not give a clear answer on whether compromised ba-
bies are best born immediately or managed expectantly.337 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e60 | 
MORRIS et al .
A comparative analysis of the two studies suggested that long- 
term (2 year) outcomes were best in those women who were 
cared for based on cCTG and ductus venosus Doppler.338 A 
weak relationship between cerebral redistribution and ad-
verse perinatal and 2 year outcome was found with MCA PI 
and, for the latter, UCR but not CPR.339 [Evidence level 1+]
The frequency of monitoring in early FGR has not 
been subjected to any prospective randomised studies. 
Nevertheless, analysis of TRUFFLE and other early FGR 
cohorts suggests that sudden deterioration can occur.340 
[Evidence level 1–]
Umbilical artery Doppler changes are defined as: PI above 
the 95th centile (borderline), absent end diastolic flow (EDF) 
(pre- critical), reversed EDF (critical).
Ductus venosus Doppler changes are defined as: raised 
PIV above the 95th centile (borderline), absent ‘a’ wave to 
baseline (pre- critical), or reversed ‘a’ wave (critical).
Depending on the severity of FGR, repeat USS (umbilical 
and ductus venosus Doppler) and CTG monitoring is nor -
mally undertaken every week where the umbilical Doppler 
changes are borderline, to alternate daily in the case of early 
onset FGR with pre- critical umbilical Doppler changes. 
Where the umbilical Doppler changes are critical, daily cCTG 
and/or Ductus venosus Doppler are indicated as sudden dete -
rioration of the fetal condition may occur.
Birth should be planned when the Ductus venosus ‘a’ 
wave is at (absent) or below baseline (reversed) or there are 
CTG abnormalities; STV less than 2.6 ms at 26+0–28+6 weeks 
or less than 3.0 ms at 29+0–31+6 weeks.
When considering birth of a preterm fetus with FGR, 
particularly when very preterm before 28 weeks and severe, 
counselling of the parents by an experienced obstetrician 
and neonatologist should occur. Decisions for birth should 
consider predictors of survival and morbidity (i.e. weight 
and gestation).341,342 [Evidence level 4]
10.2.2 | Late FGR
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
In late and term FGR, 
assessing the ductus 
venosus waveform 
is unlikely to be 
informative as it is 
very unlikely to show 
severe abnormalities.4 GPP Ductus venosus has 
been assessed as a 
surveillance tool in 
early onset FGR only.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
In pregnancies with late 
FGR, birth should 
be based on fetal 
wellbeing assessments 
or maternal indication 
(e.g. severe pre- 
eclampsia). For fetal 
assessment, birth 
should occur if any 
of the following are 
present:
• Spontaneous repeated 
persistent unprovoked 
fetal heart rate 
decelerations.
• cCTG STV less than 
3.5 ms at 32+0 to 33+6 
weeks and less than 
4.5 ms at 34+0 weeks or 
above.
• Or abnormal UA 
Doppler as follows:
• Absent end diastolic 
flow, considered 
at 32 weeks and 
absolute by 
34 weeks.
• raised umbilical 
PI above the 95th 
centile, 36+0 to 36+6 
weeks.4 GPP In this group, a normal 
umbilical artery 
Doppler cannot 
exclude placental 
dysfunction and 
therefore it is 
important that 
other methods of 
surveillance are used.
In pregnancies with 
FGR, birth should be 
initiated from 37+0 
weeks to be completed 
by 37+6 weeks.1+ A Fetuses at term with 
birthweight below 
the 3rd centile have 
the highest risk of 
stillbirth, therefore 
these pregnancies 
should not exceed 37+6 
weeks of gestation, 
independent of 
Doppler findings
Cerebral Doppler: 
abnormal MCA CPR/
UCR can inform 
monitoring strategy 
and frequency but 
should not be used 
to determine birth 
decisions prior to 
37 weeks. After 37+0 
weeks, an abnormal 
MCA, CPR or UCR 
can be used to guide 
timing of birth. A 
normal MCA, CPR 
or UCR does not 
provide reassurance 
that the fetus is not 
compromised and 
in all cases birth is 
recommended prior to 
37+6 weeks.2++ D It is likely that an 
association exists 
between cerebral 
redistribution and 
adverse perinatal 
outcome, it is not 
established that 
birth based on MCA 
Doppler changes 
would improve 
outcome and there 
is the potential that 
it might be harmful. 
Furthermore, it is not 
clear that cerebral 
Doppler changes 
are independently 
associated 
with adverse 
neurodevelopmental 
outcome.
In late FGR a woman's 
subjective assessment 
of reduced fetal 
movements or absent 
movements on 
ultrasound should 
prompt an assessment 
with cCTG.4 GPP A reduction or alteration 
in fetal movements is 
associated with risk 
factors such as FGR, 
SGA and stillbirth.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e61
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
In this group, a normal umbilical artery Doppler cannot ex -
clude placental dysfunction and therefore it is important that 
other methods of surveillance are used.260,342,343 An abnormal 
umbilical artery Doppler should also prompt further assess -
ment. There has been renewed recent interest in cerebral Doppler 
changes in FGR.344-347 While it is likely that an association exists 
between cerebral redistribution and adverse perinatal outcome, 
it is not established that birth based on MCA Doppler changes 
would improve outcome and there is the potential that actually 
it might be harmful. Furthermore, it is not clear that cerebral 
Doppler changes are independently associated with adverse 
neurodevelopmental outcome.348 Uterine artery Doppler has 
also been assessed in this group and an abnormal uterine artery 
Doppler is associated with an increased risk of intrapartum fetal 
distress, emergency caesarean birth and admission to neonatal 
intensive care unit.349-351 [Evidence level 2++]
The TRUFFLE2 study is ongoing and aims to address the 
question of the optimal monitoring and thresholds for birth 
in late onset FGR. It will investigate the hypothesis that com -
mencement of birth on evidence of cerebral blood flow re -
distribution reduces a composite of perinatal poor outcome, 
death, and short- term hypoxia- related morbidity, with no 
worsening of neurodevelopmental outcome at 2 years.352
There is no Cochrane Review on the optimal time of birth 
in late preterm babies and there has only been one trial of late 
preterm timed birth. The Growth Restriction Intervention 
Trial included 210 babies at risk of late preterm growth restric -
tion or compromise between 33+0 and 36+6 weeks, of whom 
107 were randomised to early birth and 103 to delayed.353 
Mortality and a range of neurodevelopmental measures were 
similarly distributed between the groups. Limitations of this 
study are the use of only one Doppler measure (umbilical 
artery Doppler), visual inspection of the CTG, and manage -
ment prior to birth was not standardised, but left to the cli -
nician's discretion. Consensus management of late preterm 
FGR suggests birth if the umbilical artery EDF is reversed at 
32 weeks, absent at 34 weeks and raised PI at 36 weeks. For all 
babies with FGR, birth should be planned for and initiated 
by 37 weeks with birth occurring by 37+6 weeks.354 [Evidence 
level 1+]
Recent data from those women that declined randomis -
ation in the DIGITAT study of term FGR, showed a signifi -
cantly higher perinatal mortality. In these women, three of 
four pregnancies proceeded beyond 40 weeks.325 [Evidence 
level 1+]
11 | HOW SHOULD FETUSES WITH 
FETAL GROWTH DISORDERS BE 
BORN AND PREPARED FOR BIRTH?
The birth of a preterm, or early term newborn, based on 
 concerns regarding fetal growth should be optimised. Caring 
for women and babies at the time of an extremely premature 
birth is challenging. Detailed guidance is provided by the 
British Association of Perinatal Medicine (BAPM).355 This 
section refers to recommendations for perinatal optimisation when active care is planned for the birth of a baby with FGR. 
The care of babies at 22+0–23+6 weeks of gestation is particu -
larly challenging and parents must be supported by personal -
ised counselling to help them decide how they wish their baby 
to be cared for as detailed in the BAPM framework.
11.1 | Antenatal corticosteroids
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Antenatal 
corticosteroids 
should be 
offered to 
women between 
24+0 and 34+6 
weeks, ideally 
48 hours before 
an anticipated 
birth.1++ A High quality evidence, 
need to ensure 
optimal timing.
RCOG guidance states that antenatal corticosteroids 
should be offered to women between 24+0 and 34+6 weeks 
of gestation who are at high risk of imminent PTB (for ex -
ample, having a planned PTB).356 Clinicians and women 
should consider the balance of risks and benefits of cor -
ticosteroids in women at risk of imminent PTB beyond 
35+0 weeks of gestation. The optimal timing of steroids is 
key to ensure their effectiveness, and a course of steroids 
given within the seven days prior to PTB reduces perinatal 
and neonatal death and respiratory distress syndrome.357 
[Evidence level 1++]
Further discussion on the use of corticosteroids and the 
evidence in SGA and FGR is detailed in the RCOG Green-
top Guideline no. 74 Antenatal corticosteroids to reduce neo -
natal morbidity and mortality .356
11.2 | Intrauterine transfer
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All women 
undergoing a 
PTB should 
be offered 
transfer to 
a unit with 
appropriate 
and available 
neonatal cot 
facilities when 
safe to do so.
Ensure the 
neonatal team 
are involved 
when a PTB is 
anticipated.1–
4B
GPPBabies less than 27 weeks 
or with EFW < below 
800 g should be 
born in a unit with 
a neonatal intensive 
care unit.
It is important that 
the woman and 
her family have 
appropriate 
counselling from 
the neonatal team 
and time to discuss 
options.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e62 | 
MORRIS et al .
All women undergoing a PTB should be offered transfer 
to a unit with appropriate and available neonatal cot facili -
ties when safe to do so and as agreed by the relevant neonatal 
Operational Delivery Network (ODN). Ensure the neonatal 
team are involved when a PTB is anticipated, so that they 
have time to discuss options with the woman and whoever 
may be supporting her prior to birth and to be present at the 
time of birth.358,359 [Evidence level 1–]
11.3 | Magnesium sulphate for 
neuroprotection
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Magnesium 
sulphate for 
neuroprotection 
should be 
offered between 
24+0 and 29+6 
weeks and 
considered up to 
33+6 weeks.1– B Magnesium sulphate 
administration to 
the woman before 
the birth of a 
preterm newborn 
is neuroprotective, 
reducing the risk of 
cerebral palsy.
Magnesium sulphate administration to the woman before 
the birth of a preterm newborn is neuroprotective, reduc -
ing the risk of cerebral palsy. As standard practice within 
the UK it should be discussed for women between 23+0 and 
23+6, offered to all women between 24+0 and 29+6 weeks 
and considered for women between 30+0 and 33+6.357 In a 
growth restricted fetus there is evidence of neurological de -
velopmental abnormalities persisting at least into the later 
preterm period.339 Therefore, in the absence of robust evi -
dence, the gestational window for administration should be 
considered up to 33+6 weeks (i.e. balancing any risks to the 
woman of administration and any need to delay birth for ad -
ministration). [Evidence level 1–]
11.4 | Mode of birth
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
In the FGR fetus with 
abnormal cCTG 
STV, ductus 
venosus alteration, 
umbilical artery 
absent or reversed 
end diastolic 
flow velocities 
(AREDV) 
caesarean birth is 
recommended and 
should occur after 
administration 
of steroids and 
magnesium 
sulphate.4 GPP The risk of unplanned 
(emergency) 
caesarean birth in 
this group will be 
very high.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
In the SGA fetus or 
late FGR fetus 
with normal 
umbilical artery 
Doppler or 
with abnormal 
umbilical artery 
PI but end–
diastolic velocities 
present, IOL can 
be offered but 
rates of unplanned 
(emergency) 
caesarean birth 
are increased, 
and continuous 
fetal heart rate 
monitoring is 
recommended 
from the onset 
of uterine 
contractions.4 GPP Compared with 
appropriately grown 
babies, SGA fetuses 
are at greater risk 
of fetal heart rate 
abnormalities 
in labour and 
thus unplanned 
(emergency) 
caesarean birth.
When IOL is 
being offered 
mechanical 
methods should be 
considered.2+ C Mechanical methods 
seem to be 
associated with a 
lower occurrence of 
adverse intrapartum 
outcomes
Early admission is 
recommended 
in women in 
spontaneous 
labour with a 
SGA/FGR fetus in 
order to instigate 
continuous 
fetal heart rate 
monitoring.4 GPP Fetuses with growth 
disorders are at 
greater risk of 
fetal heart rate 
decelerations in 
labour.
Compared with appropriate- for- gestational-age fetuses, 
term and near- term SGA fetuses are at increased risk of fetal 
heart rate (FHR) decelerations in labour, unplanned (emer -
gency) caesarean birth for suspected fetal compromise and 
metabolic acidaemia at birth. This reflects a lower prela -
bour pO2 and pH, greater cord compression and a greater 
fall in pH and higher lactate levels when FHR decelerations 
are present.339,360 Reported rates of unplanned (emergency) 
caesarean birth for suspected fetal compromise vary from 
6–45%, with higher rates in those with serial AC or EFW 
measurements suggestive of FGR.263,361,362 No RCTs of mode 
of birth in the SGA fetus were identified. [Evidence level 2–]
In all recent studies reporting outcome of viable SGA fe -
tuses with UA AREDV birth has been by caesarean birth 
and therefore it is not possible to determine the likelihood 
of adverse outcome (including unplanned [emergency] cae -
sarean birth for suspected fetal compromise) associated 
with induced / spontaneous labour.336,363 Older series re -
port rates of intrapartum fetal heart decelerations neces -
sitating CS of 75–95%.364,365 More recent prospective data 
on the outcome of labour in SGA fetuses with an abnormal 
UA Doppler but positive end- diastolic velocities are also 
extremely limited; suspected fetal compromise (necessi -
tating emergency caesarean birth) has been reported in 
17–32% of such cases, compared with 6–9% in SGA fetuses 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e63
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
with normal UA Doppler, although it is acknowledged that 
knowledge of Doppler may lower obstetricians' threshold 
for emergency caesarean birth.361,362,366,367 The offer of IOL 
with continuous FHR monitoring is therefore reasonable in 
term and near term SGA/FGR fetuses without UA AREDV. 
The procedures for IOL should follow existing guidance 
and within this guidance it is noted that mechanical meth -
ods are less likely to cause hyperstimulation than pharma -
cological methods.368 Studies looking specifically at IOL 
in the FGR group have demonstrated a lower risk of uter -
ine tachysystole, caesarean or operative birth and adverse 
neonatal outcome compared with pharmacological meth -
ods.369-372 A systematic review concluded that there was 
limited evidence on the optimal type of IOL in pregnancies 
with small fetuses but that mechanical methods seem to be 
associated with a lower occurrence of adverse intrapartum 
outcomes.372 [Evidence level 2+]
12 | POSTNATAL INVESTIGATIONS 
AND PREPREGNANCY COUNSELLING
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Histopathological 
examination of 
the placenta may 
be useful where 
FGR is diagnosed 
prenatally 
or at birth to 
understand 
the underlying 
causes and guide 
management 
in a subsequent 
pregnancy.3 D To confirm placental 
disease and guide 
future pregnancy 
management.
Women who have 
given birth to a 
growth restricted 
infant should 
be offered an 
appointment 
for postnatal 
counselling, 
review of 
placental 
histology and 
consideration of 
investigations of 
underlying causes 
as appropriate 
e.g. acquired 
thrombophilias.4
2- GPP
BImportant to confirm 
pathology and 
optimise future 
pregnancy 
management 
and modify the 
women's health 
to improve 
future pregnancy 
outcomes.
The British Society 
for Haematology 
recommends 
against testing 
for hereditary 
thrombophilias 
but for acquired 
thrombophilias 
can be considered 
as may aid risk 
stratification 
and treatment 
decisions.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
A plan for future 
pregnancies and 
preventative 
strategies 
(smoking 
cessation, aspirin 
treatment) should 
be recorded in 
the notes and 
discussed with the 
woman.4 GPP It is important that 
a plan for future 
pregnancies 
is recorded to 
support continuity 
of care.
As discussed in section  4, the birth of a baby with FGR 
is a major risk factor for FGR in a subsequent pregnancy 
and the postnatal period offers an opportunity to address 
modifiable risk factors. The most important of these is re -
ducing exposure to second- hand smoke. NICE guideline 
[NG209] recommends that maternity services establish links 
with contraceptive services, fertility clinics and antenatal 
and postnatal services so that everyone working in those 
organisations knows about local stop- smoking support. 
This will reduce the risk of newborn babies being exposed to 
 second-hand smoke and reduce the number of women going 
into their next pregnancy as a smoker.83
Following the birth of a baby with FGR, investiga -
tions should be offered to try to determine the underlying 
cause and help provide an opportunity to discuss risk of 
recurrence and possible interventions to reduce risk at a 
prepregnancy appointment. These investigations should 
consider placental histopathology which may be useful373 
(as recommended by the Royal College of Pathologists 
defined as birthweight below the 10th centile with an ab -
normal fetal growth curve) and investigation for acquired 
thrombophilias.374 [Evidence level 2– ]
Modifiable risk factors should be addressed such as life -
style factors (e.g. smoking, BMI) and medical conditions 
optimised. Plans for prevention (i.e. aspirin) and monitor -
ing in future pregnancies should be discussed.
13 | RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
FUTURE RESEARCH
• The interaction of multiple maternal risk factors is unknown 
and is an important area for further research. Research into 
development of prediction models that are designed specifi -
cally for FGR and FGR with adverse outcomes is needed.
• Further research is required to quantify the predictive 
accuracy of different methods, to determine the optimal 
timing of the first ultrasound, the optimal interval be -
tween scans and the benefits of universal growth scans. 
This should include cost- effectiveness of a screening pro -
gramme with appropriate longer term neonatal outcomes.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e64 | 
MORRIS et al .
• The use of biomarkers as a universal screening test to pre -
dict adverse pregnancy outcomes including cost effective 
analysis.
• RCTs are required to determine whether biomarkers en -
able further delineation of early and late onset FGR and 
whether their use can help further determine manage -
ment when combined with other tests.
• Longitudinal studies of fetuses, whose birthweight falls 
within the normal range but who are suspected of ab -
normal fetal growth, should address whether additional 
measures of fetal growth e.g. ultrasound biometry and ve -
locity, Doppler assessment and biomarkers can help deter -
mine those at risk of adverse outcome.
• Further research needs to assess the impact of different 
EFW reference charts in different populations to ensure 
that the reference charts used are appropriate or whether 
they need adjusting using local data sets.
• There is a need for research to determine better defini -
tions of growth velocity at different gestations and to 
determine the relationship between growth velocity and 
adverse outcome.
• The role of MCA Doppler in timing of birth in late preterm 
and term FGR.
• Use of maternal and fetal Doppler in the management of 
FGR needs to be supported by research to homogenise the 
Doppler indices, thresholds and reference ranges used.
• Research into functional imaging of the placenta and its 
potential use in predicting adverse outcome.
• Research into discovering novel biomarkers of FGR.
• Further research into routine third trimester USS as -
sessing a package of care (diagnostic accuracy of test and 
management pathways for screen positive and negative 
women) considering a range of outcomes are required.
• Further research into interventions, including pharmaco -
logical treatments, for FGR once diagnosed to reduce the 
risk of adverse outcome.
14 | AUDITABLE TOPICS
• Audit to report percentage of babies born <3rd cen -
tile and > 37+6 weeks and case note audit of those babies 
<3rd centile not detected antenatally to identify areas of 
improvement.
• Audit of babies born >39+6 weeks and < 10th centile to pro -
vide an indication of detection rates (%) and management 
of SGA babies.
• Use the PMRT to calculate the percentage of perinatal 
mortality cases annually where the risk assessment and 
management of FGR was a relevant issue.
• Appropriate risk assessment during pregnancy, as -
sessed as percentage of pregnancies where a risk sta -
tus for FGR is identified and recorded at booking, 
and prescribing of aspirin to those at risk of placental 
dysfunction.
• Audit and quality assurance of biometry images used in 
growth surveillance as recommended by BMUS.19215 | USEFUL LINKS AND 
SUPPORT GROUPS
• Tommy's Charity [ https:// www. tommys. org]
• Sands Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Charity [ https:// 
www. sands. org. uk/ ]
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
None.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
None.
FUNDING INFORMATION
All those involved in the development of the Green- 
top Guidelines, including the Guidelines Committee, 
Guidelines Committee co- chairs, guideline developers, peer 
reviewers and other reviewers, are unpaid volunteers and 
receive no direct funding for their work in producing the 
guideline. The exception to this are the RCOG staff involved 
who are salaried employees of the College and Guidelines 
Committee members who receive reimbursement for ex -
penses for attending Guidelines Committee meetings. 
Please see more information on travel expense rules on the 
RCOG website.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
RKM is the chair of the RCOG Scientific Advisory 
Committee, Deputy National Specialty Lead for Reproductive 
Health and Childbirth Clinical Research Network NIHR and 
President of the British Maternal Fetal Medicine Society. EJ 
received a NERC RESPIRE grant. CL is chief investigator of 
the TRUFFLE 2 study of moderate preterm fetal growth re-
striction and has received NIHR HTA funding to Imperial 
College London. VM has declared no conflicts of interest. GS 
has received the following funding, paid to their institution: 
contract from Wellcome Leap for maternal serum proteomics 
to understand and to predict pregnancy complications lead-
ing to stillbirth, contract from Roche Diagnostics Ltd. For an 
Investigator Initiated Study Agreement: Pregnancy Outcome 
Prediction Study 2; grants from MRC for pre-labour invasion 
of the human uterus by Streptococcus agalactiae, from the 
Wellcome Trust for the evaluation and development of novel 
diagnostic methods to understand and prevent placentally-
related complications of human pregnancy, from the NIHR 
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre as Theme Leader 
for Women's Health and Paediatrics and from the MRC for 
a quantitative serum metabolite ratio to predict fetal growth 
abnormalities. They have also personally received a consult-
ing fee from GSK as consultant and member of expert panel 
for RSV vaccination in pregnancy.
ETHICS APPROV AL
None.
DATA A V AILABILITY STATEMENT
None.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e65
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Alberry M, Soothill P. Management of fetal growth restriction. 
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed Jan 2007;92(1):F62-7. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1136/ adc. 2005. 082297
 2. Lees CC, Marlow N, van Wassenaer- Leemhuis A, et al. 2 year neuro -
developmental and intermediate perinatal outcomes in infants with 
very preterm fetal growth restriction (TRUFFLE): a randomised 
trial. The Lancet. 2015;385(9983):2162–72. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
S0140- 6736(14) 62049- 3
 3. McIntire DD, Bloom SL, Casey BM, Leveno KJ. Birth weight in re -
lation to morbidity and mortality among newborn infants. N Engl 
J Med. Apr 22 1999;340(16):1234–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ NEJM1 
99904 22340 1603
 4. Molina LCG, Odibo L, Zientara S, et al. Validation of Delphi pro -
cedure consensus criteria for defining fetal growth restriction. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 07 2020;56(1):61–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1002/ uog. 20854 
 5. Gordijn SJ, Beune IM, Thilaganathan B, et al. Consensus definition 
of fetal growth restriction: a Delphi procedure. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol Sep 2016;48(3):333–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 15884 
 6. NHS England. Saving babies lives version 3: a care bundle for reduc -
ing perinatal mortality . 2023. Accessed 21st June 2023. https:// www. 
engla nd. nhs. uk/ publi cation/ saving- babies- lives- versi on- three/ 
 7. Gómez O, Figueras F, Fernández S, et al. Reference ranges for 
uterine artery mean pulsatility index at 11- 41 weeks of gestation. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Aug 2008;32(2):128–32. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1002/ uog. 5315
 8. Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Lucas MJ, Leveno KJ. Effects of symmet -
ric and asymmetric fetal growth on pregnancy outcomes. Obstet 
Gynecol Sep 2000;96(3):321–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0029- 
7844(00) 00943- 1
 9. Nardozza LM, Caetano AC, Zamarian AC, et  al. Fetal growth 
restriction: current knowledge. Arch Gynecol Obstet May 
2017;295(5):1061–77. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00404- 017- 4341- 9
 10. Pels A, Beune IM, van Wassenaer- Leemhuis AG, Limpens J, 
Ganzevoort W. Early- onset fetal growth restriction: A systematic 
review on mortality and morbidity. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Feb 
2020;99(2):153–66. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ aogs. 13702 
 11. Pay AS, Wiik J, Backe B, Jacobsson B, Strandell A, Klovning A. 
Symphysis- fundus height measurement to predict small- for- gestational- 
age status at birth: a systematic review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. Feb 
10 2015;15:22. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12884- 015- 0461- z
 12. NHS England. Saving babies lives: A care bundle for reducing still-
birth. Accessed 21st June. 2023 https:// www. engla nd. nhs. uk/ wp- 
conte nt/ uploa ds/ 2016/ 03/ saving- babies- lives- car- bundl. pdf
 13. Widdows K, Reid HE, Roberts SA, Camacho EM, Heazell AEP. 
Saving babies' lives project impact and results evaluation (SPiRE): 
a mixed methodology study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth Jan 30 
2018;18(1):43. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12884- 018- 1672- x
 14. MacKay DF, Smith GC, Dobbie R, Pell JP. Gestational age at delivery 
and special educational need: retrospective cohort study of 407,503 
schoolchildren. PLoS Med. Jun 08 2010;7(6):e1000289. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pmed. 1000289
 15. Stock SJ, Ferguson E, Duffy A, Ford I, Chalmers J, Norman JE. 
Outcomes of elective induction of labour compared with expectant 
management: population based study. BMJ. May 10 2012;344:e2838. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. e2838 
 16. NHS England. Saving babies lives: A care bundle for reducing peri -
natal mortality version 2. https:// www. engla nd. nhs. uk/ wp- conte nt/ 
uploa ds/ 2019/ 03/ Saving- Babies- Lives- Care- Bundle- Versi on- Two- 
Updat ed- Final- Versi on. pdf
 17. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Development 
of RCOG Green- top Guidelines. Clinical Governance Advice No. 1. 
London: RCOG; 2015.
 18. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Antenatal care. 
NICE Guideline [NG201]. London: NICE; 2021. https://www.nice.
org.uk/guidance/ng201/ 19. Tan MY, Poon LC, Rolnik DL, et  al. Prediction and prevention 
of small- for- gestational- age neonates: evidence from SPREE and 
ASPRE. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 07 2018;52(1):52–9. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 19077 
 20. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Tommy's path -
way. Accessed 21st June. 2023 https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ about- us/ 
quali ty- impro vement- clini cal- audit- and- resea rch- proje cts/ tom -
mys- natio nal- centre- for- mater nity- impro vement/ tommys- pathw 
ay/ 
 21. Bhamidipaty- Pelosi S, Fox J, Greer RM, Kumar S. The risk of recur -
rent small- for- gestational- age infants at term is dependent on the 
number of previously affected births. Am J Obstet Gynecol Oct 
2021;225(4):415.e1-415.e9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2021. 04. 
219
 22. Voskamp BJ, Kazemier BM, Ravelli AC, Schaaf J, Mol BW, Pajkrt E. 
Recurrence of small- for- gestational- age pregnancy: analysis of first 
and subsequent singleton pregnancies in The Netherlands. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol May 2013;208(5):374.e1-6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
ajog. 2013. 01. 045
 23. Malacova E, Regan A, Nassar N, et al. Risk of stillbirth, preterm 
delivery, and fetal growth restriction following exposure in a 
previous birth: systematic review and meta- analysis. BJOG Jan 
2018;125(2):183–92. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 14906 
 24. Maignien C, Nguyen A, Dussaux C, Cynober E, Gonzales M, 
Carbonne B. Outcome of pregnancy following second- or third- 
trimester intrauterine fetal death. Int J Gynaecol Obstet Dec 
2014;127(3):275–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ijgo. 2014. 06. 015
 25. Monari F, Pedrielli G, Vergani P, et al. Adverse Perinatal Outcome 
in Subsequent Pregnancy after Stillbirth by Placental Vascular 
Disorders. PloS One. 2016;11(5):e0155761. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ 
journ al. pone. 0155761
 26. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Late Intrauterine 
Fetal Death and Stillbirth. Green-top Guideline No. 55, London; 
RCOG: 2010.
 27. Smith GC, Shah I, White IR, Pell JP, Dobbie R. Previous preeclamp -
sia, preterm delivery, and delivery of a small for gestational age 
infant and the risk of unexplained stillbirth in the second preg -
nancy: a retrospective cohort study, Scotland, 1992- 2001. Am J 
Epidemiol Jan 15 2007;165(2):194–202. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ 
aje/ kwj354
 28. Field K, Murphy DJ. Perinatal outcomes in a subsequent pregnancy 
among women who have experienced recurrent miscarriage: a ret -
rospective cohort study. Hum Reprod May 2015;30(5):1239–45. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ humrep/ dev044
 29. Quenby S, Gallos ID, Dhillon- Smith RK, et al. Miscarriage matters: 
the epidemiological, physical, psychological, and economic costs 
of early pregnancy loss. Lancet. 05 01 2021;397(10285):1658–67. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(21) 00682- 6
 30. Fawzy M, Saravelos S, Li TC, Metwally M. Do women with recur -
rent miscarriage constitute a high- risk obstetric population? Hum 
Fertil (Camb) Apr 2016;19(1):9–15. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 14647 
273. 2016. 1142214
 31. Männistö J, Mentula M, Bloigu A, Gissler M, Niinimäki M, 
Heikinheimo O. Medical termination of pregnancy during the sec-
ond versus the first trimester and its effects on subsequent preg -
nancy. Contraception Feb 2014;89(2):109–15. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. contr acept ion. 2013. 10. 015
 32. Hiersch L, Shinar S, Melamed N, et al. Recurrent Placenta- Mediated 
Complications in Women With Three Consecutive Deliveries. 
Obstet Gynecol. 03 2017;129(3):416–21. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 
AOG. 00000 00000 001890
 33. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hypertension in 
pregnancy: diagnosis and management. NICE Guideline NG133. 
London: NICE; 2019. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng133
 34. Rolnik DL, Wright D, Poon LC, et  al. Aspirin versus Placebo in 
Pregnancies at High Risk for Preterm Preeclampsia. N Engl J Med. 
08 17 2017;377(7):613–22. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ NEJMo a1704559
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e66 | 
MORRIS et al .
 35. Ayala DE, Ucieda R, Hermida RC. Chronotherapy with low- dose as -
pirin for prevention of complications in pregnancy. Chronobiol Int 
Mar 2013;30(1–2):260–79. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 07420 528. 2012. 
717455
 36. Howarth C, Gazis A, James D. Associations of Type 1 diabetes mel-
litus, maternal vascular disease and complications of pregnancy. 
Diabet Med Nov 2007;24(11):1229–34. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 
1464- 5491. 2007. 02254. x
 37. Fink JC, Schwartz SM, Benedetti TJ, Stehman- Breen CO. Increased 
risk of adverse maternal and infant outcomes among women with 
renal disease. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol Jul 1998;12(3):277–87. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1046/j. 1365- 3016. 1998. 00129. x
 38. Yasuda M, Takakuwa K, Tokunaga A, Tanaka K. Prospective studies 
of the association between anticardiolipin antibody and outcome of 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Oct 1995;86(4 Pt 1):555–9. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/ 0029- 7844(95) 00247- o
 39. Cao C, Cai W, Niu X, et al. Prehypertension during pregnancy 
and risk of small for gestational age: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med Apr 2020;33(8):1447–54. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14767 058. 2018. 1519015
 40. Yasmeen S, Wilkins EE, Field NT, Sheikh RA, Gilbert WM. 
Pregnancy outcomes in women with systemic lupus erythematosus. 
J Matern Fetal Med Apr 2001;10(2):91–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 
71490 4302
 41. van Hagen IM, Roos- Hesselink JW, Donvito V, et al. Incidence and 
predictors of obstetric and fetal complications in women with struc-
tural heart disease. Heart. 10 2017;103(20):1610–8. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1136/ heart jnl- 2016- 310644
 42. Ormesher L, Vause S, Higson S, et al. Prevalence of pre- eclampsia 
and adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with pre- existing car -
diomyopathy: a multi- centre retrospective cohort study. Sci Rep Jan 
4 2023;13(1):153. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 022- 26606- z.
 43. Murphy VE, Namazy JA, Powell H, et al. A meta- analysis of ad-
verse perinatal outcomes in women with asthma. BJOG Oct 
2011;118(11):1314–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2011. 
03055. x
 44. Bartha JL, Martinez- Sanchez N, Hueso- Zalvide E. Pregnancy out -
come in women with inflammatory bowel disease with or without 
biological medication. J Womens Health. 2017;26(4).
 45. Badfar G, Shohani M, Soleymani A, Azami M. Maternal ane -
mia during pregnancy and small for gestational age: a system -
atic review and meta- analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med May 
2019;32(10):1728–34. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14767 058. 2017. 
1411477
 46. Loret de Mola C, de França GV, Quevedo LeA, Horta BL. Low birth 
weight, preterm birth and small for gestational age association 
with adult depression: systematic review and meta- analysis. Br J 
Psychiatry Nov 2014;205(5):340–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1192/ bjp. bp. 
113. 139014
 47. Zhao X, Liu Q, Cao S, et al. A meta- analysis of selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) use during prenatal depression and risk 
of low birth weight and small for gestational age. J Affect Disord 12 
01 2018;241:563–570. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jad. 2018. 08. 061
 48. McCowan L, Horgan RP. Risk factors for small for gestational age 
infants. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol Dec 2009;23(6):779–
93. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. bpobg yn. 2009. 06. 003
 49. Grote NK, Bridge JA, Gavin AR, Melville JL, Iyengar S, Katon WJ. 
A meta- analysis of depression during pregnancy and the risk of 
preterm birth, low birth weight, and intrauterine growth restric-
tion. Arch Gen Psychiatry Oct 2010;67(10):1012–24. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1001/ archg enpsy chiat ry. 2010. 111
 50. Lean SC, Derricott H, Jones RL, Heazell AEP. Advanced mater -
nal age and adverse pregnancy outcomes: A systematic review and 
meta- analysis. PloS One. 2017;12(10):e0186287. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1371/ journ al. pone. 0186287
 51. Santos S, Voerman E, Amiano P, et al. Impact of maternal body 
mass index and gestational weight gain on pregnancy com -
plications: an individual participant data meta- analysis of European, North American and Australian cohorts BJOG Jul 
2019;126(8):984–95. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 15661 
 52. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Weight manage -
ment before, during and after pregnancy . Public health guideline 27 
[PH27]. London: NICE; 2010. Accessed 21st June. 2023 https:// www. 
nice. org. uk/ guida nce/ ph27/ resou rces/ weight- manag ement- before- 
during- and- after- pregn ancy- pdf- 19962 42046405
 53. Pan JR, Li TY, Tucker D, Chen KY. Pregnancy outcomes in women 
with active anorexia nervosa: a systematic review. J Eat Disord. Feb 
16 2022;10(1):25. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s40337- 022- 00551- 8
 54. Kjær MM, Lauenborg J, Breum BM, Nilas L. The risk of adverse preg -
nancy outcome after bariatric surgery: a nationwide register- based 
matched cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol Jun 2013;208(6):464.
e1-5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2013. 02. 046
 55. Johansson K, Cnattingius S, Näslund I, et  al. Outcomes of preg -
nancy after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. Feb 26 2015;372(9):814–
24. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ NEJMo a1405789
 56. Kwong W, Tomlinson G, Feig DS. Maternal and neonatal outcomes 
after bariatric surgery; a systematic review and meta- analysis: 
do the benefits outweigh the risks? Am J Obstet Gynecol. 06 
2018;218(6):573–80. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2018. 02. 003
 57. Kramer MS. Determinants of low birth weight: methodolog -
ical assessment and meta- analysis. Bull World Health Organ. 
1987;65(5):663–737.
 58. Alexander GR, Wingate MS, Mor J, Boulet S. Birth outcomes of 
Asian- Indian- Americans. Int J Gynaecol Obstet Jun 2007;97(3):215–
20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ijgo. 2007. 02. 017
 59. Stacey T, Prady S, Haith- Cooper M, Downe S, Simpson N, Pickett 
K. Ethno- Specific Risk Factors for Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes: 
Findings from the Born in Bradford Cohort Study. Matern 
Child Health J 07 2016;20(7):1394–404. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10995- 016- 1936- x
 60. Sheikh J, Allotey J, Kew T, et al. Effects of race and ethnicity on 
perinatal outcomes in high- income and upper- middle- income 
countries: an individual participant data meta- analysis of 2 198 655 
pregnancies. Lancet Dec 10 2022;400(10368):2049–62. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/ s0140- 6736(22) 01191- 6
 61. Relph S, Vieira MC, Copas A, et al. The DESiGN Trial Team and 
DESiGN Collaborative Group. Characteristics associated with 
antenatally unidentified small- for- gestational- age fetuses: pro -
spective cohort study nested within DESiGN randomized con-
trolled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 2023;61(3):356–66. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 26091 
 62. Shah PS, on behalf of Knowledge Synthesis Group on Determinants 
of LBW/PT births. Parity and low birth weight and preterm birth: 
a systematic review and meta- analyses. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 
Jul 2010;89(7):862–75. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 00016 349. 2010. 
486827
 63. Blumenshine P, Egerter S, Barclay CJ, Cubbin C, Braveman PA. 
Socioeconomic disparities in adverse birth outcomes: a systematic 
review. Am J Prev Med Sep 2010;39(3):263–72. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. amepre. 2010. 05. 012
 64. Shah PS, Zao J, Ali S, on behalf of Knowledge Synthesis Group 
on Determinants of LBW/PT births. Maternal marital status and 
birth outcomes: a systematic review and meta- analyses. Matern 
Child Health J Oct 2011;15(7):1097–109. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10995- 010- 0654- z
 65. Shah PS, Shah V, on behalf of Knowledge Synthesis Group on 
Determinants of LBW/PT births. Influence of the maternal birth 
status on offspring: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Acta 
Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2009;88(12):1307–18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
3109/ 00016 34090 3358820
 66. Conde- Agudelo A, Rosas- Bermúdez A, Kafury- Goeta AC. Birth 
spacing and risk of adverse perinatal outcomes: a meta- analysis. 
JAMA. Apr 19 2006;295(15):1809–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jama. 
295. 15. 1809
 67. Pastorino S, Bishop T, Crozier SR, et al. Associations between ma -
ternal physical activity in early and late pregnancy and offspring 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e67
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
birth size: remote federated individual level meta- analysis from 
eight cohort studies. BJOG Mar 2019;126(4):459–70. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 15476 
 68. Panagiotopoulos M, Tseke P, Michala L. Obstetric Complications 
in Women With Congenital Uterine Anomalies According to the 
2013 European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology 
and the European Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy 
Classification: A Systematic Review and Meta- analysis. Obstet 
Gynecol Jan 1 2022;139(1):138–48. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ aog. 
00000 00000 004627
 69. Patra J, Bakker R, Irving H, Jaddoe VW, Malini S, Rehm J. Dose- 
response relationship between alcohol consumption before and 
during pregnancy and the risks of low birthweight, preterm birth 
and small for gestational age (SGA)- a systematic review and meta- 
analyses. BJOG Nov 2011;118(12):1411–21. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 
1471- 0528. 2011. 03050. x
 70. Mamluk L, Edwards HB, Savović J, et al. Low alcohol consumption 
and pregnancy and childhood outcomes: time to change guide -
lines indicating apparently 'safe' levels of alcohol during preg -
nancy? A systematic review and meta- analyses. BMJ Open Aug 03 
2017;7(7):e015410. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmjop en- 2016- 015410
 71. Gouin K, Murphy K, Shah PS, on behalf of Knowledge Synthesis 
Group on Determinants of LBW/PT births. Effects of cocaine 
use during pregnancy on low birthweight and preterm birth: 
systematic review and metaanalyses. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Apr 
2011;204(4):340.e1-12. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2010. 11. 013
 72. Dos Santos JF, de Melo Bastos Cavalcante C, Barbosa FT, et  al. 
Maternal, fetal and neonatal consequences associated with the use 
of crack cocaine during the gestational period: a systematic review 
and meta- analysis. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 09 2018;298(3):487–503. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00404- 018- 4833- 2
 73. Metz TD, Stickrath EH. Marijuana use in pregnancy and lactation: 
a review of the evidence. Am J Obstet Gynecol Dec 2015;213(6):761–
78. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2015. 05. 025
 74. Haug K, Irgens LM, Skjaerven R, Markestad T, Baste V, Schreuder 
P. Maternal smoking and birthweight: effect modification of period, 
maternal age and paternal smoking. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Jun 
2000;79(6):485–9.
 75. Brand JS, Gaillard R, West J, et al. Associations of maternal quitting, 
reducing, and continuing smoking during pregnancy with longitu -
dinal fetal growth: Findings from Mendelian randomization and pa-
rental negative control studies. PLoS Med Nov 2019;16(11):e1002972. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pmed. 1002972
 76. McCowan L, Dekker G, Chan E, et al. Spontaneous preterm birth 
and small for gestational age infants in women who stop smoking 
early in pregnancy: prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2009;338:b338.
 77. Bickerstaff M, Beckmann M, Gibbons K, Flenady V. Recent cessa -
tion of smoking and its effect on pregnancy outcomes. Aust N Z 
J Obstet Gynaecol Feb 2012;52(1):54–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 
1479- 828X. 2011. 01387. x
 78. Polakowski LL, Akinbami LJ, Mendola P. Prenatal smoking cessa -
tion and the risk of delivering preterm and small- for- gestational- 
age newborns. Obstet Gynecol Aug 2009;114(2 Pt 1):318–25. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 0b013 e3181 ae9e9c
 79. Hoyt AT, Canfield MA, Romitti PA, et al. Does Maternal Exposure 
to Secondhand Tobacco Smoke During Pregnancy Increase the 
Risk for Preterm or Small- for- Gestational Age Birth? Matern 
Child Health J Oct 2018;22(10):1418–29. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10995- 018- 2522- 1
 80. Wen X, Thomas MA, Liu L, et al. Association between maternal e- 
cigarette use during pregnancy and low gestational weight gain. Int 
J Gynaecol Obstet Jul 2023;162(1):300–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 
ijgo. 14672 
 81. Taylor L, Claire R, Campbell K, et al. Fetal safety of nicotine replacement 
therapy in pregnancy: systematic review and meta- analysis. Addiction 
Feb 2021;116(2):239–77. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ add. 15185 
 82. Hajek P, Przulj D, Pesola F, et al. Electronic cigarettes versus nic-
otine patches for smoking cessation in pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial. Nat Med May 2022;28(5):958–64. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1038/ s41591- 022- 01808- 0
 83. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Tobacco: pre -
venting uptake,promoting quitting and treating dependence . NICE 
Guideline [NG209]. London: NICE; 2021. Accessed 21st June. 2023 
https:// www. nice. org. uk/ guida nce/ ng209 
 84. Sengpiel V, Elind E, Bacelis J, et al. Maternal caffeine intake during 
pregnancy is associated with birth weight but not with gesta -
tional length: results from a large prospective observational co -
hort study. BMC Med. Feb 19 2013;11:42. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 
1741- 7015- 11- 42
 85. CARE Study Group. Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and 
risk of fetal growth restriction: a large prospective observational study. 
BMJ Nov 03 2008;337:a2332. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. a2332 
 86. NHS England. Foods to avoid in pregnancy. NHS. https:// www. nhs. 
uk/ pregn ancy/ keepi ng- well/ foods- to- avoid/ 
 87. Pandey S, Shetty A, Hamilton M, Bhattacharya S, Maheshwari A. 
Obstetric and perinatal outcomes in singleton pregnancies result -
ing from IVF/ICSI: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Hum 
Reprod Update 2012 Sep-Oct 2012;18(5):485–503. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1093/ humupd/ dms018
 88. Shah PS, on behalf of Knowledge Synthesis Group on Determinants 
of LBW/PT births. Paternal factors and low birthweight, preterm, 
and small for gestational age births: a systematic review. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. Feb 2010;202(2):103–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
ajog. 2009. 08. 026
 89. Khandwala YS, Baker VL, Shaw GM, Stevenson DK, Lu Y , Eisenberg 
ML. Association of paternal age with perinatal outcomes between 
2007 and 2016 in the United States: population based cohort study. 
BMJ Oct 31 2018;363:k4372. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. k4372 
 90. Bandoli G, Lindsay S, Johnson DL, Kao K, Luo Y, Chambers CD. 
Change in paternity and select perinatal outcomes: causal or con-
founded? J Obstet Gynaecol Oct 2012;32(7):657–62. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 3109/ 01443 615. 2012. 698669
 91. Bilagi A, Burke DL, Riley RD, Mills I, Kilby MD, Morris RK. 
Association of maternal serum PAPP- A levels, nuchal translu -
cency and crown- rump length in first trimester with adverse 
pregnancy outcomes: retrospective cohort study. Prenat Diagn Jul 
2017;37(7):705–11. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ pd. 5069
 92. Smith GC, Crossley JA, Aitken DA, et al. First- trimester pla -
centation and the risk of antepartum stillbirth. JAMA Nov 10 
2004;292(18):2249–54. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jama. 292. 18. 2249
 93. Morris RK, Bilagi A, Devani P, Kilby MD. Association of serum 
PAPP- A levels in first trimester with small for gestational age and 
adverse pregnancy outcomes: systematic review and meta- analysis. 
Prenat Diagn Mar 2017;37(3):253–65. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ pd. 
5001
 94. Morris RK, Cnossen JS, Langejans M, et al. Serum screening with 
Down's syndrome markers to predict pre- eclampsia and small 
for gestational age: systematic review and meta- analysis. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth Aug 04 2008;8:33. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 
1471- 2393-8- 33
 95. Ormesher L, Warrander L, Liu Y, et  al. Risk stratification for 
early- onset fetal growth restriction in women with abnormal 
serum biomarkers: a retrospective cohort study. Sci Rep. 12 17 
2020;10(1):22259. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 020- 78631- 5
 96. Cooper S, Johnson JA, Metcalfe A, et al. The predictive value of 18 
and 22 week uterine artery Doppler in patients with low first trimes -
ter maternal serum PAPP- A. Prenat Diagn Mar 2009;29(3):248–52. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ pd. 2175
 97. Singnoi W, Wanapirak C, Sekararithi R, Tongsong T. A cohort 
study of the association between maternal serum Inhibin- A and 
adverse pregnancy outcomes: a population- based study. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. Apr 11 2019;19(1):124. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1186/ s12884- 019- 2266- y
 98. Toal M, Chan C, Fallah S, et al. Usefulness of a placental profile in 
high- risk pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol Apr 2007;196(4):363.
e1-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2006. 10. 897
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e68 | 
MORRIS et al .
 99. Kantomaa T, Vääräsmäki M, Gissler M, Sairanen M, Nevalainen J. 
First trimester low maternal serum pregnancy associated plasma 
protein- A (PAPP- A) as a screening method for adverse pregnancy 
outcomes. J Perinat Med May 25 2023;51(4):500–9. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1515/ jpm- 2022- 0241
 100. Gagnon A, Wilson RD, Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
of Canada Genetics Committee. Obstetrical complications asso -
ciated with abnormal maternal serum markers analytes. J Obstet 
Gynaecol Can Oct 2008;30(10):918–32. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
S1701- 2163(16) 32973- 5
 101. Zhong Y, Zhu F, Ding Y. Serum screening in first trimester to pre -
dict pre- eclampsia, small for gestational age and preterm delivery: 
systematic review and meta- analysis. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 
Aug 25 2015;15:191. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12884- 015- 0608- y
 102. Papastefanou I, Wright D, Lolos M, Anampousi K, Mamalis M, 
Nicolaides KH. Competing- risks model for prediction of small- 
for- gestational- age neonate from maternal characteristics, serum 
pregnancy- associated plasma protein- A and placental growth 
factor at 11- 13 weeks' gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 
2021;57(3):392–400. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 23118 
 103. Boutin A, Gasse C, Demers S, Blanchet G, Giguère Y, Bujold E. Does 
Low PAPP- A Predict Adverse Placenta- Mediated Outcomes in a 
Low- Risk Nulliparous Population? the Great Obstetrical Syndromes 
(GOS) Study. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 06 2018;40(6):663–8. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jogc. 2017. 08. 047
 104. Wenstrom KD, Hauth JC, Goldenberg RL, DuBard MB, Lea C. The 
effect of low- dose aspirin on pregnancies complicated by elevated 
human chorionic gonadotropin levels. Am J Obstet Gynecol Oct 
1995;173(4):1292–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0002- 9378(95) 91373- 4
 105. NHS England. Fetal anomaly screening programme handbook. 
https:// www. gov. uk/ gover nment/ publi catio ns/ fetal- anoma ly- scree 
ning- progr amme- handbook
 106. Goetzinger KR, Cahill AG, Macones GA, Odibo AO. Echogenic 
bowel on second- trimester ultrasonography: evaluating the risk of 
adverse pregnancy outcome. Obstet Gynecol Jun 2011;117(6):1341–
8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 0b013 e3182 1aa739
 107. Hurt L, Wright M, Dunstan F, Thomas S, et al. Prevalence of defined 
ultrasound findings of unknown significance at the second trimes -
ter fetal anomaly scan and their association with adverse pregnancy 
outcomes: the Welsh study of mothers and babies population- based 
cohort. Prenat Diagn Jan 2016;36(1):40–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 
pd. 4708
 108. Kim HJ, Kim JH, Chay DB, Park JH, Kim MA. Association of iso -
lated single umbilical artery with perinatal outcomes: Systemic re -
view and meta- analysis. Obstet Gynecol Sci May 2017;60(3):266–73. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 5468/ ogs. 2017. 60.3. 266
 109. Dagklis T, Siargkas A, Apostolopoulou A, et al. Adverse perinatal 
outcomes following the prenatal diagnosis of isolated single umbil-
ical artery in singleton pregnancies: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. J Perinat Med. Mar 28 2022;50(3):244–52. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1515/ jpm- 2021- 0260
 110. Battarbee AN, Palatnik A, Ernst LM, Grobman WA. Association 
of Isolated Single Umbilical Artery With Small for Gestational Age 
and Preterm Birth. Obstet Gynecol Oct 2015;126(4):760–4. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 00000 00000 001037
 111. Bukowski R, Hansen NI, Pinar H, et al. Altered fetal growth, pla -
cental abnormalities, and stillbirth. PloS One. 2017;12(8):e0182874. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 0182874
 112. Gutvirtz G, Walfisch A, Beharier O, Sheiner E. Isolated single um -
bilical artery is an independent risk factor for perinatal mortality 
and adverse outcomes in term neonates. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 11 
2016;294(5):931–5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00404- 016- 4088- 8
 113. NHS England National Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme. 
Guidance the 20- week screening scan. Accessed 21st June. 2023 
https:// www. gov. uk/ gover nment/ publi catio ns/ fetal- anoma ly- scree 
ning- progr amme- handb ook/ 20- week- scree ning- scan
 114. Saraswat L, Bhattacharya S, Maheshwari A. Maternal and peri -
natal outcome in women with threatened miscarriage in the first trimester: a systematic review. BJOG Feb 2010;117(3):245–57. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2009. 02427. x
 115. Magann EF, Cummings JE, Niederhauser A, Rodriguez- Thompson 
D, McCormack R, Chauhan SP. Antepartum bleeding of unknown 
origin in the second half of pregnancy: a review. Obstet Gynecol 
Surv Nov 2005;60(11):741–5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 01. ogx. 00001 
82881. 53139. f7
 116. Balayla J, Desilets J, Shrem G. Placenta previa and the risk of intra -
uterine growth restriction (IUGR): a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. J Perinat Med Aug 27 2019;47(6):577–84. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1515/ jpm- 2019- 0116
 117. Allen VM, Joseph K, Murphy KE, Magee LA, Ohlsson A. The effect 
of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy on small for gestational age 
and stillbirth: a population based study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 
Aug 06 2004;4(1):17. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 1471- 2393-4- 17
 118. Gunnarsdottir J, Akhter T, Högberg U, Cnattingius S, Wikström 
AK. Elevated diastolic blood pressure until mid- gestation is as -
sociated with preeclampsia and small- for- gestational- age birth: a 
population- based register study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth May 
28 2019;19(1):186. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12884- 019- 2319- 2, 186
 119. Zhu B, Huang K, Bao W, et al. Dose- response relationship between 
maternal blood pressure in pregnancy and risk of adverse birth 
outcomes: Ma'anshan birth cohort study. Pregnancy Hypertens Jan 
2019;15:16–22. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. preghy. 2018. 09. 004
 120. Wei SQ, Bilodeau- Bertrand M, Liu S, Auger N. The impact of 
COVID- 19 on pregnancy outcomes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Cmaj. Apr 19 2021;193(16):E540-e548. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1503/ cmaj. 202604
 121. Villar J, Ariff S, Gunier RB, et al. Maternal and Neonatal Morbidity 
and Mortality Among Pregnant Women With and Without 
COVID- 19 Infection: The INTERCOVID Multinational Cohort 
Study. JAMA Pediatr Aug 1 2021;175(8):817–26. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1001/ jamap ediat rics. 2021. 1050
 122. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Coronavirus 
(COVID- 19) infection in Pregnancy. Information for healthcare 
professionals. RCOG: London; 2022. Accessed 21st June, 2023. 
https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ media/ ftzil sfj/ 2022- 12- 15- coron avirus- 
covid- 19- infec tion- in- pregn ancy- v16. pdf
 123. González- González NL, González- Dávila E, González Marrero L, 
Padrón E, Conde JR, Plasencia W. Value of placental volume and 
vascular flow indices as predictors of intrauterine growth retarda -
tion. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol May 2017;212:13–9. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2017. 03. 005
 124. Boucoiran I, Djemli A, Taillefer C, Rypens F, Delvin E, Audibert 
F. First- trimester prediction of birth weight. Am J Perinatol Sep 
2013;30(8):665–72. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1055/s- 0032- 1331023
 125. Macdonald- Wallis C, Silverwood RJ, de Stavola BL, Inskip H, 
Cooper C, Godfrey KM, Crozier S, et al. Antenatal blood pressure 
for prediction of pre- eclampsia, preterm birth, and small for gesta -
tional age babies: development and validation in two general popu -
lation cohorts. BMJ Nov 17 2015;351:h5948. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ 
bmj. h5948 
 126. Syngelaki A, Bredaki FE, Vaikousi E, Maiz N, Nicolaides KH. Body 
mass index at 11- 13 weeks' gestation and pregnancy complications. 
Fetal Diagn Ther. 2011;30(4):250–65. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00032 
8083
 127. Seed PT, Chappell LC, Black MA, et  al. Prediction of preeclamp -
sia and delivery of small for gestational age babies based on a com -
bination of clinical risk factors in high- risk women. Hypertens 
Pregnancy. 2011;30(1):58–73. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 10641 955. 
2010. 486460
 128. McCowan LM, Thompson JM, Taylor RS, et  al. Prediction of 
Small for Gestational Age Infants in Healthy Nulliparous Women 
Using Clinical and Ultrasound Risk Factors Combined with Early 
Pregnancy Biomarkers. PloS One. 2017;12(1):e0169311. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 0169311
 129. Meertens L, Smits L, van Kuijk S, et al. External validation 
and clinical usefulness of first- trimester prediction models for 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e69
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
small- and large- for- gestational- age infants: a prospective cohort 
study. BJOG Mar 2019;126(4):472–84. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 
1471- 0528. 15516 
 130. Nicolaides KH, Papastefanou I, Syngelaki A, Ashoor G, Akolekar R. 
Predictive performance for placental dysfunction related stillbirth of 
the competing risks model for small- for- gestational- age fetuses. BJOG 
Aug 2022;129(9):1530–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 17066 
 131. Ota E, Hori H, Mori R, Tobe- Gai R, Farrar D. Antenatal dietary ed-
ucation and supplementation to increase energy and protein intake. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Jun 02 2015;(6):CD000032. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD000 032. pub3
 132. Crovetto F, Crispi F, Casas R, et al. Effects of Mediterranean Diet 
or Mindfulness- Based Stress Reduction on Prevention of Small- 
for- Gestational Age Birth Weights in Newborns Born to At- Risk 
Pregnant Individuals: The IMPACT BCN Randomized Clinical 
Trial. JAMA Dec 07 2021;326(21):2150–60. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ 
jama. 2021. 20178 
 133. Middleton P, Gomersall JC, Gould JF, Shepherd E, Olsen SF, 
Makrides M. Omega- 3 fatty acid addition during pregnancy. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11 15 2018;11:CD003402. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD003 402. pub3
 134. Keats EC, Haider BA, Tam E, Bhutta ZA. Multiple- micronutrient 
supplementation for women during pregnancy. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 03 14 2019;3:CD004905. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. 
CD004 905. pub6
 135. Brough L, Rees GA, Crawford MA, Morton RH, Dorman EK. Effect 
of multiple- micronutrient supplementation on maternal nutrient 
status, infant birth weight and gestational age at birth in a low- 
income, multi- ethnic population. Br J Nutr Aug 2010;104(3):437–45. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S0007 11451 0000747
 136. Wen SW , White RR, Rybak N, et al. Effect of high dose folic acid sup-
plementation in pregnancy on pre- eclampsia (FACT): double blind, 
phase III, randomised controlled, international, multicentre trial. BMJ. 
2018;09(12):362, k3478. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. k3478 
 137. Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah AN, Duley L. Calcium supplementation 
during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive disorders and related 
problems. Cochrane Database Syst Rev Aug 04 2010;(8):CD001059. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD001 059. pub3
 138. Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah Á, Torloni MR. Calcium sup -
plementation during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive dis -
orders and related problems. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10 01 
2018;10:CD001059. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD001 059. 
pub5
 139. Hofmeyr GJ, Betrán AP, Singata- Madliki M, et al. Prepregnancy and 
early pregnancy calcium supplementation among women at high 
risk of pre- eclampsia: a multicentre, double- blind, randomised, 
placebo- controlled trial. Lancet. 01 26 2019;393(10169):330–9. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(18) 31818- X
 140. Makrides M, Crosby DD, Bain E, Crowther CA. Magnesium sup-
plementation in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Apr 03 
2014;(4):CD000937. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD000 937. pub2
 141. De- Regil LM, Palacios C, Lombardo LK, Peña- Rosas JP. Vitamin D 
supplementation for women during pregnancy. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev Jan 14 2016;(1):CD008873. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 
858. CD008 873. pub3
 142. Thorne- Lyman A, Fawzi WW. Vitamin D during pregnancy and 
maternal, neonatal and infant health outcomes: a systematic review 
and meta- analysis. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol Jul 2012;26 Suppl 
1:75–90. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1365- 3016. 2012. 01283. x
 143. Roth DE, Leung M, Mesfin E, Qamar H, Watterworth J, Papp E. 
Vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy: state of the evi -
dence from a systematic review of randomised trials. BMJ Nov 29 
2017;359:j5237. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. j5237 
 144. Fogacci S, Fogacci F, Banach M, et al. Vitamin D supplementation 
and incident preeclampsia: A systematic review and meta- analysis 
of randomized clinical trials. Clin Nutr. 06 2020;39(6):1742–52. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. clnu. 2019. 08. 015 145. Chamberlain C, O'Mara- Eves A, Porter J, Coleman T, Perlen SM, 
Thomas J, McKenzie JE, Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth 
Group. Psychosocial interventions for supporting women to 
stop smoking in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 02 14 
2017;2:CD001055. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD001 055. 
pub5
 146. Action on Smoking and Health. Using e- cigarettes before, during 
and after pregnancy. Accessed 21st June. 2023 https:// ash. org. uk/ 
resou rces/ smoke free- nhs/ smoki ng- in- pregn ancy- chall enge- group/ 
using-e- cigar ettes- before- during- and- after- pregn ancy
 147. Say L, Gülmezoglu AM, Hofmeyr GJ. Maternal nutrient supple -
mentation for suspected impaired fetal growth. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2003;(1):CD000148. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. 
CD000148
 148. Duley L, Meher S, Hunter KE, Seidler AL, Askie LM. Antiplatelet 
agents for preventing pre- eclampsia and its complications. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 10 30 2019;2019(10)https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1002/ 14651 858. CD004 659. pub3
 149. Bujold E, Roberge S, Lacasse Y, et al. Prevention of preeclampsia and 
intrauterine growth restriction with aspirin started in early preg -
nancy: a meta- analysis. Obstet Gynecol Aug 2010;116(2 Pt 1):402–
14. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 0b013 e3181 e9322a
 150. Roberge S, Bujold E, Nicolaides KH. Aspirin for the prevention of 
preterm and term preeclampsia: systematic review and metaanal -
ysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol Mar 2018;218(3):287-293.e1. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2017. 11. 561
 151. Meher S, Duley L, Hunter K, Askie L. Antiplatelet therapy before 
or after 16 weeks' gestation for preventing preeclampsia: an indi -
vidual participant data meta- analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol Feb 
2017;216(2):121–128.e2. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2016. 10. 016
 152. Roberge S, Nicolaides K, Demers S, Hyett J, Chaillet N, Bujold E. 
The role of aspirin dose on the prevention of preeclampsia and 
fetal growth restriction: systematic review and meta- analysis. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol Feb 2017;216(2):110-120.e6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. ajog. 2016. 09. 076
 153. Hermida RC, Ayala DE, Iglesias M, et  al. Time- dependent effects 
of low- dose aspirin administration on blood pressure in pregnant 
women. Hypertension Sep 1997;30(3 Pt 2):589–95. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1161/ 01. hyp. 30.3. 589
 154. Mendoza M, Carreras E, Suy A. Aspirin Discontinuation in 
Pregnancies at High Risk of Preterm Preeclampsia- Reply. JAMA 
2023:1988–1989. vol. 22.
 155. Hastie R, Tong S, Wikström AK, Sandström A, Hesselman S, 
Bergman L. Aspirin use during pregnancy and the risk of bleed-
ing complications: a Swedish population- based cohort study. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol Jan 2021;224(1):95.e1-95.e12. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. ajog. 2020. 07. 023
 156. Dodd JM, McLeod A, Windrim RC, Kingdom J. Antithrombotic 
therapy for improving maternal or infant health outcomes in women 
considered at risk of placental dysfunction. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev Jul 24 2013;(7):CD006780. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. 
CD006 780. pub3
 157. Mastrolia SA, Novack L, Thachil J, et al. LMWH in the prevention 
of preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction in women without 
thrombophilia. A systematic review and meta- analysis. Thromb 
Haemost Oct 28 2016;116(5):868–78. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1160/ 
TH16- 02- 0169
 158. Haddad B, Winer N, Chitrit Y, et  al. Enoxaparin and Aspirin 
Compared With Aspirin Alone to Prevent Placenta- Mediated 
Pregnancy Complications: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet 
Gynecol. 11 2016;128(5):1053–63. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 
00000 00000 001673
 159. Groom KM, McCowan LM, Mackay LK, et al. Enoxaparin for the 
prevention of preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction in 
women with a history: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
Mar 2017;216(3):296.e1-296.e14. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2017. 
01. 014
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e70 | 
MORRIS et al .
 160. Martinelli I, Ruggenenti P, Cetin I, et  al. Heparin in pregnant 
women with previous placenta- mediated pregnancy complica -
tions: a prospective, randomized, multicenter, controlled clinical 
trial. Blood. Apr 05 2012;119(14):3269–75. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1182/ 
blood- 2011- 11- 391383
 161. Abheiden C, Van Hoorn ME, Hague WM, Kostense PJ, van Pampus 
MG, de Vries J. Does low- molecular- weight heparin influence fetal 
growth or uterine and umbilical arterial Doppler in women with a 
history of early- onset uteroplacental insufficiency and an inherit -
able thrombophilia? Secondary randomised controlled trial results 
BJOG Apr 2016;123(5):797–805. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 
13421 
 162. Rodger MA, Gris JC, de Vries JIP, et al. Low- molecular- weight hep -
arin and recurrent placenta- mediated pregnancy complications: 
a meta- analysis of individual patient data from randomised con-
trolled trials. Lancet. 11 26 2016;388(10060):2629–41. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(16) 31139- 4
 163. Meher S, Duley L. Progesterone for preventing pre- eclampsia 
and its complications. Cochrane Database Syst Rev Oct 18 
2006;(4):CD006175. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD006175
 164. Norman JE, Marlow N, Messow CM, et al. Vaginal progesterone pro-
phylaxis for preterm birth (the OPPTIMUM study): a multicentre, 
randomised, double- blind trial. Lancet. 05 21 2016;387(10033):2106–
16. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(16) 00350- 0
 165. Hassan SS, Romero R, Vidyadhari D, et al. for the PREGNANT 
Trial. Vaginal progesterone reduces the rate of preterm birth in 
women with a sonographic short cervix: a multicenter, randomized, 
double- blind, placebo- controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
Jul 2011;38(1):18–31. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 9017
 166. Guillotin V, Bouhet A, Barnetche T, et al. Hydroxychloroquine for 
the prevention of fetal growth restriction and prematurity in lupus 
pregnancy: A systematic review and meta- analysis. Joint Bone 
Spine. 12 2018;85(6):663–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jbspin. 2018. 03. 
006
 167. Mekinian A, Costedoat- Chalumeau N, Masseau A, et al., on the be -
half of the SNFMI and the European Forum of APS Chronic histio -
cytic intervillositis: outcome, associated diseases and treatment in a 
multicenter prospective study. Autoimmunity Feb 2015;48(1):40–5. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 08916 934. 2014. 939267
 168. Vardi L, Paterson H, Hung NA. Successful pregnancy following 
treatment of recurrent chronic histiocytic intervillositis. BMJ Case 
Rep Jan 10 2017;2017 https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bcr- 2016- 217886 , 2017, 
bcr2016217886
 169. Abalos E, Duley L, Steyn DW, Gialdini C. Antihypertensive drug 
therapy for mild to moderate hypertension during pregnancy. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10 01 2018;10:CD002252. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD002 252. pub4
 170. Katsi V, Papakonstantinou IP, Papazachou O, Makris T, Tsioufis K. 
Beta- Blockers in Pregnancy: Clinical Update. Curr Hypertens Rep 
Feb 2023;25(2):13–24. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11906- 023- 01234- 8
 171. Bais JM, Eskes M, Pel M, Bonsel GJ, Bleker OP. Effectiveness of de -
tection of intrauterine growth retardation by abdominal palpation 
as screening test in a low risk population: an observational study. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol Oct 15 2004;116(2):164–9. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2004. 01. 037
 172. Kean L, Liu D. Antenatal care as a screening tool for the detection of 
small for gestational age babies in the low risk population. J Obstet 
Gynaecol. 1996;16:77–82.
 173. Hall MH, Chng PK, MacGillivray I. Is routine antenatal care worth 
while? Lancet Jul 12 1980;2(8185):78–80. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
s0140- 6736(80) 92950- 5
 174. Rosenberg K, Grant JM, Hepburn M. Antenatal detection of growth 
retardation: actual practice in a large maternity hospital. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol Jan 1982;89(1):12–5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 
1982. tb046 26. x
 175. Magee LA, Ornstein MP, von Dadelszen P. Fortnightly re -
view: management of hypertension in pregnancy. BMJ May 15 
1999;318(7194):1332–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. 318. 7194. 1332 176. Robert Peter J, Ho JJ, Valliapan J, Sivasangari S. Symphysial fundal 
height (SFH) measurement in pregnancy for detecting abnormal 
fetal growth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev Sep 08 2015;(9):CD008136. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD008 136. pub3 , CD008136
 177. Pay ASD, Frøen JF, Staff AC, Jacobsson B, Gjessing HK. Symphysis- 
fundus measurement - the predictive value of a new reference curve. 
Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 05 2017;137(10):717–20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
4045/ tidss kr. 16. 1022
 178. Morse K, Williams A, Gardosi J. Fetal growth screening by fundal 
height measurement. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol Dec 
2009;23(6):809–18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. bpobg yn. 2009. 09. 
004
 179. Bailey SM, Sarmandal P, Grant JM. A comparison of three meth -
ods of assessing inter- observer variation applied to measure -
ment of the symphysis- fundal height. Br J Obstet Gynaecol Nov 
1989;96(11):1266–71. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 1989. tb032 
23. x
 180. Gardosi J, Francis A. Controlled trial of fundal height measure -
ment plotted on customised antenatal growth charts. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol Apr 1999;106(4):309–17.
 181. Papageorghiou AT, Ohuma EO, Gravett MG, et al., International 
Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century 
(INTERGROWTH- 21st). International standards for symphysis- 
fundal height based on serial measurements from the Fetal Growth 
Longitudinal Study of the INTERGROWTH- 21st Project: prospec-
tive cohort study in eight countries. BMJ Nov 07 2016;355:i5662. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. i5662 
 182. Papageorghiou AT, Ohuma EO, Altman DG, et al., International 
Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century 
(INTERGROWTH- 21st). International standards for fetal growth 
based on serial ultrasound measurements: the Fetal Growth 
Longitudinal Study of the INTERGROWTH- 21st Project. Lancet 
Sep 06 2014;384(9946):869–79. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 
6736(14) 61490- 2
 183. Bricker L, Medley N, Pratt JJ. Routine ultrasound in late pregnancy 
(after 24 weeks' gestation). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Jun 29 
2015;(6):CD001451. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD001 451. 
pub4
 184. GC S, AA M, D W et al. Universal late pregnancy ultrasound screen-
ing to predict adverse outcomes in nulliparous women: a system -
atic review and cost- effectiveness analysis. Health Technol Assess. 
2021;25(15):1–190.
 185. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Antenatal care 
Routine Third Trimester ultrasound for fetal growth . NICE Guideline 
[NG201]. London: NICE; 2021. Accessed 21st June. 2023 https:// 
www. nice. org. uk/ guida nce/ ng201/ evide nce/q- routi ne- third- trime 
ster- ultra sound- for- fetal- growth- pdf- 33130 5934364
 186. Wanyonyi SZ, Orwa J, Ozelle H, et al. Routine third- trimester ul-
trasound for the detection of small- for- gestational age in low- 
risk pregnancies (ROTTUS study): randomized controlled trial. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jun 2021;57(6):910–6. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1002/ uog. 23618 
 187. Sovio U, White IR, Dacey A, Pasupathy D, Smith GCS. Screening 
for fetal growth restriction with universal third trimester ultra -
sonography in nulliparous women in the Pregnancy Outcome 
Prediction (POP) study: a prospective cohort study. Lancet. 11 21 
2015;386(10008):2089–97. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(15) 
00131- 2
 188. Aderoba AK, Ioannou C, Kurinczuk JJ, Quigley MA, Cavallaro A, 
Impey L. The impact of a universal late third- trimester scan for fetal 
growth restriction on perinatal outcomes in term singleton births: 
A prospective cohort study. BJOG Jun 2023;130(7):791–802. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 17395 
 189. Bonnevier A, Maršál K, Källén K. Detection and clinical outcome 
of small- for- gestational- age fetuses in the third trimester- A com -
parison between routine ultrasound examination and examination 
on indication. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Jan 2022;101(1):102–10. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ aogs. 14278 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e71
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
 190. Caradeux J, Martinez- Portilla RJ, Peguero A, Sotiriadis A, Figueras 
F. Diagnostic performance of third- trimester ultrasound for the 
prediction of late- onset fetal growth restriction: a systematic review 
and meta- analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol May 2019;220(5):449-459.
e19. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2018. 09. 043
 191. Monier I, Blondel B, Ego A, Kaminiski M, Goffinet F, Zeitlin J. Poor 
effectiveness of antenatal detection of fetal growth restriction and 
consequences for obstetric management and neonatal outcomes: a 
French national study. BJOG Mar 2015;122(4):518–27. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 13148 
 192. The British Medical Ultrasound Society. Professional guidance for 
fetal growth scans performed after 23 weeks of gestation. London: 
BMUS; London: SoR & BMUS; 2022 https:// www. bmus. org/ polic 
ies- state ments- guide lines/ profe ssion al- guida nce/ guida nce- pages/ 
profe ssion al- guida nce- for- fetal- growth- scans- perfo rmed- after- 23- 
weeks- of- gesta tion/ 
 193. Society of Radiographers and the British Society for Medical 
Ultrasound. Guidelines for Professional Ultrasound Practice. 2022 
https:// www. sor. org/ getme dia/ d4920 fb9- 043c- 47a0- b425- d3545 
aea73 b0/ SoR- and- BMUS- guide lines- 2022- 7th- Ed- docx
 194. Fadigas C, Saiid Y, Gonzalez R, Poon LC, Nicolaides KH. Prediction 
of small- for- gestational- age neonates: screening by fetal biometry 
at 35- 37 weeks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol May 2015;45(5):559–65. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 14816 
 195. Southam M, Williams M, Malik A, Gardosi J. Effect of serial scan 
frequency on detection of fetal growth restriction. Arch Dis Child 
Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2014;99(Supplement 1):A104 A104.1, A1A104.
 196. Mongelli M, Ek S, Tambyrajia R. Screening for fetal growth restric-
tion: a mathematical model of the effect of time interval and ultra -
sound error. Obstet Gynecol Dec 1998;92(6):908–12. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/ s0029- 7844(98) 00349- 4
 197. Roberts R, Sibai B, Blackwell S, Chauhan S. Timing of serial ultra -
sound in t risk pregnancies: a randomized controlled trial (SUN 
trial). Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018;218:S3_S4–S4.
 198. Chang TC, Robson SC, Boys RJ, Spencer JA. Prediction of the small 
for gestational age infant: which ultrasonic measurement is best? 
Obstet Gynecol Dec 1992;80(6):1030–8.
 199. Chauhan SP, Magann EF. Screening for fetal growth restriction. 
Clin Obstet Gynecol Jun 2006;49(2):284–94. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1097/ 00003 081- 20060 6000- 00010 
 200. Blue NR, Yordan JMP, Holbrook BD, Nirgudkar PA, Mozurkewich 
EL. Abdominal Circumference Alone versus Estimated Fetal 
Weight after 24 Weeks to Predict Small or Large for Gestational Age 
at Birth: A Meta- Analysis. Am J Perinatol. 09 2017;34(11):1115–24. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1055/s- 0037- 1604059
 201. Pearce JM, Campbell S. A comparison of symphysis- fundal height 
and ultrasound as screening tests for light- for- gestational age in-
fants. Br J Obstet Gynaecol Feb 1987;94(2):100–4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1111/j. 1471- 0528. 1987. tb023 33. x
 202. Hammami A, Mazer Zumaeta A, Syngelaki A, Akolekar R, 
Nicolaides KH. Ultrasonographic estimation of fetal weight: devel -
opment of new model and assessment of performance of previous 
models. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 07 2018;52(1):35–43. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 19066 
 203. Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Sharman RS, Deter RL, Park SK. 
Estimation of fetal weight with the use of head, body, and femur 
measurements—a prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Feb 
01 1985;151(3):333–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0002- 9378(85) 
90298- 4
 204. Stirnemann J, Villar J, Salomon LJ, et al. for the International 
Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century 
(INTERGROWTH- 21st), Scientific Advisory Committee, Steering 
Committees, INTERGROWTH- 21st, INTERBIO- 21st, Executive 
Committee, In addition for INTERBIO 21st, Project Coordinating 
Unit, Data Analysis Group, Data Management Group, In addition 
for INTERBIO 21st, Ultrasound Group, In addition for INTERBIO- 
21st:, Anthropometry Group, In addition for INTERBIO- 21st:, 
Laboratory Processing Group, Neonatal Group, Environmental Health Group, Neurodevelopment Group, Participating countries 
and local investigators, In addition for INTERBIO- 21st:, In addi -
tion for INTERBIO- 21st. International estimated fetal weight stan-
dards of the INTERGROWTH- 21. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Apr 
2017;49(4):478–86. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 17347 
 205. Sovio U, Smith GCS. Comparison of estimated fetal weight cen-
tiles near term for predicting extremes of birthweight centile. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 03 2021;224(3):292.e1-292.e19. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. ajog. 2020. 08. 054
 206. Chitty LS, Altman DG, Henderson A, Campbell S. Charts of fetal 
size: 2. Head measurements Br J Obstet Gynaecol Jan 1994;101(1):35–
43. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 1994. tb130 07. x
 207. Salomon LJ, Alfirevic Z, Da Silva Costa F, et  al. ISUOG Practice 
Guidelines: ultrasound assessment of fetal biometry and growth. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jun 2019;53(6):715–23. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1002/ uog. 20272 
 208. Dudley NJ, Varley H. Caveats in the monitoring of fetal growth using 
ultrasound estimated fetal weight. Ultrasound Feb 2021;29(1):10–7. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 17422 71X20 954508
 209. Sarris I, Ioannou C, Dighe M, et al., for the International 
Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21 Century 
(INTERGROWTH- 21st) Standardization of fetal ultrasound bi -
ometry measurements: improving the quality and consistency of 
measurements. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Dec 2011;38(6):681–7. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 8997
 210. Dudley NJ. A systematic review of the ultrasound estimation of fetal 
weight. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jan 2005;25(1):80–9. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 1751
 211. Zdanowicz JA, Huber C, Gerull R, Mueller M, Raio L, Surbek D. 
Impact of Fetal Weight Estimation on the Prediction of Neonatal 
Morbidity and Mortality at the Limit of Viability. Fetal Diagn Ther. 
2017;42(1):63–70. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00045 0943
 212. Ambroise Grandjean G, Le Gall L, Bourguignon L, Collin A, Hossu 
G, Morel O. Is accuracy of estimated fetal weight improved by better 
image quality scores? Int J Gynaecol Obstet Apr 2023;161(1):289–97. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ijgo. 14447 
 213. Salomon LJ, Bernard JP, Duyme M, Doris B, Mas N, Ville Y. 
Feasibility and reproducibility of an image- scoring method for 
quality control of fetal biometry in the second trimester. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol Jan 2006;27(1):34–40. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 
2665
 214. Kiserud T, Benachi A, Hecher K, et al. The World Health 
Organization fetal growth charts: concept, findings, interpretation, 
and application. Am J Obstet Gynecol Feb 2018;218(2S):S619-S629. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2017. 12. 010
 215. Buck Louis GM, Grewal J, Albert PS, et al. Racial/ethnic standards for 
fetal growth: the NICHD Fetal Growth Studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
Oct 2015;213(4):449.e1-449.e41. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2015. 
08. 032
 216. Chiossi G, Pedroza C, Costantine MM, Truong VTT, Gargano G, 
Saade GR. Customized vs population- based growth charts to 
identify neonates at risk of adverse outcome: systematic review 
and Bayesian meta- analysis of observational studies. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol Aug 2017;50(2):156–66. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 
uog. 17381 
 217. Gardosi J, Francis A. Adverse pregnancy outcome and associa -
tion with small for gestational age birthweight by customized and 
population- based centiles. Am J Obstet Gynecol Jul 2009;201(1):28.
e1-8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2009. 04. 034
 218. Gardosi J, Francis A, Turner S, Williams M. Customized growth 
charts: rationale, validation and clinical benefits. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol Feb 2018;218(2S):S609-S618. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 
2017. 12. 011
 219. Deter RL, Lee W, Yeo L, et al. Individualized growth assessment: 
conceptual framework and practical implementation for the eval-
uation of fetal growth and neonatal growth outcome. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol Feb 2018;218(2S):S656-S678. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 
2017. 12. 210
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e72 | 
MORRIS et al .
 220. Hadlock FP , Harrist RB, Martinez- Poyer J. In utero analysis of 
fetal growth: a sonographic weight standard. Radiology Oct 
1991;181(1):129–33. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1148/ radio logy. 181.1. 1887021
 221. Hugh O, Williams M, Turner S, Gardosi J. Reduction of stillbirths 
in England from 2008 to 2017 according to uptake of the Growth 
Assessment Protocol: 10- year population- based cohort study. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 2021;57(3):401–8. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1002/ uog. 22187 
 222. Sovio U, Smith GCS. The effect of customization and use of a fetal 
growth standard on the association between birthweight centile and ad-
verse perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol Feb 2018;218(2S):S738-
S744. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2017. 11. 563
 223. Hutcheon JA, Walker M, Platt RW. Assessing the value of custom-
ized birth weight centiles. Am J Epidemiol . Feb 15 2011;173(4):459–
67. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ aje/ kwq399
 224. Hutcheon J. Do customized birth weight charts add anything but com-
plexity to the assessment of fetal growth? J Obstet Gynaecol Can Feb 
2014;36(2):107–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1701- 2163(15) 30652- 6
 225. Vieira MC, Relph S, Copas A, et al. The DESiGN trial (DEtection 
of Small for Gestational age Neonate), evaluating the effect of the 
Growth Assessment Protocol (GAP): study protocol for a ran-
domised controlled trial. Trials. Mar 04 2019;20(1):154. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1186/ s13063- 019- 3242- 6
 226. Corcoran P, Leitao S, O'Donoghue K, Greene RA. Lessons to be 
learned from the DESIGN trial. Accessed 22nd June. 2023 https:// 
journ als. plos. org/ plosm edici ne/ artic le/ comme nt? id= 10. 1371/ annot 
ation/ abf5e 28e- 82b7- 4e19- 82df- d6a98 34b6f96
 227. Butler E, Hugh O, Gardosi J. Evaluating the Growth Assessment 
Protocol for stillbirth prevention: progress and challenges. J 
Perinat Med Jul 26 2022;50(6):737–47. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1515/ 
jpm- 2022- 0209
 228. Kiserud T, Piaggio G, Carroli G, et al. The World Health 
Organization Fetal Growth Charts: A Multinational Longitudinal 
Study of Ultrasound Biometric Measurements and Estimated Fetal 
Weight. PLoS Med Jan 2017;14(1):e1002220. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ 
journ al. pmed. 1002220
 229. Nicolaides KH, Wright D, Syngelaki A, Wright A, Akolekar R. Fetal 
Medicine Foundation fetal and neonatal population weight charts. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jul 2018;52(1):44–51. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1002/ uog. 19073 
 230. Francis A, Hugh O, Gardosi J. Customized vs INTERGROWTH- 21. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol Feb 2018;218(2S):S692-S699. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. ajog. 2017. 12. 013
 231. Vieira MC, Relph S, Persson M, Seed PT, Pasupathy D. 
Determination of birth- weight centile thresholds associated with 
adverse perinatal outcomes using population, customised, and 
Intergrowth charts: A Swedish population- based cohort study. 
PLoS Med Sep 2019;16(9):e1002902. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. 
pmed. 1002902
 232. Ioannou C, Talbot K, Ohuma E, et al. Systematic review of meth -
odology used in ultrasound studies aimed at creating charts of fetal 
size. BJOG Nov 2012;119(12):1425–39. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 
1471- 0528. 2012. 03451. x
 233. Schild RL. Three- dimensional volumetry and fetal weight measure -
ment. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Nov 2007;30(6):799–803. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 5181
 234. Tuuli MG, Kapalka K, Macones GA, Cahill AG. Three- Versus Two- 
Dimensional Sonographic Biometry for Predicting Birth Weight 
and Macrosomia in Diabetic Pregnancies. J Ultrasound Med Sep 
2016;35(9):1925–30. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7863/ ultra. 15. 08032 
 235. Mohsen LA, Amin MF. 3D and 2D ultrasound- based fetal weight 
estimation: a single center experience. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 
Med Apr 2017;30(7):818–25. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14767 058. 2016. 
1187125
 236. Steller JG, Gumina D, Driver C, et al. 3D Fractional Limb Volume 
Identifies Reduced Subcutaneous and Lean Mass in Fetal Growth 
Restriction. J Ultrasound Med Jul 2022;41(7):1623–32. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ jum. 15841 237. Lee W, Deter R, Sangi- Haghpeykar H, Yeo L, Romero R. Prospective 
validation of fetal weight estimation using fractional limb volume. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Feb 2013;41(2):198–203. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1002/ uog. 11185 
 238. Kadji C, Cannie MM, De Angelis R, et  al. Prenatal prediction 
of postnatal large- for- dates neonates using a simplified MRI 
method: comparison with conventional 2D ultrasound estimates. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 08 2018;52(2):250–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1002/ uog. 17523 
 239. Carlin A, Kadji C, De Angelis R, Cannie MM, Jani JC. Prenatal 
prediction of small- for- gestational age neonates using MR imag -
ing: comparison with conventional 2D ultrasound. J Matern Fetal 
Neonatal Med May 2019;32(10):1673–81. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 
14767 058. 2017. 1414797
 240. Lin S, Shimizu I, Suehara N, Nakayama M, Aono T. Uterine artery 
Doppler velocimetry in relation to trophoblast migration into the 
myometrium of the placental bed. Obstet Gynecol May 1995;85(5 Pt 
1):760–5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0029- 7844(95) 00020- r
 241. Prefumo F, Sebire NJ, Thilaganathan B. Decreased endovas -
cular trophoblast invasion in first trimester pregnancies with 
high- resistance uterine artery Doppler indices. Hum Reprod Jan 
2004;19(1):206–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ humrep/ deh037
 242. Triunfo S, Crovetto F, Rodriguez- Sureda V, et al. Changes in uter -
ine artery Doppler velocimetry and circulating angiogenic factors 
in the first half of pregnancies delivering a small- for- gestational- 
age neonate. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 2017;49(3):357–63. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 15978 
 243. Cnossen JS, Morris RK, ter Riet G, et  al. Use of uterine artery 
Doppler ultrasonography to predict pre- eclampsia and intrauter -
ine growth restriction: a systematic review and bivariable meta- 
analysis. CMAJ. Mar 11 2008;178(6):701–11. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1503/ 
cmaj. 070430
 244. García B, Llurba E, Valle L, et al. Do knowledge of uterine ar -
tery resistance in the second trimester and targeted surveillance 
improve maternal and perinatal outcome? UTOPIA study: a 
randomized controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jun 
2016;47(6):680–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 15873 
 245. Parry S, Sciscione A, Haas DM, et  al. Role of early second- trimester 
uterine artery Doppler screening to predict small- for- gestational- age 
babies in nulliparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 11 2017;217(5):594.
e1-594.e10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2017. 06. 013
 246. Familiari A, Bhide A, Morlando M, Scala C, Khalil A, Thilaganathan 
B. Mid- pregnancy fetal biometry, uterine artery Doppler indices 
and maternal demographic characteristics: role in prediction of 
small- for- gestational- age birth. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Feb 
2016;95(2):238–44. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ aogs. 12804 
 247. Poon LC, Lesmes C, Gallo DM, Akolekar R, Nicolaides KH. 
Prediction of small- for- gestational- age neonates: screening by 
biophysical and biochemical markers at 19- 24 weeks. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol Oct 2015;46(4):437–45. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 
14904 
 248. Roeder HA, Dejbakhsh SZ, Parast MM, Laurent LC, Woelkers DA. 
Abnormal uterine artery Doppler velocimetry predicts adverse out -
comes in patients with abnormal analytes. Pregnancy Hypertens. 
Oct 2014;4(4):296–301. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. preghy. 2014. 10. 001
 249. Li N, Ghosh G, Gudmundsson S. Uterine artery Doppler in high- 
risk pregnancies at 23- 24 gestational weeks is of value in predicting 
adverse outcome of pregnancy and selecting cases for more intense 
surveillance. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Dec 2014;93(12):1276–81. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ aogs. 12488 
 250. Casagrandi D, Sivanandan L, Das R, et al. Prediction of small for 
gestational age using uterine artery Doppler as part of a multipa -
rameter pragmatic approach in the second trimester. Ultrasound in 
Obstetrics and Gynecology. 2019;54(1):172.
 251. Ghi T, Contro E, Youssef A, et al. Persistence of increased uterine 
artery resistance in the third trimester and pregnancy outcome. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Nov 2010;36(5):577–81. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1002/ uog. 7602
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e73
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
 252. Groom KM, North RA, Stone PR, et al. SCOPE Consortium 
Patterns of change in uterine artery Doppler studies between 20 and 
24 weeks of gestation and pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol Feb 
2009;113(2 Pt 1):332–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 0b013 e3181 
95b223
 253. Ventura W, De Paco Matallana C, Prieto- Sanchez MT, et al. Uterine 
and umbilical artery Doppler at 28 weeks for predicting adverse 
pregnancy outcomes in women with abnormal uterine artery 
Doppler findings in the early second trimester. Prenat Diagn Mar 
2015;35(3):294–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ pd. 4542
 254. Contro E, Maroni E, Cera E, et al. Unilaterally increased uterine 
artery resistance, placental location and pregnancy outcome. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol Dec 2010;153(2):143–7. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2010. 07. 012
 255. Bhide A, Acharya G, Bilardo CM, et al. ISUOG practice guidelines: 
use of Doppler ultrasonography in obstetrics. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol Feb 2013;41(2):233–39. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 12371 
 256. Papageorghiou AT, Yu CK, Bindra R, Pandis G, Nicolaides KH. 
Multicenter screening for pre- eclampsia and fetal growth restric-
tion by transvaginal uterine artery Doppler at 23 weeks of gesta -
tion. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Nov 2001;18(5):441–9. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1046/j. 0960- 7692. 2001. 00572. x
 257. Valiño N, Giunta G, Gallo DM, Akolekar R, Nicolaides KH. Uterine 
artery pulsatility index at 30- 34 weeks' gestation in the prediction 
of adverse perinatal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 
2016;47(3):308–15. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 14898 
 258. Martinez- Portilla RJ, Caradeux J, Meler E, Lip- Sosa DL, Sotiriadis 
A, Figueras F. Third- trimester uterine artery Doppler for prediction 
of adverse outcome in late small- for- gestational- age fetuses: sys -
tematic review and meta- analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 05 
2020;55(5):575–85. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 21940 
 259. Chang TC, Robson SC, Spencer JA, Gallivan S. Identification of 
fetal growth retardation: comparison of Doppler waveform indices 
and serial ultrasound measurements of abdominal circumference 
and fetal weight. Obstet Gynecol Aug 1993;82(2):230–6.
 260. Chang TC, Robson SC, Spencer JA, Gallivan S. Prediction of peri -
natal morbidity at term in small fetuses: comparison of fetal growth 
and Doppler ultrasound. Br J Obstet Gynaecol May 1994;101(5):422–
7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 1994. tb119 16. x
 261. Owen P, Donnet ML, Ogston SA, Christie AD, Howie PW, Patel 
NB. Standards for ultrasound fetal growth velocity. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol Jan 1996;103(1):60–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 
1996. tb095 16. x
 262. Larsen T, Petersen S, Greisen G, Larsen JF. Normal fetal growth 
evaluated by longitudinal ultrasound examinations. Early Hum 
Dev Oct 1990;24(1):37–45. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0378- 3782(90) 
90004- 3
 263. Royston P. Calculation of unconditional and conditional reference 
intervals for foetal size and growth from longitudinal measure -
ments. Stat Med Jul 15 1995;14(13):1417–36. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 
sim. 47801 41303 
 264. Hugh O, Gardosi J. Fetal weight projection model to define growth 
velocity and validation against pregnancy outcome in a cohort 
of serially scanned pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jul 
2022;60(1):86–95. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 24860 
 265. Perinatal Institute. Fetal growth rate calculator. Accessed 22nd 
June. 2023 https:// perin atal. org. uk/ growt hrate 
 266. Jauniaux E, Ramsay B, Campbell S. Ultrasonographic investigation 
of placental morphologic characteristics and size during the sec-
ond trimester of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol Jan 1994;170(1 Pt 
1):130–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0002- 9378(94) 70397- 3
 267. Hafner E, Philipp T, Schuchter K, Dillinger- Paller B, Philipp K, 
Bauer P. Second- trimester measurements of placental volume by 
three- dimensional ultrasound to predict small- for- gestational- age 
infants. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Aug 1998;12(2):97–102. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1046/j. 1469- 0705. 1998. 12020 097. x
 268. Salafia CM, Misra DP, Yampolsky M, Charles AK, Miller RK. 
Allometric metabolic scaling and fetal and placental weight. Placenta Apr 2009;30(4):355–60. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. place nta. 
2009. 01. 006
 269. Wolf H, Oosting H, Treffers PE. Second- trimester placental vol-
ume measurement by ultrasound: prediction of fetal outcome. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol Jan 1989;160(1):121–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
0002- 9378(89) 90102- 6
 270. Damodaram M, Story L, Eixarch E, et al. Placental MRI in intra -
uterine fetal growth restriction. Placenta Jun 2010;31(6):491–8. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. place nta. 2010. 03. 001
 271. Wright E, Audette MC, Ye XY, et al. Maternal Vascular Malperfusion 
and Adverse Perinatal Outcomes in Low- Risk Nulliparous Women. 
Obstet Gynecol. 11 2017;130(5):1112–20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 
AOG. 00000 00000 002264
 272. Toal M, Keating S, Machin G, et al. Determinants of adverse peri -
natal outcome in high- risk women with abnormal uterine artery 
Doppler images. Am J Obstet Gynecol Mar 2008;198(3):330.e1-7. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2007. 09. 031
 273. Higgins LE, Simcox L, Sibley CP, Heazell AE, Johnstone ED. Third 
trimester placental volume and biometry measurement: A method- 
development study. Placenta. 2016;06(42):51–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. place nta. 2016. 04. 010
 274. Derwig IE, Akolekar R, Zelaya FO, Gowland PA, Barker GJ, 
Nicolaides KH. Association of placental volume measured 
by MRI and birth weight centile. J Magn Reson Imaging Nov 
2011;34(5):1125–30. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jmri. 22794 
 275. Aughwane R, Ingram E, Johnstone ED, Salomon LJ, David AL, 
Melbourne A. Placental MRI and its application to fetal intervention. 
Prenat Diagn. 01 2020;40(1):38–48. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ pd. 5526
 276. Heazell AE, Hayes DJ, Whitworth M, Takwoingi Y, Bayliss SE, 
Davenport C. Biochemical tests of placental function versus ul-
trasound assessment of fetal size for stillbirth and small- for- 
gestational- age infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev May 14 
2019;5(5):CD012245. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD012 245. 
pub2 , CD012245
 277. Robinson CJ, Stringer SE. The splice variants of vascular endo -
thelial growth factor (VEGF) and their receptors. J Cell Sci Mar 
2001;114(Pt 5):853–65.
 278. Maynard SE, Min JY, Merchan J, et al. Excess placental soluble 
fms- like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt1) may contribute to endothelial 
dysfunction, hypertension, and proteinuria in preeclampsia. J 
Clin Invest Mar 2003;111(5):649–58. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1172/ 
JCI17189
 279. Duhig KE, Myers J, Seed PT, et al. Placental growth factor testing 
to assess women with suspected pre- eclampsia: a multicentre, prag -
matic, stepped- wedge cluster- randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
05 04 2019;393(10183):1807–18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 
6736(18) 33212- 4
 280. Tong S, Joy Kaitu'u- Lino T, Walker SP, MacDonald TM. Blood- 
based biomarkers in the maternal circulation associated with fetal 
growth restriction. Prenat Diagn. 10 2019;39(11):947–57. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ pd. 5525
 281. Crispi F, Llurba E, Domínguez C, Martín- Gallán P, Cabero L, 
Gratacós E. Predictive value of angiogenic factors and uterine 
artery Doppler for early- versus late- onset pre- eclampsia and in-
trauterine growth restriction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 
2008;31(3):303–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 5184
 282. Griffin M, Seed PT, Webster L, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of pla -
cental growth factor and ultrasound parameters to predict the 
small- for- gestational- age infant in women presenting with re -
duced symphysis- fundus height. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Aug 
2015;46(2):182–90. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 14860 
 283. Valiño N, Giunta G, Gallo DM, Akolekar R, Nicolaides KH. 
Biophysical and biochemical markers at 30- 34 weeks' gestation in 
the prediction of adverse perinatal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol Feb 2016;47(2):194–202. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 
14928 
 284. Gaccioli F, Sovio U, Cook E, Hund M, Charnock- Jones DS, Smith 
GCS. Screening for fetal growth restriction using ultrasound and 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e74 | 
MORRIS et al .
the sFLT1/PlGF ratio in nulliparous women: a prospective cohort 
study. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 08 2018;2(8):569–81. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S2352- 4642(18) 30129- 9
 285. Ciobanu A, Rouvali A, Syngelaki A, Akolekar R, Nicolaides KH. 
Prediction of small for gestational age neonates: screening by mater -
nal factors, fetal biometry, and biomarkers at 35- 37 weeks' gestation. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol May 2019;220(5):486.e1-486.e11. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2019. 01. 227
 286. Nowacka U, Papastefanou I, Bouariu A, Syngelaki A, Akolekar R, 
Nicolaides KH. Second- trimester contingent screening for small- 
for- gestational- age neonate. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Feb 
2022;59(2):177–84. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 23730 
 287. Niknafs P, Sibbald J. Accuracy of single ultrasound parame -
ters in detection of fetal growth restriction. Am J Perinatol Sep 
2001;18(6):325–34. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1055/s- 2001- 17856 
 288. Snijders RJ, Sherrod C, Gosden CM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal growth 
retardation: associated malformations and chromosomal abnor -
malities. Am J Obstet Gynecol Feb 1993;168(2):547–55. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/ 0002- 9378(93) 90491- z
 289. Anandakumar C, Chew S, Wong YC, Malarvishy G, Po LU, Ratnam 
SS. Early asymmetric IUGR and aneuploidy. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 
Aug 1996;22(4):365–70. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1447- 0756. 1996. 
tb009 90. x
 290. Borrell A, Grande M, Pauta M, Rodriguez- Revenga L, Figueras 
F. Chromosomal Microarray Analysis in Fetuses with Growth 
Restriction and Normal Karyotype: A Systematic Review and Meta- 
Analysis. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2018;44(1):1–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 
00047 9506
 291. Sagi- Dain L, Maya I, Reches A, et  al. Chromosomal Microarray 
Analysis Results From Pregnancies With Various Ultrasonographic 
Anomalies. Obstet Gynecol. 12 2018;132(6):1368–75. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 00000 00000 002975
 292. Borrell A, Grande M, Meler E, et al. Genomic Microarray in Fetuses 
with Early Growth Restriction: A Multicenter Study. Fetal Diagn 
Ther. 2017;42(3):174–80. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00045 2217
 293. Mathiesen JM, Aksglaede L, Skibsted L, Petersen OB, Tabor A, the 
Danish Fetal Medicine Study Group. Outcome of fetuses with short 
femur length detected at second- trimester anomaly scan: a national 
survey. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Aug 2014;44(2):160–5. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 13286 
 294. D'Ambrosio V, Vena F, Marchetti C, et  al. Midtrimester isolated 
short femur and perinatal outcomes: A systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 01 2019;98(1):11–7. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1111/ aogs. 13470 
 295. de Wit MC, Srebniak MI, Joosten M, et al. Prenatal and postnatal 
findings in small- for- gestational- age fetuses without structural 
ultrasound anomalies at 18- 24 weeks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
Mar 2017;49(3):342–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 15949 
 296. Hendrix N, Berghella V. Non- placental causes of intrauterine 
growth restriction. Semin Perinatol Jun 2008;32(3):161–5. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1053/j. sempe ri. 2008. 02. 004
 297. Freeman K, Oakley L, Pollak A, et al. for The European Multicentre 
Study on Congenital Toxoplasmosis (EMSCOT) Members of 
The European Multicentre Study on Congenital Toxoplasmosis 
(EMSCOT) are listed on page 000. Association between congeni -
tal toxoplasmosis and preterm birth, low birthweight and small for 
gestational age birth. BJOG Jan 2005;112(1):31–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2004. 00299. x
 298. Yamamoto R, Ishii K, Shimada M, et al. Significance of maternal 
screening for toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus and herpes 
simplex virus infection in cases of fetal growth restriction. J Obstet 
Gynaecol Res Mar 2013;39(3):653–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1447- 
0756. 2012. 02012. x
 299. Yakoob MY, Zakaria A, Waqar SN, et al. Does malaria during preg -
nancy affect the newborn? J Pak Med Assoc Dec 2005;55(12):543–6.
 300. Walker CL, Merriam AA, Ohuma EO, et  al. Femur- sparing pat -
tern of abnormal fetal growth in pregnant women from New York 
City after maternal Zika virus infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 08 2018;219(2):187.e1-187.e20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2018. 04. 
047
 301. Groom KM, David AL. The role of aspirin, heparin, and other inter -
ventions in the prevention and treatment of fetal growth restriction. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 02 2018;218(2S):S829-S840. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. ajog. 2017. 11. 565
 302. Paauw ND, Terstappen F, Ganzevoort W, Joles JA, Gremmels H, 
Lely AT. Sildenafil During Pregnancy: A Preclinical Meta- Analysis 
on Fetal Growth and Maternal Blood Pressure. Hypertension. 
11 2017;70(5):998–1006. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1161/ HYPER TENSI 
ONAHA. 117. 09690 
 303. von Dadelszen P, Dwinnell S, Magee LA, et al. for the Research into 
Advanced Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy (RAFT) Group. Sildenafil 
citrate therapy for severe early- onset intrauterine growth restric-
tion. BJOG Apr 2011;118(5):624–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 
0528. 2010. 02879. x
 304. Trapani A, Gonçalves LF, Trapani TF, Vieira S, Pires M, Pires MMS. 
Perinatal and Hemodynamic Evaluation of Sildenafil Citrate for 
Preeclampsia Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet 
Gynecol. 08 2016;128(2):253–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 00000 
00000 001518
 305. Sharp A, Cornforth C, Jackson R, et  al. Maternal sildenafil for 
severe fetal growth restriction (STRIDER): a multicentre, ran-
domised, placebo- controlled, double- blind trial. Lancet Child 
Adolesc Health. 02 2018;2(2):93–102. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S2352- 
4642(17) 30173- 6
 306. Groom KM, McCowan LM, Mackay LK, et al. STRIDER NZAus: a 
multicentre randomised controlled trial of sildenafil therapy in 
early- onset fetal growth restriction. BJOG 07 2019;126(8):997–
1006. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 15658 
 307. Sharp A, Cornforth C, Jackson R, et  al. Mortality in the UK 
STRIDER trial of sildenafil therapy for the treatment of severe 
early- onset fetal growth restriction. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 
03 2019;3(3):e2-e3. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S2352- 4642(19) 30020- 3
 308. Tanaka H, Kubo M, Nii M, Maki S, Umekawa T, Ikeda T. Treatment 
using tadalafil for severe pre- eclampsia with fetal growth restric-
tion. J Obstet Gynaecol Res Jul 2017;43(7):1205–8. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1111/ jog. 13335 
 309. Kubo M, Tanaka H, Maki S, et al. Safety and dose- finding trial of 
tadalafil administered for fetal growth restriction: A phase- 1 clini -
cal study. J Obstet Gynaecol Res Jul 2017;43(7):1159–68. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1111/ jog. 13345 
 310. Mazarico E, Molinet- Coll C, Martinez- Portilla RJ, Figueras F. 
Heparin therapy in placental insufficiency: Systematic review and 
meta- analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 02 2020;99(2):167–74. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ aogs. 13730 
 311. McCowan LM, Harding JE, Roberts AB, Barker SE, Ford C, Stewart 
AW. A pilot randomized controlled trial of two regimens of fetal 
surveillance for small- for- gestational- age fetuses with normal re -
sults of umbilical artery doppler velocimetry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
Jan 2000;182(1 Pt 1):81–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0002- 9378(00) 
70494- 7
 312. Morris RK, Malin G, Robson SC, Kleijnen J, Zamora J, Khan KS. 
Fetal umbilical artery Doppler to predict compromise of fetal/
neonatal wellbeing in a high- risk population: systematic review 
and bivariate meta- analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Feb 
2011;37(2):135–42. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 7767
 313. Magann EF, Isler CM, Chauhan SP, Martin JN. Amniotic fluid vol-
ume estimation and the biophysical profile: a confusion of crite -
ria. Obstet Gynecol Oct 2000;96(4):640–2. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
s0029- 7844(99) 00634- 1
 314. Nabhan AF, Abdelmoula YA. Amniotic fluid index versus sin-
gle deepest vertical pocket as a screening test for preventing ad-
verse pregnancy outcome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev Jul 16 
2008;(3):CD006593. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD006 593. 
pub2 , 2010
 315. Zhang J, Troendle J, Meikle S, Klebanoff MA, Rayburn WF. Isolated 
oligohydramnios is not associated with adverse perinatal outcomes. 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e75
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
BJOG Mar 2004;111(3):220–5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 
2004. 00060. x
 316. Morris RK, Meller CH, Tamblyn J, et al. Association and prediction 
of amniotic fluid measurements for adverse pregnancy outcome: 
systematic review and meta- analysis. BJOG May 2014;121(6):686–
99. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 12589 
 317. Chauhan SP, Sanderson M, Hendrix NW, Magann EF, Devoe LD. 
Perinatal outcome and amniotic fluid index in the antepartum 
and intrapartum periods: A meta- analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
Dec 1999;181(6):1473–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0002- 9378(99) 
70393- 5
 318. Boers KE, Vijgen SM, Bijlenga D, et al. Induction versus expectant 
monitoring for intrauterine growth restriction at term: randomised 
equivalence trial (DIGITAT). BMJ Dec 21 2010;341:c7087. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. c7087 
 319. van Wyk L, Boers KE, van der Post JA, et al. DIGITAT Study Group. 
Effects on (neuro)developmental and behavioral outcome at 2 years 
of age of induced labor compared with expectant management in 
intrauterine growth- restricted infants: long- term outcomes of the 
DIGITAT trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol May 2012;206(5):406.e1-7. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2012. 02. 003
 320. Vijgen SM, Boers KE, Opmeer BC, et al. Economic analysis compar -
ing induction of labour and expectant management for intrauterine 
growth restriction at term (DIGITAT trial). Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol Oct 2013;170(2):358–63. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
ejogrb. 2013. 07. 017
 321. Bond DM, Gordon A, Hyett J, de Vries B, Carberry AE, Morris J. 
Planned early delivery versus expectant management of the term 
suspected compromised baby for improving outcomes. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev Nov 24 2015;(11):CD009433. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1002/ 14651 858. CD009 433. pub2 , CD009433
 322. van den Hove MM, Willekes C, Roumen FJ, Scherjon SA. Intrauterine 
growth restriction at term: induction or spontaneous labour? 
Disproportionate intrauterine growth intervention trial at term 
(DIGITAT): a pilot study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. Mar 01 
2006;125(1):54–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2005. 06. 018
 323. Ek S, Andersson A, Johansson A, Kublicas M. Oligohydramnios in 
uncomplicated pregnancies beyond 40 completed weeks. A prospec-
tive, randomised, pilot study on maternal and neonatal outcomes. 
Fetal Diagn Ther 2005 May-Jun 2005;20(3):182–5. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1159/ 00008 3901
 324. Grobman WA, Rice MM, Reddy UM, et al. Labor Induction versus 
Expectant Management in Low- Risk Nulliparous Women. N Engl 
J Med. Aug 09 2018;379(6):513–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ NEJMo 
a1800566
 325. van Wyk L, Boers KE, Gordijn SJ, et al. Perinatal death in a term fetal 
growth restriction randomized controlled trial: the paradox of prior 
risk and consent. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM. 11 2020;2(4):100239. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajogmf. 2020. 100239
 326. Peasley R, Rangel LAA, Casagrandi D, et al. Management of late- onset 
fetal growth restriction: a pragmatic approach. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol. Mar 02 2023;62(1):106–14. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 26190 
 327. Veglia M, Cavallaro A, Papageorghiou A, Black R, Impey L. 
Small- for- gestational- age babies after 37 weeks: impact study 
of risk- stratification protocol. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jul 
2018;52(1):66–71. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 17544 
 328. Lees CC, Marlow N, van Wassenaer- Leemhuis A, et al. TRUFFLE 
study group. 2 year neurodevelopmental and intermediate perina -
tal outcomes in infants with very preterm fetal growth restriction 
(TRUFFLE): a randomised trial. Lancet May 30 2015;385(9983):2162–
72. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(14) 62049- 3
 329. Figueras F, Gratacós E. Update on the diagnosis and classification 
of fetal growth restriction and proposal of a stage- based manage -
ment protocol. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2014;36(2):86–98. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1159/ 00035 7592
 330. Seravalli V, Baschat AA. A uniform management approach to opti -
mize outcome in fetal growth restriction. Obstet Gynecol Clin North 
Am Jun 2015;42(2):275–88. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ogc. 2015. 01. 005 331. Oros D, Ruiz- Martinez S, Staines- Urias E, et al. Reference ranges 
for Doppler indices of umbilical and fetal middle cerebral arteries 
and cerebroplacental ratio: systematic review. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol Apr 2019;53(4):454–64. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 
20102 
 332. Ruiz- Martinez S, Papageorghiou AT, Staines- Urias E, Villar J, 
Gonzalez De Agüero R, Oros D. Clinical impact of Doppler ref -
erence charts on management of small- for- gestational- age fe -
tuses: need for standardization. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Aug 
2020;56(2):166–72. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 20380 
 333. Hecher K, Bilardo CM, Stigter RH, et al. Monitoring of fetuses with 
intrauterine growth restriction: a longitudinal study. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol Dec 2001;18(6):564–70. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1046/j. 
0960- 7692. 2001. 00590. x
 334. Bilardo CM, Wolf H, Stigter RH, et al. Relationship between 
monitoring parameters and perinatal outcome in severe, early 
intrauterine growth restriction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Feb 
2004;23(2):119–25. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 965
 335. Ribbert LS, Snijders RJ, Nicolaides KH, Visser GH. Relation of fetal 
blood gases and data from computer- assisted analysis of fetal heart 
rate patterns in small for gestation fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
Aug 1991;98(8):820–3. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 1991. 
tb134 89. x
 336. Lees C, Marlow N, Arabin B, et al. the TRUFFLE Group. Perinatal 
morbidity and mortality in early- onset fetal growth restriction: 
cohort outcomes of the trial of randomized umbilical and fetal 
flow in Europe (TRUFFLE). Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Oct 
2013;42(4):400–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 13190 
 337. Thornton JG, Hornbuckle J, Vail A, Spiegelhalter DJ, Levene 
M. Infant wellbeing at 2 years of age in the Growth Restriction 
Intervention Trial (GRIT): multicentred randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet Aug 7–13 2004;364(9433):513–20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/ s0140- 6736(04) 16809- 8
 338. Ganzevoort W, Thornton JG, Marlow N, et al. Comparative anal-
ysis of 2- year outcomes in GRIT and TRUFFLE trials. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol. 01 2020;55(1):68–74. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 
20354 
 339. Van Wassenaer- Leemhuis AG, Marlow N, Lees C, Wolf H, investiga -
tors T. The association of neonatal morbidity with long- term neuro -
logical outcome in infants who were growth restricted and preterm 
at birth: secondary analyses from TRUFFLE (Trial of Randomized 
Umbilical and Fetal Flow in Europe). BJOG. Jun 2017;124(7):1072–
8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 14511 
 340. Ganzevoort W, Mensing Van Charante N, Thilaganathan B, et al. 
How to monitor pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restric-
tion and delivery before 32 weeks: post- hoc analysis of TRUFFLE 
study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jun 2017;49(6):769–77. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 17433 
 341. Mactier H, Bates SE, Johnston T, et al. BAPM Working Group. 
Perinatal management of extreme preterm birth before 27 weeks of 
gestation: a framework for practice. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal 
Ed May 2020;105(3):232–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ archd ischi 
ld- 2019- 318402
 342. Oros D, Figueras F, Cruz- Martinez R, Meler E, Munmany M, 
Gratacos E. Longitudinal changes in uterine, umbilical and fetal 
cerebral Doppler indices in late- onset small- for- gestational age fe -
tuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Feb 2011;37(2):191–5. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 7738
 343. Vergani P, Andreotti C, Roncaglia N, et al. Doppler predictors of 
adverse neonatal outcome in the growth restricted fetus at 34 weeks' 
gestation or beyond. Am J Obstet Gynecol Oct 2003;189(4):1007–11. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1067/ s0002- 9378(03) 00836- 6
 344. Akolekar R, Syngelaki A, Gallo DM, Poon LC, Nicolaides KH. Umbilical 
and fetal middle cerebral artery Doppler at 35- 37 weeks' gestation in the 
prediction of adverse perinatal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jul 
2015;46(1):82–92. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 14842 
 345. Khalil AA, Morales- Rosello J, Morlando M, et al. Is fetal cere -
broplacental ratio an independent predictor of intrapartum fetal 
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e76 | 
MORRIS et al .
compromise and neonatal unit admission? Am J Obstet Gynecol Jul 
2015;213(1):54.e1-54.e10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2014. 10. 024
 346. Morales- Roselló J, Khalil A, Morlando M, Hervás- Marín D, Perales- 
Marín A. Doppler reference values of the fetal vertebral and middle 
cerebral arteries, at 19- 41 weeks gestation. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 
Med Feb 2015;28(3):338–43. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 14767 058. 2014. 
916680
 347. DeVore GR. The importance of the cerebroplacental ratio in the evalu -
ation of fetal well- being in SGA and AGA fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
Jul 2015;213(1):5–15. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2015. 05. 024
 348. Meher S, Hernandez- Andrade E, Basheer SN, Lees C. Impact of 
cerebral redistribution on neurodevelopmental outcome in small- 
for- gestational- age or growth- restricted babies: a systematic review. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Oct 2015;46(4):398–404. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ uog. 14818 
 349. Severi FM, Bocchi C, Visentin A, et al. Uterine and fetal cere -
bral Doppler predict the outcome of third- trimester small- for- 
gestational age fetuses with normal umbilical artery Doppler. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 2002;19(3):225–8. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1046/j. 1469- 0705. 2002. 00652. x
 350. Ghosh GS, Gudmundsson S. Uterine and umbilical artery Doppler 
are comparable in predicting perinatal outcome of growth- 
restricted fetuses. BJOG Feb 2009;116(3):424–30. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2008. 02057. x
 351. Vergani P, Roncaglia N, Andreotti C, et al. Prognostic value of uter -
ine artery Doppler velocimetry in growth- restricted fetuses deliv -
ered near term. Am J Obstet Gynecol Oct 2002;187(4):932–6. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1067/ mob. 2002. 127137
 352. Mylrea- Foley B, Thornton JG, Mullins E, et al. Perinatal and 2- year 
neurodevelopmental outcome in late preterm fetal compromise: 
the TRUFFLE 2 randomised trial protocol. BMJ Open. Apr 15 
2022;12(4):e055543. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmjop en- 2021- 055543
 353. Thornton JG, Hornbuckle J, Vail A, Spiegelhalter DJ, Levene M, 
group Gs. Infant wellbeing at 2 years of age in the Growth Restriction 
Intervention Trial (GRIT): multicentred randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet 2004 Aug 7–13 2004;364(9433):513–20. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(04) 16809- 8
 354. Bilardo CM, Hecher K, Visser GHA, et al. Severe fetal growth re -
striction at 26–32 weeks: key messages from the TRUFFLE study. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 09 2017;50(3):285–90. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1002/ uog. 18815 
 355. British Association of Perinatal Medicine. Perinatal management of 
extreme preterm birth before 27 weeks of gestation. London: BAPM; 
2019 https:// www. bapm. org/ resou rces/ 80- perin atal- manag ement- 
of- extre me- prete rm- birth- before- 27- weeks- of- gesta tion- 2019
 356. Stock SJ, Thomson AJ, Papworth S. on behalf of the Royal College 
of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Antenatal corticosteroids to 
reduce neonatal morbidity and mortality: Green- top Guideline No. 
74. BJOG. Jul 2022;129(8):e35–e60. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 
0528. 17027 
 357. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Preterm labour 
and birth . NICE Guideline [NG25]. London: NICE; 2015 (updated 
2019). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng25
 358. British Association of Perinatal Medicine. Antenatal Optimisation 
Toolkit. London: BAPM; 2020. https://www.bapm.org/pages/ 
194-antenatal-optimisation-toolkit
 359. Lasswell SM, Barfield WD, Rochat RW, Blackmon L. Perinatal re -
gionalization for very low- birth- weight and very preterm infants: a 
meta- analysis. JAMA Sep 01 2010;304(9):992–1000. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1001/ jama. 2010. 1226
 360. Lees C. Protocol 02PRT/34 Trial of umbilical and fetal flow in 
Europe (TRUFFLE): a multicentre randomised study. https:// www. 
thela ncet. com/ proto col- revie ws/ 02PRT- 34
 361. Nicolaides KH, Economides DL, Soothill PW. Blood gases, pH, and 
lactate in appropriate- and small- for- gestational- age fetuses. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol Oct 1989;161(4):996–1001. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
0002- 9378(89) 90770- 9 362. Robson SC, Crawford RA, Spencer JA, Lee A. Intrapartum amni -
otic fluid index and its relationship to fetal distress. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol Jan 1992;166(1 Pt 1):78–82. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0002- 
9378(92) 91833- v
 363. GRIT Study Group. A randomised trial of timed delivery for 
the compromised preterm fetus: short term outcomes and 
Bayesian interpretation. BJOG Jan 2003;110(1):27–32. https://doi.
org/10.1046/j.1471-0528.2003.02014.x
 364. Lin CC, Moawad AH, Rosenow PJ, River P. Acid- base character -
istics of fetuses with intrauterine growth retardation during labor 
and delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol Jul 01 1980;137(5):553–9. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0002- 9378(80) 90695- x
 365. Burke G, Stuart B, Crowley P, Scanaill SN, Drumm J. Is intrauter -
ine growth retardation with normal umbilical artery blood flow a 
benign condition? BMJ. Apr 21 1990;300(6731):1044–5. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. 300. 6731. 1044
 366. Baschat AA, Weiner CP. Umbilical artery doppler screening for de -
tection of the small fetus in need of antepartum surveillance. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol Jan 2000;182(1 Pt 1):154–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
s0002- 9378(00) 70505- 9
 367. Karsdorp VH, van Vugt JM, van Geijn HP, et al. Clinical signifi -
cance of absent or reversed end diastolic velocity waveforms in um -
bilical artery. Lancet Dec 17 1994;344(8938):1664–8. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/ s0140- 6736(94) 90457- x
 368. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Inducing Labour .
NICE Guideline [NG207]. London: NICE; 2021 https:// www. nice. 
org. uk/ guida nce/ ng207 
 369. Di Mascio D, Villalain C, Rizzo G, et al. Maternal and neonatal out -
comes of pregnancies complicated by late fetal growth restriction 
undergoing induction of labor with dinoprostone compared with 
cervical balloon: A retrospective, international study. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand Jul 2021;100(7):1313–21. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 
aogs. 14135 
 370. Villalain C, Herraiz I, Quezada MS, et  al. Labor Induction in Late- 
Onset Fetal Growth Restriction: Foley Balloon versus Vaginal 
Dinoprostone. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2019;46(1):67–74. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1159/ 00049 1784
 371. Al- Hafez L, Bicocca MJ, Chauhan SP, Berghella V. Prostaglandins 
for induction in pregnancies with fetal growth restriction. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol MFM Mar 2022;4(2):100538. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. ajogmf. 2021. 100538
 372. Familiari A, Khalil A, Rizzo G,et al. Adverse intrapartum outcome in 
pregnancies complicated by small for gestational age and late fetal 
growth restriction undergoing induction of labor with Dinoprostone, 
Misoprostol or mechanical methods: A systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol Sep 2020;252:455–67. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2020. 07. 020
 373. Evans C, Cox P. G108: Tissue pathway for histopathological exam -
ination of the placenta. London: The Royal College of Pathologists; 
2019.
 374. Arachchillage DJ, Mackillop L, Chandratheva A, Motawani J, 
MacCallum P, Laffan M. Thrombophilia testing: A British Society 
for Haematology guideline. Br J Haematol Aug 2022;198(3):443–58. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ bjh. 18239 
How to cite this article: Morris RK, Johnstone E, Lees 
C, Morton V, Smith G; on behalf of the Royal College of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Investigation and 
Care of a Small- for- Gestational- Age Fetus and a 
Growth Restricted Fetus (Green-top Guideline No. 31). 
BJOG. 2024;131(9):e31–e80. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1471-0528.17814
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e77
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
Classification of evidence levels
1++ High- quality meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a very low risk of 
bias
1+ Well- conducted meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a low risk of bias
1– Meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of bias
2++ High- quality systematic reviews of case–control or cohort studies or high- quality
case–control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a
high probability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well- conducted case–control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance
and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a
significant risk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non- analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series
4 Expert opinion
Grades of Recommendation
A At least one meta- analysis, systematic reviews or RCT rated as 1++, and directly applicable to the target population; or a systematic 
review of RCTs or a body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, directly applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results
B A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
C A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
D Evidence level 3 or 4; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good Practice Points
GPP Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development groupAPPENDIX I
Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about 
appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. Each guideline is systematically developed using a standardised methodology. 
Exact details of this process can be found in the RCOG handbook Developing a Green- top Guideline: Guidance for developers . 
These recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated 
with reference to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local popula -
tions. It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to in- corporate these guidelines into routine practice. Attention 
is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations formulated in a similar 
fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e78 | 
MORRIS et al .
APPENDIX II
Surveillance pathway following risk assessment for Fetal growth Fetal medicine refers to a clinician with fetal medicine 
expertise
Footnote Appendix  II.
The risk factors listed in Appendix  I constitute those routinely assessed at booking and at mid trimester scan. Other risk 
factors exist and risk assessment must always be individualised taking into account previous medical and obstetric history and 
current pregnancy history. For women with maternal medical conditions and individuals with disease progression, or institu -
tion of medical therapies, an individual's risk may increase and necessitate monitoring with serial scanning. For women with 
a previous stillbirth, management must be tailored to the previous history i.e. evidence of placental dysfunction or maternal 
medical conditions.
Serial measurement of SFH should be performed as per NICE guideline [CG62].
‡AC and/or EFW <10th centile at the anomaly scan is a high- risk factor.
$ An individualised plan of care should be made.
* Refer to risk assessment and screening section for advice on scan interval.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e79
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
APPENDIX III
Management of fetal growth restriction (FGR)
*Consider after 30+0 weeks; **Consider after 32+0 weeks; EFW, estimated fetal weight; UA, umbilical artery; DV, ductus veno -
sus; cCTG, computerised cardiotocograph; STV, short- term variation; ms, milliseconds; AC, abdominal circumference; PI, 
pulsatility index; AREDF, absent reversed end- diastolic flow.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e80 | 
MORRIS et al .
The guideline will be considered for update 3 years after 
publication, with an intermediate assessment of the need to 
update 2 years after publication.This guideline was produced on behalf of the 
Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists by:
Professor R K Morris FRCOG, Birmingham; 
Professor E Johnstone MRCOG, Manchester; 
Professor C Lees FRCOG, London; Dr V Hodgetts 
Morton MRCOG, Birmingham; Professor G 
Smith FRCOG, Cambridge
The following organisations and individuals sub -
mitted comments at peer review: U Agarwal; C 
Allison; C Austin; A Breeze; British Maternal 
and Fetal Medicine Society; British Association 
for Perinatal Medicine; P Chandra on behalf 
of Fernandez Foundation; Chesterfield Royal 
Hospital; T Coleman; H Dent; A Diyaf; T Everett; 
T Farrell; K Gaunt; Prof. P Hajek; Healthcare Safety 
Investigation Branch; ERM Jauniaux; L McCowan; 
A Morrison; R Napolitano; National Perinatal 
Epidemiology Centre HSE and UCC (Ireland); 
NHS England - Prevention Programme; Perinatal 
Institute; U Ram; the Royal College of Physicians 
(London); L Shanmugasundaram; R Smith; Society 
of Radiographers (London); B Thilaganathan; J 
Thornton; the UK National Screening Committee 
(UK NSC); M van de Venne; and J Waldron
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr M Madhra 
MRCOG3, Edinburgh and Dr S Karavolos MRCOG, 
Manchester;1 Dr R Bahl MRCOG, Bristol2 and Mr 
K Jayaprakasan4.
1until September 2020; 2from September 2020; 
3until September 2022; 4from September 2022.
The chair of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr 
MA Ledingham FRCOG, Glasgow;1 Dr B Magowan 
FRCOG, Melrose;2 Mr A McKelvey MRCOG, 
Norwich3 and Ms N Potdar FRCOG, Leicester.3
1until December 2021; 2until May 2021; 3from 
January 2022.
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare 
any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising 
any conflicts of interest for this guideline is available 
from: https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ en/ guide lines- resea 
rch- servi ces/ guide lines/ gtg31/ 
The final version is the responsibility of the 
Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educa -
tional aid to good clinical practice. They present 
recognised methods and techniques of clinical 
practice, based on published evidence, for consid -
eration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and 
other relevant health professionals. The ultimate 
judgement regarding a particular clinical proce -
dure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor 
or other attendant in the light of clinical data pre -
sented by the patient and the diagnostic and treat -
ment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike pro -
tocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they 
are not intended to be prescriptive directions de -
fining a single course of management. Departure 
from the local prescriptive protocols or guidelines 
should be fully documented in the patient's case 
notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
 14710528, 2024, 9, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17814 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [13/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License