Management of Breech Presentation
Green-top Guideline No. 20b
March 2017

Executive summary of recommendations
Women with a breech presentation at term should be offered external cephalic version (ECV) unless there is an absolute contraindication. They should be advised on the risks and benefits of ECV and the implications for mode of delivery.

Women who have a breech presentation at term following an unsuccessful or declined offer of ECV should be counseled on the risks and benefits of planned vaginal breech delivery versus planned caesarean section.

Women should be informed that planned caesarean section leads to a small reduction in perinatal mortality compared with planned vaginal breech delivery. The reduced risk is due to the avoidance of stillbirth after 39 weeks of gestation, the avoidance of intrapartum risks, and the risks of vaginal breech birth.

When planning delivery for a breech baby, the risk of perinatal mortality is approximately 0.5/1000 with caesarean section after 39+0 weeks of gestation, and approximately 2.0/1000 with planned vaginal breech birth.

Planned vaginal breech birth increases the risk of low Apgar scores and serious short-term complications but has not been shown to increase the risk of long-term morbidity.

Women should be informed that caesarean section increases the risk of complications in future pregnancies, including the risks of opting for vaginal birth after caesarean section, the increased risk of complications at repeat caesarean section, and the risk of an abnormally invasive placenta.

Women should be informed that caesarean section has been associated with a small increase in the risk of stillbirth for subsequent babies although this may not be causal.

Women with breech presentation at term following an unsuccessful or declined offer of ECV should be counselled on the risks and benefits of planned vaginal breech delivery versus planned caesarean section. Women should be informed that planned caesarean section leads to a small reduction in perinatal mortality compared with planned vaginal breech delivery. When planning delivery for a breech baby, the risk of perinatal mortality is approximately 0.5/1000 with caesarean section after 39 weeks of gestation, and approximately 2.0/1000 with planned vaginal breech birth. Selection of appropriate pregnancies and skilled intrapartum care may allow planned vaginal breech birth to be nearly as safe as planned vaginal cephalic birth. Planned vaginal breech birth increases the risk of low Apgar scores and serious short-term complications, but has not been shown to increase the risk of long-term morbidity. Clinicians should counsel women in an unbiased way that ensures a proper understanding of the absolute as well as relative risks of their different options. Women should also be informed about the maternal complications associated with planned caesarean section, including risks in future pregnancies. Caesarean section has been associated with a small increase in the risk of stillbirth for subsequent babies.

The safety of vaginal breech delivery depends on case selection, operator skill, and intrapartum management. Factors affecting safety include antenatal assessment for risk factors, such as hyperextended neck on ultrasound or high estimated fetal weight. Skilled birth attendants are essential, and intrapartum management should be based on the stage of labor and availability of expertise. Continuous fetal monitoring may improve outcomes. Delivery in a hospital with immediate access to a cesarean section is recommended. Adherence to a protocol for management reduces neonatal morbidity. The position for delivery during vaginal breech birth can be semirecumbent or all-fours. Assistance during the active second stage should be provided without traction if there is delay or poor fetal condition.

All maneuvers to avoid fetal trauma should be followed, such as grasping the fetus around the pelvic girdle and avoiding hyperextension of the neck. Selective episiotomy is recommended over routine episiotomy. Signs that delivery should be assisted include lack of tone or color, or delay, commonly due to extended arms or neck. Intervention to expedite breech birth is required if there is evidence of poor fetal condition or significant delays in delivery. The position of the fetus should be monitored and managed carefully during delivery. In cases of preterm breech birth, individualized management based on various factors is recommended. Planned caesarean section is recommended for preterm breech presentation in cases of maternal or fetal compromise. The decision about mode of delivery for preterm breech babies should be made by an experienced obstetrician following a thorough clinical evaluation. In cases of twin pregnancy with breech presentation, planned caesarean section for the first twin is recommended, while routine caesarean section for the second twin is not recommended. Organizational and governance arrangements should be in place to support a routine vaginal breech delivery service, including simulation equipment for training and guidelines for case selection and management.

Breech birth supports adherence to a strict management protocol and the presence of skilled birth attendants. Recommendations for future research include evaluation of all-fours position for vaginal breech birth, the role of pelvimetry in planning vaginal breech delivery, and the effect of epidural analgesia on vaginal breech birth. Auditable topics include documentation of discussion regarding mode of delivery, vaginal delivery rates in women planning vaginal breech delivery, rate of adverse neonatal and maternal outcomes following planned and actual breech birth, and percentage of staff who have undergone training in vaginal breech delivery.

Clinical guidelines are systematically developed statements to assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions. Each guideline is developed using a standardized methodology. The evidence used in this guideline was graded using a specific scheme, with different levels of evidence and recommendations. The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. The review process will commence in 2020.