BJOG . 2024;131:e1–e30. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bjo | e1
© 2024 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.RCOG GREEN- TOP GUIDELINES
The Management of Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy and 
Hyperemesis Gravidarum (Green-top Guideline No. 69)
Catherine Nelson- Piercy | Caitlin Dean | Manjeet Shehmar | Roger Gadsby | 
Margaret O'Hara | Kenneth Hodson | Melanie Nana | on behalf of the Royal College of 
Obstetricians and GynaecologistsPublished online: 4 February 2024
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.17739 
This guideline has been endorsed by the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM), the Association of Early Pregnancy Units (AEPU), and the General Practitioners 
Championing Perinatal Care (GPCPC); and it has been supported by the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP). Correspondence
Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, 10–18 Union Street, London 
SE1 1SZ.
Email: clinicaleffectiveness@rcog.org.uk
This is the second edition of this guideline 
which was previously published in 2016 
under the same name. This guideline is for 
healthcare professionals who care for women, 
non- binary and trans people.Key recommendations
• An objective and validated index of nausea and vomiting such as the Pregnancy- 
Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) and HyperEmesis Level Prediction 
(HELP) tools can be used to classify the severity of NVP and HG. [Grade C]
• Ketonuria is not an indicator of dehydration and should not be used to assess 
severity. [Grade A]
• There are safety and efficacy data for first line antiemetics such as anti (H1) 
histamines, phenothiazines and doxylamine/pyridoxine (Xonvea®) and they 
should be prescribed initially when required for NVP and HG (Appendix III). 
[Grade A]
• There is evidence that ondansetron is safe and effective. Its use as a second line 
antiemetic should not be discouraged if first line antiemetics are ineffective. 
Women can be reassured regarding a very small increase in the absolute risk of 
orofacial clefting with ondansetron use in the first trimester , which should be 
balanced with the risks of poorly managed HG. [Grade B]
• Metoclopramide is safe and effective and can be used alone or in combination 
with other antiemetics. [Grade B]
• Because of the risk of extrapyramidal effects metoclopramide should be used 
as second- line therapy. Intravenous doses should be administered by slow bolus 
injection over at least 3 minutes to help minimise these. [Grade C]
• Women should be asked about previous adverse reactions to antiemetic thera -
pies. If adverse reactions occur, there should be prompt cessation of the medica -
tions. [GPP]
• Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) with additional potassium chloride in each bag, 
with administration guided by daily monitoring of electrolytes, is the most ap -
propriate intravenous hydration. [Grade C]
• Combinations of different drugs should be used in women who do not re -
spond to a single antiemetic. Suggested antiemetics for UK use are given in 
Appendix III. [GPP]
• Thiamine supplementation (either oral 100 mg tds or intravenous as part of 
vitamin B complex (Pabrinex®)) should be given to all women admitted with 
vomiting, or severely reduced dietary intake, especially before administration 
of dextrose or parenteral nutrition. [Grade D]
• All therapeutic measures should have been tried before considering termina -
tion of pregnancy. [Grade C]
e2 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
1 | PURPOSE AND SCOPE
There is variation in the care of women who have nausea and 
vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) or hyperemesis gravidarum 
(HG) with the potential for lack of understanding of its se -
verity and options for treatment and support.
The aim of this guideline is to provide updated evidence- 
based or best clinical practice information regarding the di -
agnosis and subsequent management of NVP and HG across 
community, ambulatory day care and inpatient settings. A sum -
mary for general practitioners is given in Appendix Vai and Vaii. 
It gives advice for multidisciplinary professionals involved in the 
care of women with these conditions, including how to counsel 
and support women before, during and after their pregnancies.
Within this document we use the terms woman and 
women's health. However, it is important to acknowledge 
that it is not only women for whom it is necessary to access 
women's health and reproductive services in order to main -
tain their gynaecological health and reproductive wellbeing. 
Gynaecological and obstetric services and delivery of care 
must therefore be appropriate, inclusive and sensitive to the 
needs of those individuals whose gender identity does not 
align with the sex they were assigned at birth.
2 | INTRODUCTION AND 
BACKGROUND EPIDEMIOLOGY
NVP affects up to 90% of pregnant women1 and is one of 
the most common indications for hospital admission among 
pregnant women, with typical stays of between three and four 
days. The annual cost to the National Health Service (NHS) 
of NVP has been estimated to be up to £62 million due to hos -
pital admissions, general practice (GP) visits and ambulance 
call- outs.1–4 NVP is defined as the symptom of nausea and/or 
vomiting during pregnancy when onset is prior to 16 weeks of 
gestation and where there are no other causes. The term often 
used in the lay media for NVP is “morning sickness” which is 
not only inaccurate (as symptoms occur both before and after 
noon), but is felt by sufferers to trivialise the condition.5
HG is a severe form of NVP, which affects between 0.3 and 
3.6% of pregnant women, interfering with quality of life and 
the ability to eat and drink normally. Reported HG recurrence 
rates vary, from 15.2% in a Norwegian hospital registry study to 
89% if using self- reported diagnosis.6–9 In a population based 
pregnancy cohort using general practice records prevalence of 
clinically recorded NVP/HG was 9.1%: 2.1% had hospital ad -
missions, 3.4% were treated with antiemetics in primary care 
only, and 3.6% had only recorded diagnoses.10 Therefore it is 
likely that use of a definition that puts more emphasis on sub -
jective patient focussed criteria (see section 5 below) will lead 
to an increase in reported incidence rates.
The major mechanism of NVP and HG has recently 
been elucidated to be related to hypersensitivity to the vomiting hormone growth differentiation factor- 15 
(GDF15). GDF15 caused loss of appetite, taste aver -
sion, nausea, vomiting and weight loss. Variation in the 
GDF15 gene both in families and in unrelated individ -
uals is associated with HG. Both hCG and GDF15 are 
made when genes in the placenta are activated and cir -
culating levels have a peak in the first half of pregnancy, 
but no genetic variants in hCG have been identified (even 
in very large studies) to be associated with HG. Higher 
circulating levels of GDF15 and not hCG were found in 
hospitalised HG patients, patients taking medication for 
NVP, and patients with 2nd trimester vomiting.11 hCG is 
therefore unlikely to be causative.11 Genetic variants as -
sociated with expression of GDF15 in families with HG 
have been identified as the greatest genetic risk factor for 
HG12 and are associated with recurrence in subsequent 
pregnancies.13
3 | IDENTIFICATION AND 
ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE
The Cochrane Library and electronic databases (DARE, 
EMBASE, Trip, MEDLINE and PubMed) were searched 
using the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, 
including all subheadings and synonyms, and this was com -
bined with a keyword search and was limited to humans 
and English language; search terms included ‘hyperemesis’, 
‘nausea and vomiting’ ‘pregnan*’, ‘morning sickness’ and 
‘hyperemesis gravidarum’. The search was restricted to ar -
ticles published between 2015 and July 2023. The full search 
strategy is available to view online as supporting informa -
tion (Appendix  S1 and S2 ).
This guideline was developed using the standard meth -
odology for Green- top Guidelines.14 Where possible, recom -
mendations are based on available evidence. In the absence 
of published evidence, these have been annotated as ‘good 
practice points’. Further information about the assessment 
of evidence and the grading of recommendations may be 
found in Appendix  I.
4 | HOW ARE NVP AND HG 
DEFINED AND DIAGNOSED?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
NVP is diagnosed 
when onset is prior 
to 16 weeks of 
gestation and other 
causes of nausea 
and vomiting have 
been excluded.2– D Onset of NVP is in the first 
trimester and if the 
initial onset is after 
16 weeks this should be 
investigated for other 
causes.
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e3
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
HG can be diagnosed 
when symptoms 
start in early 
pregnancy, nausea 
and/or vomiting are 
severe enough to 
cause an inability 
to eat and drink 
normally and 
strongly limits 
daily activities of 
living. Signs of 
dehydration are 
contributory to 
diagnosis.2– D Definition of HG has been 
agreed by international 
consensus in published 
literature.
An objective and 
validated index 
of nausea and 
vomiting such as the 
Pregnancy- Unique 
Quantification of 
Emesis (PUQE) and 
HyperEmesis Level 
Prediction (HELP) 
tools can be used to 
classify the severity 
of NVP and HG.2+ C The PUQE score is a 
validated score to 
objectively assess 
severity of NVP and 
treatment response for 
mild to moderate NVP. 
The HELP score is 
another validated score 
to determine treatment 
response in severe NVP 
and HG in addition to 
assessing severity.
Clinicians should 
be aware of the 
features in history, 
examination and 
investigation that 
allow NVP and HG 
to be assessed and 
for their severity to 
be monitored.4 D Thorough history, 
examination and 
investigation ensure 
accurate assessment of 
severity and exclusion 
of other causes.
Ketonuria is not 
an indicator of 
dehydration in 
pregnancy and 
should not be used 
to assess severity.1++ A Ketonuria is not associated 
with HG or its severity.
NVP typically starts between the fourth and seventh 
weeks of gestation, peaks in approximately the ninth week 
and resolves by the 20th week in 90% of women.15 [Evidence 
level 2–]
A multi- stakeholder international consensus process de -
veloped a definition for HG to aid clinical diagnosis. The 
Windsor definition17 describes HG as nausea and vomiting 
of which one is severe, beginning in early pregnancy (before 
16 weeks of gestation), inability to eat and drink normally, and 
strongly limiting daily living activities. Signs of dehydration 
are considered contributory to diagnosis. This definition rep -
resents a shift from a historic reliance on objective measures 
such as weight loss and electrolyte imbalance, and towards subjective patient focused criteria which may lead to im -
proved recognition and diagnosis of HG.16 [Evidence level 2–]
The Rhodes Index17,18 was originally validated to mea -
sure nausea and vomiting in chemotherapy patients, in -
cluding assessment of physical symptoms and the resulting 
stress, but has subsequently been used for NVP. A shorter 
disease- specific questionnaire (PUQE) was developed by the 
Motherisk Program,19 an NVP helpline in Canada, which 
highly correlated with the Rhodes Index and assessed symp -
toms over the previous 12 hours.20 The PUQE was modi -
fied to include symptom profile over the previous 24 hours 
including a wellbeing score that correlated with hydration 
status and, more recently, over the duration of the first 
trimester.21,22 The PUQE score can be used to determine 
whether the NVP is mild, moderate or severe (Appendix II ). 
[Evidence level 2+] The PUQE score can also be used to as -
sess the response to treatment for mild to moderate NVP but 
is not valid for severe NVP and HG.
The HELP score was developed and validated by the 
Hyperemesis Education and Research Foundation in the 
USA23 to quantify HG symptoms into a score that can be 
trended over time to monitor progress and response to treat -
ment. It is available as an online calculator ( https:// www. 
hyper emesis. org/ tools/ help- score/ ) and in app form. The 
HELP score ( https:// www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ pmc/ artic les/ 
PMC78 15331/ figure/ FI130 91997 - 1/? report= objec tonly ) can 
be used to track progress with treatment in women with se -
vere NVP and HG. [Evidence level 2+]
NVP and HG are associated with hyponatraemia, hy -
pokalaemia, low serum urea, raised haematocrit and ke -
tonuria with a metabolic hypochloraemic alkalosis. If 
severe, a metabolic acidosis may develop. In two- thirds of 
women with HG, there may be abnormal thyroid function 
tests (based on a structural similarity between thyroid- 
stimulating hormone [TSH] and hCG with a biochemical 
thyrotoxicosis, and raised free thyroxine levels with or 
without a suppressed thyroid stimulating hormone level. 
These patients rarely have thyroid antibodies and are eu -
thyroid clinically. The biochemical thyrotoxicosis resolves 
as the HG improves and treatment with antithyroid drugs 
is unnecessary.24 A raised T4 and low TSH therefore do 
not need treatment in straightforward NVP/HG where the 
cause is clear and the patient is responding to treatment. 
[Evidence level 2–]
Liver function tests are abnormal in up to 40% of women 
with HG,25 with the most likely abnormality being a rise in 
transaminases. Levels of both bilirubin and amylase may be 
mildly elevated. These abnormalities improve as the HG re -
solves. [Evidence level 3]
Ketonuria is not an indicator of dehydration and is not 
associated with severity of NVP or HG.26,27 [Evidence level 
1++]
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e4 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
Clinical assessment as outlined in table  1 or with the 
HELP or PUQE scores are better indicators of severity. 
Assessment of urinary ketosis may mislead clinical judge -
ment of hydration and nutrition status and should be 
avoided in the assessment or monitoring of NVP and HG.Severe malnutrition can be assessed with anthropomet -
ric measures such as mid- upper arm circumference (more 
useful with serial measurements) and validated nutrition 
screening tools such as the Malnutrition Universal Screening 
Tool (MUST) which can be adapted for pregnancy.28–33TABLE 1 Features in the history, examination, and investigations to aid diagnosis and exclude other causes of severe nausea and vomiting in 
pregnancy.
History • Previous history of NVP/HG
• Quantify severity using PUQE/HELP score: nausea, vomiting, ptyalism (hypersalivation), spitting, weight loss, 
inability to tolerate food and fluids, effect on quality of life and ability to perform daily activities
• Ask about self- reported nutritional status or rapid weight loss
• Ask about co- morbidities which may be complicated by lack of oral intake of essential medications such as epilepsy, 
diabetes, HIV, psychiatric conditions and hypoadrenalism.
• Relevant surgical history such as gastric bypass, band or sleeve
• History to exclude other causes:
◦ abdominal pain
◦ urinary symptoms
◦ infection
◦ drug history (prescription and/or recreational)
◦ chronic Helicobacter pylori infection
Examination • Temperature
• Heart rate (tachycardia in dehydration)
• Blood pressure (hypotension in dehydration)
• Oxygen saturations
• Respiratory rate (tachypnoea in dehydration)
• Abdominal examination
• Weight
• Signs of dehydration such as sunken eyes, dry lips and mouth, oliguria or anuria, tachycardia and hypotension
• Signs of malnutrition or rapid weight loss (≥5% pre pregnancy weight), and muscle wasting as measured by mid- arm 
circumference1
• Neurological signs such as confusion, nystagmus or ataxia which could indicate Wernicke's encephalopathy
Investigation • Urinalysis: Nitrites may indicate infection. The presence or absence of ketonuria in pregnancy is not an indicator of 
dehydration. Assessing urinary ketones does not have a use in the management of NVP or HG and may be misleading.
• MSU (if dipstick indicates signs of UTI)
• Urea and electrolytes: (to guide intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement)
• hypokalaemia/hyperkalaemia
◦ hyponatraemia
◦ chronic kidney disease
◦ high creatinine / urea (acute kidney injury) due to dehydration
• Full blood count:
◦ infection
◦ anaemia
◦ raised haemoglobin and haematocrit
• Blood glucose level:
◦ diagnose diabetes
◦ exclude diabetic ketoacidosis in patients with diabetes
• Ultrasound scan:
◦ assess if viable intrauterine pregnancy, multiple pregnancy or trophoblastic disease
• In refractory cases or history of previous admissions, check:
◦ TFTs: hypothyroid/hyperthyroid
◦ LFTs: exclude other liver disease such as hepatitis or gallstones, monitor malnutrition
◦ calcium and phosphate
◦ amylase: exclude pancreatitis
◦ VBG: exclude metabolic disturbances to monitor severity
1Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool ( bapen. org. uk).
VBG venous blood gas; LFTs liver function tests; MSU midstream urine; TFTs thyroid function tests.
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e5
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
5 | HOW SHOULD WOMEN WITH 
NVP AND HG BE CARED FOR?
5.1 | What initial clinical assessment and 
baseline investigations should be performed?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women with mild NVP 
should be cared for in 
the community with 
antiemetics.4 D Since most women with 
NVP require only 
oral or intramuscular 
antiemetics, 
management in the 
community/primary 
care is appropriate 
to avoid unnecessary 
hospital admissions 
and disruption to the 
woman's life.34
Ambulatory day care 
should be used when 
community/primary care 
measures have failed.2+ C If women are unable 
to tolerate oral 
antiemetics or 
oral fluids then 
ambulatory day 
care management is 
appropriate.
Inpatient care should be 
considered if there is at 
least one of the following:
• Continued nausea and 
vomiting and inability 
to keep down oral 
antiemetics
• Continued nausea and 
vomiting associated with 
clinical dehydration or 
weight loss (greater than 
5% of body weight), despite 
oral antiemetics
• Confirmed or suspected 
comorbidity (such as 
urinary tract infection and 
inability to tolerate oral 
antibiotics).
• Comorbidities such as 
epilepsy, diabetes, HIV, 
hypoadrenalism or 
psychiatric disease where 
symptoms and inability 
to tolerate oral intake and 
medication could present 
further complications.4 GPP Women who have 
recurrent/on- going 
NVP/HG despite 
adequate ambulatory 
day care treatment 
should be cared for 
as inpatients because 
of the associated 
complications, 
in particular 
electrolyte imbalance 
and nutritional 
deficiencies.
Where inpatient care is 
required an ultrasound 
scan should be scheduled 
to confirm viability 
and gestational age, 
and to assess for 
multiple pregnancy or 
trophoblastic disease. 
Unless there are other 
medical reasons for an 
urgent scan, this can be 
scheduled for the next 
available appointment.4 GPP Trophoblastic disease and 
multiple pregnancy 
are associated with 
an increased risk of 
HG but do not affect 
the initial care.Women who have nausea and vomiting but are not 
dehydrated can be cared for in the community with an -
tiemetics, reassurance, oral hydration and dietary ad -
vice (eat little and often to prevent an empty stomach). 
Women may benefit from rest and time off work. In areas 
where ‘acute care at home’ or ‘hospital at home’ services 
are operating to provide IV treatment in the community, 
these services can be utilised for IV rehydration at home 
for women who are unable to maintain hydration orally 
but who do not have co- morbidities or complications. 
Women may be reluctant to take, and non- specialist cli -
nicians may be reluctant to prescribe, pharmacological 
treatments owing to concerns about teratogenic risk.35,36 
Women should be counselled that the benefits of anti -
emetics outweigh the risks, and that the absolute risk is 
low. Antiemetics are therefore appropriate and should be 
offered (see section 6.2.2).37 [Evidence level 4]
If women are unable to tolerate oral antiemetics or 
oral fluids then ambulatory day care management, which 
provides intravenous fluids, vitamins (especially B1- thi-
amine)38,39 and parenteral antiemetics, is appropriate 
and should be offered. Thiamine stores in a previously 
healthy individual can deplete rapidly and cause symp -
toms of tachycardia, weakness and decreased deep tendon 
reflexes within one week without intake.39 Various rehy -
dration regimens have been shown to be effective.40,41 A 
randomised controlled trial (RCT) of 98 women showed 
that ambulatory day care management involving intra -
venous fluids and stepwise increments in antiemetic 
therapy versus inpatient care was acceptable to women 
and resulted in fewer days as an inpatient.42 In a study 
of 428 women who had ambulatory day care subcuta -
neous metoclopramide therapy (SMT), improvement in 
symptoms occurred in 89.3%.41 Those women for whom 
the SMT regimen failed (10.7%) had higher mean PUQE 
scores at the start of ambulatory day care treatment than 
those for whom it was successful (10.0 ± 3.0 versus 7.6 
± 2.8 respectively, P < 0.001). Moreover, they were more 
likely to have a PUQE score of 13 or higher, SMT was 
started earlier in pregnancy (9.7 ± 2.9 weeks versus 11.4 
± 3.2 weeks, P = 0.005) and they were more likely to need 
intravenous hydration (91.3% versus 65.2%, P < 0.001). In 
addition to the SMT regimen, women received adjuvant 
therapies at home such as intravenous hydration, subcu -
taneous ondansetron, histamine type- 2 receptor block -
ers, and received total parenteral nutrition. Ambulatory 
day care management has been successfully and safely 
set up in units and is associated with high patient satis -
faction.43 [Evidence level 2+]
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e6 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
5.2 | How should women with NVP and HG 
be cared for?
5.2.1 | What pharmacological therapeutic 
options are available and effective for women with 
NVP and HG?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Combinations of different 
drugs should be used 
in women who do not 
respond to a single 
antiemetic. Suggested 
antiemetics for UK use 
are given in Appendix 
III.4 GPP Various drug classes have 
different mechanisms 
of action and work 
synergistically, 
therefore, 
combination 
antiemetics should be 
used in women who 
do not respond to a 
single agent. Some 
women may require 
combinations of two 
or more medications 
from first- and 
second- line options 
(see Appendix III )
A delayed- release 
combination of 
doxylamine and 
pyridoxine (vitamin 
B6) is the only licensed 
treatment of NVP in the 
UK so can be used first- 
line for mild- moderate 
NVP requiring 
treatment.2++ B A larger improvement 
in PUQE score from 
baseline to day 15 and 
increased wellbeing 
has been reported 
as compared with 
placebo.44
For women with 
persistent or severe 
HG, the parenteral, 
transdermal, or rectal 
route may be necessary 
and more effective than 
an oral regimen.2− D
Corticosteroids should be 
reserved for cases where 
standard therapies have 
been ineffective and 
used in combination 
with antiemetics.1+ A Systematic review 
suggests a beneficial 
effect for steroids.45
Clinicians should use antiemetics with which they are fa -
miliar and should use drugs from different classes if the first 
drug is not effective or only partially effective. Many women 
will require a combination of two or more antiemetics.46
A slow- release combination of doxylamine and pyridox -
ine (vitamin B6) called Xonvea®™ is the only licensed treat -
ment of NVP in the UK.44 A delayed- release formulation 
containing 10 mg doxylamine succinate and 10 mg pyri -
doxine hydrochloride has been available in Canada since 
1979 and since 2013 in the USA. The combination of doxyl -
amine and pyridoxine resulted in a larger improvement in 
PUQE score from baseline to day 15 compared with placebo 
(mean difference −0.90, 95% CI −1.55 to −0.25; P = 0.006) in 
a randomised double- blind multicentre trial of 256 women. 
There was also a significantly larger increase in wellbeing 
score with active treatment (+1.0, P = 0.005). Although no high quality evidence exists to suggest that delayed release 
formulations are more effective than other antiemetics in 
treating NVP, evidence from other fields, such as chemo -
therapy nausea and vomiting management supports their 
use to create stable blood levels of the drug.44 [Evidence 
level 2++]
A study of 1037 admissions46 for HG demonstrated that 
antihistamines were more commonly prescribed in combina -
tion with other antiemetics at hospital discharge after a first 
admission and that combinations of dopamine antagonists 
and serotonin antagonists are common after second and sub -
sequent admissions. Furthermore, persistent vomiting may 
mean that oral doses of antiemetics are not absorbed and 
therefore the sublingual, intravenous, rectal, transcutaneous, 
subcutaneous or intramuscular routes may be necessary and 
more effective (see Appendix III ). [Evidence level 2++]
Three small randomised studies47–49 have shown on-
dansetron to be superior to doxylamine and pyridoxine in 
reducing nausea and vomiting,47 equally effective as meto -
clopramide, but with fewer adverse effects,48 and more ef -
fective than metoclopramide at reducing severe vomiting.49 
[Evidence level 2++] Because there are large amounts of 
safety data for doxylamine/pyridoxine and the antihista -
mines in general have fewer adverse effects than ondan -
setron (which may cause constipation) the antihistamines 
remain first line over ondansetron which is second line (see 
Appendix  III).
A Cochrane systematic review including two RCTs 
demonstrated that treatment with ondansetron was asso -
ciated with improvement in symptoms of all severities.50 
[Evidence level 2++]
There are small studies of the use of Granisetron with 
limited evidence as yet of its use.51,52 [Evidence level 3]
There is no association between the degree of NVP at 
12 weeks and vitamin B6 levels measured at 15 weeks.53 A 
Cochrane review concluded that there is a lack of consistent 
evidence that pyridoxine is an effective therapy for NVP.54 
Furthermore, a placebo- controlled trial of its use in HG did 
not demonstrate any improvement in nausea, vomiting or re -
hospitalisation in 46 women given 20 mg orally three times 
a day in addition to intravenous fluids, intravenous meto -
clopramide three times a day and oral thiamine, compared 
with the control group given placebo in addition to standard 
therapy.55 A matched non- randomised study demonstrated 
that the combination of doxylamine and pyridoxine was sig -
nificantly more effective than pyridoxine alone.56 [Evidence 
level 2++]
Corticosteroids have resulted in dramatic and rapid im -
provement in case series of women with refractory HG.57 
The results of randomised studies are conflicting58 and the 
largest study failed to show improvement in the primary 
outcome of rehospitalisation (however, both groups also 
received metoclopramide and promethazine).59,60 Case se -
lection and route and dose of corticosteroid administration 
may explain the different results, with beneficial results 
being described in more severe cases. A systematic review 
and meta- analysis identified five trials of 310 women and 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e7
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
showed no effect on readmission rates, with one study 
showing reduced vomiting and one showing improved well -
being.45 [Evidence level 1+]
Corticosteroids should not be used until conventional 
treatment with intravenous fluid replacement and regular 
antiemetics has been proven to be ineffective. The suggested 
dose is IV hydrocortisone 100 mg twice daily, and once 
clinical improvement occurs conversion to oral predniso -
lone 40–50 mg daily, with the dose gradually tapered until 
the lowest maintenance dose that controls the symptoms is 
reached. In most cases prednisolone needs to be continued 
until the gestational age at which HG would have resolved 
and in some extreme cases, prednisolone is continued until 
birth.34 Women receiving corticosteroids should be screened 
for gestational diabetes.
There are no trials of community use of ginger for severe 
NVP and HG. A large cross- sectional survey of 512 women 
with HG found that ginger foodstuffs or over the counter 
tablets have little or no efficacy but caused unpleasant ad -
verse effects and worsening of symptoms in over half (54%) 
of participants. Recommendations by a healthcare profes -
sional (HCP) to try ginger was found to cause a loss of trust 
in the HCP and damaged clinician- patient relationships. 
Because prior awareness and self- administration of ginger as 
a home remedy prior to seeking medical help was extremely 
high HCPs should not suggest it and doing so may delay ac -
cess to effective treatment.61
5.2.2 | What is the safety of the 
pharmacological agents used to treat NVP and 
HG? ( See Appendix III)
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
First line - There are safety 
data for antiemetics such 
as anti (H1) histamines, 
phenothiazines and 
pyridoxine- doxylamine 
(Xonvea®) and they 
should be prescribed 
initially when required 
for NVP and HG 
(Appendix III).2++ A Cochrane review 
reports no increased 
risk of congenital 
malformations 
or other adverse 
pregnancy 
outcomes.62
Second line - There 
is evidence that 
ondansetron is safe. 
Its use should not be 
discouraged if first 
line antiemetics are 
ineffective. Women can 
be reassured regarding 
a very small increase 
in the absolute risk of 
orofacial clefting with 
ondansetron use in the 
first trimester , which 
should be balanced 
with the risks of poorly 
managed HG.2++ B Absolute risk of 
orofacial clefting 
increases from a 
background risk of 
11 cases per 10 000 
births to 14 cases 
per 10 000 births 
with ondansetron 
(infographic from 
Irish Medicines in 
Pregnancy Service 
in Appendix IV ).RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Additional second line – 
Metoclopramide is safe 
and can be used alone 
or in combination with 
other antiemetics.2++ B Drug- induced 
extrapyramidal 
symptoms and 
oculogyric crises can 
occur with the use of 
phenothiazines and 
metoclopramide.
Because of the risk of 
extrapyramidal effects 
metoclopramide should 
be used as second- line 
therapy. Intravenous 
doses should be 
administered by slow 
bolus injection over at 
least 3 minutes to help 
minimise these.2+ C Dystonic reactions 
have been shown 
to be significantly 
less common in 
non- pregnant 
patients receiving 
a slow infusion as 
opposed to a bolus 
injection of 10 mg of 
metoclopramide.
Women should be asked 
about previous 
adverse reactions to 
antiemetic therapies. 
If adverse reactions 
occur, there should be 
prompt cessation of the 
medications.4 GPP Women should not 
be prescribed 
medications that 
have caused previous 
adverse reactions.
All the antiemetics discussed above can and should be 
used with confidence in primary and secondary care to 
manage women's symptoms.
A Cochrane review63, other systematic reviews and 
meta- analyses37,64–66 and birth registry data37 have re -
ported on the safety and efficacy of many antiemetics for 
use in NVP and HG, with no increased risk of teratogenesis 
or other adverse pregnancy outcomes. These drugs include: 
antihistamines (H1 receptor antagonists) such as pro -
methazine, cyclizine, cinnarizine, pyridoxine- doxylamine 
(Xonvea®)67 and dimenhydrinate; phenothiazines including 
prochlorperazine, chlorpromazine and perphenazine; and 
dopamine antagonists including metoclopramide68 and 
domperidone. Because there are no clear data supporting 
increased efficacy of one class of antiemetic over others the 
suggested step wise approach (Appendix  III) is based pre -
dominantly on safety data6. [Evidence level 2++]
Use of ondansetron for NVP/HG is increasing69 as is the 
body of literature to support no overall increased risk of 
congenital malformations.70–73 However, conflicting find-
ings from large epidemiological studies (some of which have 
shown a small increased risk of either cardiac defects74 or 
orofacial clefting70) have, controversially, led to warnings 
from the European Medicines Authority to avoid ondan -
setron in the first trimester. The Medicines and Healthcare 
products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) did not issue a warn -
ing. The UK Teratology Information Service (UKTIS) have 
published a systematic review of the literature that concludes 
‘currently available data do not provide evidence that ondan -
setron use in the first trimester of pregnancy is associated 
with an increase in the overall malformation rate.’73 They 
summarised the data for congenital malformations ‘Twelve 
studies, including one meta- analysis of data from seven 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e8 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
studies, collectively including more than 97 000 unique first 
trimester- exposed pregnancies have assessed the overall 
malformation rate following maternal ondansetron use in 
pregnancy.70,75–85 The majority of these studies,70,75,80–84 in-
cluding the largest and most statistically robust (more than 
88 000 first trimester exposures)70 and the meta- analysis,85 
did not identify increased risks in comparison with disease- 
matched and/or healthy or population unexposed controls.’ 
[Evidence level 2++]
Two large cohort studies form the majority of the data in 
the meta- analysis.70,74,85 Although one study74 found a sig -
nificant risk of cardiac defects (adjusted OR 1.43, 95% CI 
1.28–1.61), the larger (1.8 million pregnancy cohort of which 
almost 5% [88 467 women] were exposed to ondansetron 
during the first trimester) study70 did not find a significant 
association for cardiac defects after adjusting for pre- defined 
confounding factors (adjusted relative risk [aRR] 0.99, 95% 
CI 0.93–1.06). However, a small increased risk of orofacial 
clefting was noted71 (aRR 1.24, 95% CI 1.03–1.48). It is im -
portant to put this into context as the background risk of 
orofacial clefting is low, and therefore the increase in abso -
lute risk is small. If the increase in risk is real, then ondan -
setron represents an additional three oral clefts per 10 000 
births (14 cases per 10 000 births with ondansetron exposure 
versus 11 cases per 10 000 births in the unexposed popula -
tion, see Appendix  IV for visual risk summary). [Evidence 
level 2++]
A limitation of these two cohort studies is that they com -
pare women with severe NVP and HG taking ondansetron 
to women who do not have severe NVP and HG. This leaves 
open the possibility that any effects are confounded by indi -
cation, nor do they consider the competing risks to women 
with severe NVP and HG of leaving their illness poorly con -
trolled. A study comparing women with HG taking ondan -
setron with women with HG taking other antiemetics found 
no increased risk of major malformations in the ondanse -
tron group.86 A study85 comparing women with HG tak -
ing ondansetron vs those with HG not taking ondansetron 
found a higher rate of terminations of pregnancy in those 
not taking ondansetron and higher rate of live birth in those 
taking ondansetron.
Due to the risk of extrapyramidal effects with metoclo -
pramide it should be used as second- line therapy. A review 
of metoclopramide,87 conducted by the European Medicines 
Agency's (EMA) Committee for Medicinal Products for 
Human Use, has confirmed the risks of short- term extra -
pyramidal disorders and tardive dyskinesia, particularly 
in young people. The review recommends metoclopramide 
should only be prescribed for short- term use (maximum dose 
of 30 mg in 24 hours or 0.5 mg/kg body weight in 24 hours 
[whichever is lowest] and maximum duration of 5 days) and 
that intravenous doses should be administered by slow bolus 
injection over at least 3 minutes to help minimise these risks. 
Dystonic reactions have been shown to be significantly less 
common in non- pregnant patients receiving a slow infusion 
as opposed to a bolus injection of 10 mg of metoclopramide.88 Notwithstanding the EMA's recommendation the authors of 
this guideline recommend that it can be prescribed for more 
than five days in those women who gain symptomatic relief 
from it. [Evidence level 2++]
Data confirm that corticosteroid use in the first trimester 
is not associated with an increase in risk of congenital mal -
formations overall and specifically no increase in orofacial 
clefting, cardiac defects or hypospadias following first tri -
mester use of corticosteroids.89 Data on corticosteroids use 
in the first trimester is limited to a maximum of approxi -
mately 3500 exposures, and therefore is less well studied in 
comparison to other anti- emetic medication. [Evidence level 
2++]
5.2.3 | What adverse effects can occur from 
NVP and HG and how can they be prevented?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Urea and serum electrolyte 
levels should be 
checked daily in women 
requiring intravenous 
fluids.4 GPP NVP can be associated 
with electrolyte 
imbalances.
Histamine type- 2 receptor 
blockers or proton pump 
inhibitors may be used 
for women developing 
gastro- oesophageal 
reflux disease, 
oesophagitis or gastritis.4 D Recurrent intractable 
vomiting may lead to 
gastro- oesophageal 
reflux disease, 
oesophagitis or 
gastritis.
Thiamine supplementation 
(either oral 100 mg tds 
or intravenous as part 
of vitamin B complex 
(Pabrinex®)) should 
be given to all women 
admitted with vomiting, 
or severely reduced 
dietary intake, especially 
before administration of 
dextrose or parenteral 
nutrition.4 D NVP/HG can lead 
to Wernicke 
encephalopathy 
due to vitamin 
B1 (thiamine) 
deficiency.
Women admitted with 
HG should be offered 
thromboprophylaxis 
with low- molecular- 
weight heparin and 
those being managed in 
the community should 
be assessed for VTE 
risk (see GTG 37a). 
Graduated compression 
stockings should be used 
when low- molecular- 
weight heparin is 
contra- indicated 
(as per GTG 37a). 
Thromboprophylaxis 
can be discontinued 
upon discharge 
providing no other 
indications exist 
for continuation of 
thromboprophylaxis.3 C Women with HG 
have increased 
risk of venous 
thromboembolism 
with odds ratio 2.5 
(95% CI 2–3.2).90
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e9
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women with previous or 
current NVP or HG 
should consider avoiding 
iron- containing 
preparations if these 
exacerbate symptoms 
or consider alternative 
route of administering 
iron.4 D Oral iron can cause 
nausea and vomiting 
and constipation.
Women should be 
questioned about their 
bowel habits and offered 
laxatives if constipated, 
and particularly if 
ondansetron is used.4 GPP Women with NVP or HG 
commonly suffer 
with constipation 
because of reduced 
food and fluid intake 
and if treated with 
ondansetron.91
Women should be offered 
treatment with proton 
pump inhibitors for 
Gastro- oesophageal 
reflux.4 GPP The treatment of gastro- 
oesophageal reflux, 
along with anti- 
emetic therapy, has 
been associated with 
reduced PUQE- 24 
scores and improved 
quality of life scores.92
Inability to tolerate oral fluids and excessive vomiting due 
to NVP and HG can affect other medical conditions requir -
ing oral medication, such as epilepsy, psychiatric conditions, 
hypoadrenalism and HIV. It is vital to prescribe antiemetics 
for women with the above co- morbidities. Medication times 
may need to be adjusted so women can take them when 
symptoms are better controlled.
HG increases risks in some conditions such as those with 
diabetes mellitus, or a history of gastric band, gastric bypass 
and gastric sleeve surgery. Specialist advice is required for 
these women. A previous history of gastric reduction surgery 
may cause malabsorption of oral medication and increase 
the risk of nutrient and vitamin deficiency, particularly thi -
amine and vitamin K.
In women requiring intravenous fluids, daily monitoring 
of fluid and serum electrolyte levels is important to recog -
nise and treat hyponatraemia and hypokalaemia.34,93
Oesophago- gastroduodenoscopy is safe in pregnancy 
and indicated in cases of haematemesis or severe epigas -
tric pain. A therapeutic trial with a proton pump inhibitor 
is appropriate for treatment and prevention and is safe in 
pregnancy.94,95
Wernicke encephalopathy due to vitamin B1 (thia -
mine) deficiency classically presents with blurred vision, 
unsteadiness and confusion/memory problems/drows -
iness and on examination there is usually nystagmus, 
ophthalmoplegia, hyporeflexia or areflexia, gait and/or 
finger–nose ataxia. In HG, the presentation tends to be 
episodic and of slow onset. Wernicke encephalopathy is a 
potentially fatal medical emergency. In the context of HG, 
it is preventable and studies have stressed the association 
between Wernicke encephalopathy and administration of 
intravenous dextrose and parenteral nutrition.96 A sys -
tematic review of 177 cases found that chronic cognitive 
disorders occurred in 65.4%, pregnancy loss in 50%, and maternal death in 5% of cases.96 Therefore thiamine sup -
plementation is recommended for all women admitted 
with HG. [Evidence level 2++]
A Canadian study97 using hospital discharge data found 
an adjusted odds ratio for deep vein thrombosis of 4.4 (95% 
CI 2.4–8.4) in women with HG. However, since women with 
HG are only at markedly increased risk while persistently 
vomiting, thromboprophylaxis can be discontinued at dis -
charge or when the HG resolves.98
In a Canadian prospective cohort study, two- thirds of 97 
women who discontinued iron supplements reported im -
provement in their severity of NVP.99
6 | HOW SHOULD WOMEN WITH 
NVP AND HG BE OFFERED ONGOING 
ANTENATAL CARE?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should only be 
discharged once
• appropriate antiemetic 
therapy has been tolerated
• adequate oral nutrition 
and hydration has been 
tolerated
• management of 
concurrent conditions is 
completed4 GPP Failure to ensure 
this will 
increase the 
chance of 
readmission.
At the time of discharge, it is 
essential that women are 
advised to continue with 
their antiemetics where 
appropriate and that 
they know how to access 
further care.4 D Continued 
treatment may 
reduce the need 
for hospital 
readmission.
Women with severe NVP or 
HG who have continued 
symptoms into the late 
second or the third 
trimester should be 
offered serial scans to 
monitor fetal growth.2+ B Women with low 
pregnancy 
weight gain are 
at increased 
risk of preterm 
birth and low 
birth weight.
Almost one third of women will be readmitted within the 
same pregnancy.100 Therefore, at the time of discharge it is es -
sential that women are advised to continue with their antiemet -
ics where appropriate and that they know how to access further 
care if their symptoms and/or signs recur (e.g. persistent vom -
iting, dehydration). Rehydration and a review of antiemetic 
treatment should ideally be undertaken in an ambulatory day 
care setting.101 Better communication and advice about the 
safety of antiemetics may enable general practitioners to ade -
quately support women with HG.101,102 [Evidence level 2–]
Level of ketones should not be used to inform clinical 
decision making about treatments or hydration status.27 
[Evidence level 2+]
An observational study has shown that women with HG 
and low pregnancy weight gain (less than 7 kg during preg -
nancy) are at an increased risk of preterm birth (aRR 3.0, 95% 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e10 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
CI 1.9–4.3) and low birthweight (less than 2500g; aRR 2.8, 95% 
CI 1.7–4.3).103 [Evidence level 2+]
A population- based cohort study using secondary health -
care records demonstrated that HG was significantly asso -
ciated with low birthweight (OR 1.12, 99% CI 1.08–1.17), 
small- for- gestational- age (OR 1.06, 99% CI 1.01–1.11) babies, 
and babies more likely to undergo resuscitation or inten -
sive care treatment, albeit with small absolute risk.104 The 
Cambridge Baby Growth Study also found that vomiting 
during the first and second trimesters of pregnancy was as -
sociated with a higher risk of low birthweight (OR 3.5 95% CI 
1.2–10.8 P = 0.03) even when vomiting was not perceived to 
be severe enough to warrant treatment.105 [Evidence level 2+]
6.1 | What are optimal rehydration regimens 
for ambulatory and inpatient care?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Normal saline 
(0.9% NaCl) 
with additional 
potassium chloride 
in each bag, with 
administration 
guided by daily 
monitoring of 
electrolytes, is the 
most appropriate 
intravenous 
hydration.3 C There is no evidence to 
determine which 
fluid regimen is 
most appropriate 
but given that most 
women admitted to 
hospital with HG 
are hyponatraemic, 
hypochloraemic 
and hypokalaemic, 
it seems appropriate 
to use normal saline 
(0.9% NaCl) and 
potassium chloride.
The use of dextrose 
infusions for fluid 
replacement in 
NVP and HG is not 
recommended.4 D Intravenous fluid 
and electrolyte 
replacement is 
likely to be the 
most important 
intervention in 
the treatment of 
those requiring 
ambulatory or 
inpatient care for 
NVP. General 
guidance on fluid 
management in 
adults can be found 
in NICE Clinical 
Guideline 174.106 
Dextrose- containing 
solutions may 
precipitate Wernicke 
encephalopathy in 
thiamine deficient 
states.
The most important intervention is likely to be appropriate 
intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement. General adult 
fluid management guidance can be found in NICE Clinical 
Guideline 174.106 IV fluids have been shown to reduce vomit -
ing and are therefore valuable for both outpatient and inpatient 
management of the symptoms of HG and severe NVP as well 
as associated dehydration and electrolyte disorders. Women in the placebo arm of controlled trials for NVP demonstrated a 
significant improvement in nausea with supportive treatment 
including IV fluids without antiemetics107,108.
Dextrose- containing solutions can precipitate Wernicke 
encephalopathy in thiamine- deficient states (see section 7.1); 
hence, they should be avoided, and high (e.g. 100 mg) doses 
of parenteral thiamine should be given to prevent Wernicke 
encephalopathy. Dextrose containing fluids are appropriate 
for nausea and vomiting in the third trimester to prevent 
and treat starvation ketosis.109 [Evidence level 3]
6.2 | What is the effect of NVP and HG 
on the quality of life of the woman and family?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
A woman's quality of life can 
be adversely affected 
by NVP and HG and 
practitioners should 
assess the severity of a 
woman's symptoms in 
relation to her quality of 
life and social situation.2– C NVP has been reported to 
reduce quality of life, 
impairing a woman's 
ability to function on 
a day- to- day basis, 
and negatively affects 
relationships with her 
partner and family.
Practitioners should carry 
out a full assessment of 
both physical and mental 
health status during the 
pregnancy and refer for 
psychological support if 
necessary.2+ C Depressive symptoms and 
poor mental health are 
associated with severity 
of NVP.
Acknowledgement 
by healthcare 
professionals of the 
effect of these physical 
symptoms on patients’ 
mental health is likely 
to lead to an improved 
patient experience.
Pre- existing mental 
health conditions 
may be exacerbated 
by HG particularly 
where prescribed oral 
medications are not 
being taken or kept down 
because of vomiting, 
therefore consideration 
to alternative routes of 
administration, proactive 
use of antiemetics and 
appropriate referrals 
should be considered.
Information about patient 
support groups should 
be provided to all women 
admitted with nausea and 
vomiting in pregnancy.4
4GPP
GPP Many women and their 
partners find support 
groups (e.g. Pregnancy 
Sickness Support) 
online or in person 
extremely helpful.
6.2.1 | Effect of HG on daily functioning
NVP has been reported to reduce quality of life, impairing a 
woman's ability to function on a day- to- day basis, and nega -
tively affects relationships with her partner and family.110–130 
Women with HG are three to six times more likely than 
women with NVP to have low quality of life.24 Constant nausea 
is the symptom that most adversely affects quality of life.118,131 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e11
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
Furthermore, causes of stress as a consequence of NVP include 
lack of understanding and support, inability to eat healthily, 
regret for the loss of a positive pregnancy experience, finan -
cial pressures, absence from work, isolation, inability to care 
for family, others’ belief that it is psychosomatic and percep -
tion that doctors are reluctant to provide treatment.112,132,133 
Perceived stress positively correlated with NVP and negatively 
correlated with social support in a cross- sectional study of 243 
women.134 It has been recommended that social support is 
necessary as an adjunct to treatment and the circle of support 
should be expanded to include family, friends and healthcare 
professionals.135 A cohort study of 648 women found that hav -
ing support from at least three other persons was protective in 
women with NVP.112 [Evidence level 2–]
Information about patient support groups (e.g. Pregnancy 
Sickness Support) should be provided as many women 
and their partners find this form of support helpful.136–138 
[Evidence level 4]
A follow- up appointment for antenatal care is important 
in women with HG. Psychological and social support should 
be organised depending upon the clinical and social circum -
stances. [Evidence level 4]
6.2.2 | Effect of HG on mental health
The erroneous belief in the psychogenic aetiology of HG is 
still prevalent among healthcare professionals137,139–143 and 
such attitudes towards women contribute to a worse expe -
rience for NVP and HG sufferers.137,140,143–145 Women often 
struggle to obtain treatment for NVP and HG, are dissat -
isfied with communication during their appointments and 
found healthcare professionals dismissive and unsympa -
thetic.143,146–149 A cohort study of 808 women demonstrated 
that women who feel that their healthcare professional is 
unsympathetic report more depression and anxiety.140 A 
review paper recommends an integrated approach which 
addresses both physical and psychological suffering in 
HG.150 The theory of psychogenic aetiology proposed by 
Fairweather has been severely criticised for poor methodol -
ogy and bias.97,151–153 Studies have failed to find a convinc -
ing association between a prior history of psychological poor 
health and having HG.154–160 Similarly, these suggest that 
poor mental health can be exacerbated by HG rather than 
being caused by it.114,139,144,150,157,160–163 [Evidence level 2+]
Depressive symptoms and poor mental health are asso -
ciated with severity of NVP.164,165 Poor psychological health 
of women with HG is considered as the demoralisation of 
suffering from a prolonged, severe chronic illness and in this 
regard it is similar to mental health problems suffered in 
other chronic illnesses.140 [Evidence level 2+]
Pre- existing mental health conditions may be exacer -
bated by HG particularly where prescribed oral medications 
are not being taken or kept down due to vomiting, therefore 
consideration to alternative routes of administration, ag -
gressive use of antiemetics and appropriate referrals should 
be considered. [Evidence level 4]Clinical assessment should be considered for depression, 
anxiety and postnatal depression with appropriate referral. 
Depression and poor psychological health have been found 
to be associated with NVP and HG in numerous stud -
ies,112,113,130,144,154–157,161,164–169 including a systematic re -
view and meta- analysis, but resulted from the disease and 
were not the cause of HG or NVP.126 A UK wide survey 
of 5071 participants found a quarter of those suffering HG 
occasionally reported suicidal ideation and 6.6% regularly 
considered suicide due to the severity of the condition, 
4.9% had a termination of pregnancy (TOP) due to HG and 
52.1% considered TOP due to HG. Both suicidal ideation 
and TOP of a wanted pregnancy were associated with per -
ceived poor care from their healthcare providers. Those 
reporting extremely poor perception of both primary and 
secondary care were less likely to have been offered med -
ication compared with those reporting excellent care.170 
[Evidence level 2++]
A cohort study of 648 women found that symptoms of 
major depression are associated with moderate and se -
vere NVP but prior history of depression is not a determi -
nant.112,162 [Evidence level 2–]
Poor mental health can persist post- partum and HG is a 
risk factor for postpartum PTSD.169,171,172 [Evidence level 2+]
Pregnancy sickness specific counselling may be helpful 
either during or after pregnancy.173 Measures that address 
NVP, poor social support and depression are warranted 
throughout pregnancy.112 A prospective cohort study of 
367 women suggests that practitioners could improve their 
management of NVP by addressing symptoms and life situ -
ation.115 [Evidence level 3]
7 | HOW SHOULD WOMEN WITH 
NVP AND HG BE CARED FOR WHEN 
STANDARD TREATMENT MEASURES 
DO NOT CONTROL SYMPTOMS OF 
NAUSEA AND VOMITING?
7.1 | What is the role of the multidisciplinary 
team?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
In women with 
severe NVP 
or HG, input 
should be sought 
from other allied 
professionals.4 D There are many facets to severe 
NVP and HG and a holistic 
approach to assessment 
and treatment should be 
adopted.
Involvement of the mental health team in the woman's 
care may improve quality of life and the ability to cope with 
the impact of a complicated pregnancy.110 Emotional support 
and psychological or psychiatric care may be required126,174 
with targeted interventions specifically designed to treat 
mental health issues occurring as a result of HG.154,161,175,176 
[Evidence level 2–]
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e12 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
Dieticians should be consulted regarding the role of nu -
tritional support. Oral nutritional supplements may supple -
ment an inadequate food intake or provide a more balanced 
nutritional intake where women are only able to tolerate a 
limited range of foods. All care should be holistic and cul -
turally sensitive particularly in those with multimorbidity, 
social deprivation and other marginalised groups.
7.2 | When should enteral and parenteral 
nutrition be considered and what are the risks 
to the woman and fetus?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
When all other medical 
therapies have failed 
to sufficiently manage 
symptoms, enteral tube 
feeding or parenteral 
treatment should be 
considered with a referral 
to gastroenterology 
and a multidisciplinary 
approach in parallel 
to ongoing medical 
therapies.3 D Total parenteral 
nutrition is 
a high- risk 
intervention; 
however, it 
may be useful 
in refractory 
cases to ensure 
sufficient 
nutritional 
intake.
Parenteral nutrition should only be considered as a multi -
disciplinary approach when all other treatments have failed 
to sufficiently control symptoms as it is inconvenient, expen -
sive and can be associated with serious complications such 
as thrombosis, metabolic disturbances and infection.177,178 A 
single nonrandomised study has shown that total parenteral 
nutrition (TPN) was associated with a decreased risk of peri -
natal morbidity compared with those with HG who did not 
receive TPN.179 [Evidence level 2+]
There are no defined criteria for starting parenteral or en -
teral tube feeding. Their effectiveness is not well established. 
Anecdotally, they can be effective and are often employed as a 
last resort when all other medical therapy has failed and the only 
other practical option is TOP.180,181 Close monitoring of meta -
bolic and electrolyte balance, related complications (including 
refeeding syndrome)182 and nutritional requirements are needed 
with a multidisciplinary approach. [Evidence level 2–]
Enteral tube feeding options to consider include naso -
gastric, nasoduodenal or nasojejunal tubes, or percutane -
ous endoscopic gastrostomy or gastrojejunostomy feeding, 
all of which should only be considered in consultation with 
gastroenterology and with a multidisciplinary approach. 
Parenteral feeding with a peripherally inserted central cath -
eter (PICC line) is often better tolerated than enteral feeding; 
however, it carries a higher risk of infection and vascular 
complications.183 [Evidence level 2+]
In some women, feeding by nasogastric or percutaneous 
endoscopic gastrostomy tube increases the risk of nausea 
and vomiting. It may be tolerated in the short term but not 
in protracted HG.184 A recent randomised controlled trial 
recruited 116 women hospitalised for HG between 5 and 
20 weeks and allocated them to either enteral (nasogastric) tube feeding (n=59) or standard care (n=57). Outcomes did 
not differ between the groups and adherence to protocol was 
low due to adverse effects in the enteral tube feeding arm. 
Many women could not tolerate tube feeding due to discom -
fort suggesting it is poorly tolerated as an early routine treat -
ment. [Evidence level 2+]
In nasojejunal feeding, the tube is inserted endoscopically 
or under radiological guidance to the jejunum and feeding can 
be administered by a continuous infusion. One study showed 
that although the majority of women improved greatly within 
48 hours, ongoing vomiting and retching can dislodge gastric 
and postpyloric feeding tubes.184 [Evidence level 3]
Feeding via a percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy 
(PEG- J), placed under general anaesthetic in the second tri -
mester,185,186,187 has been shown to be an effective, safe and 
well- tolerated treatment of HG. In the majority of women, the 
tube is removed after birth. The risk of early dislodgement is 
minimised compared with nasoenteric placement.187 Potential 
complications of percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy 
include tube dislodgement, obstruction or migration, cutane -
ous or intra- abdominal abscesses, fistula formation, pneuma -
tosis, occlusion and intestinal ischaemia. [Evidence level 2+]
7.3 | When should termination of pregnancy 
be discussed?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All therapeutic 
measures should 
have been offered 
before considering 
termination of 
pregnancy.2– C HG is associated with a higher 
risk of termination of 
pregnancy. As many as 10% 
of women with HG undergo 
termination of pregnancy 
due to the severity of 
symptoms, who would not 
otherwise have chosen to.188
Around 10% of women with HG will terminate a wanted 
pregnancy, due to the condition.137,170 Pregnancy Sickness 
Support in the UK found that many of these women have not 
been offered the full range of treatments available and fewer 
than 10% had been offered steroids.188 [Evidence level 2–]
Treatment options of antiemetics, corticosteroids, enteral 
tube and parenteral feeding, and correction of electrolyte or 
metabolic disturbances should be considered before deciding 
that the only option is TOP.189,190 Consider seeking psychi -
atric opinion if there are concerns regarding mental health, 
and the decision for TOP needs to be multidisciplinary, with 
documentation of therapeutic failure if this is the reason for 
the termination. Women should be offered counselling be -
fore and after a decision of pregnancy termination is made. 
[Evidence level 2–]
In a survey of 808 women who had TOP secondary to 
HG, 123 (15.2%) had at least one termination due to HG, and 
49 (6.1%) had multiple terminations.190 Common reasons 
given for the terminations were inability to care for the fam -
ily and self (66.7%), fear that they and their baby could die 
(51.2%), or that the baby would be abnormal (22%). In one 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e13
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
study, women who underwent a pregnancy termination were 
more likely to report a negative attitude from their caregiver. 
Initiation of a prompt and responsive treatment plan may 
reduce this.180 Rarely, HG or its treatment may lead to life- 
threatening illness and TOP is seen as the only option.96,191 
[Evidence level 4]
8 | WHAT ARE THE LONG- TERM 
EFFECTS OF NVP AND HG?
8.1 | What are the long- term effects of NVP 
and HG on women?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
There is no evidence of 
significant impact 
on long- term all- 
cause mortality .2++ B In a large population cohort 
study from Norway, 
HG was not associated 
with an increased risk 
of long- term all- cause 
mortality.192
Women who experience 
HG in pregnancy 
are at increased risk 
of PND, anxiety and 
PTSD postpartum.2++ B Systematic review has shown 
a significantly increased 
risk of depression and 
anxiety in women with 
HG which extended into 
the postnatal period.126 
A subsequent two- point 
case control study 
demonstrated long- 
lasting psychological 
morbidity associated 
with HG.169
Women with previous 
HG should be 
advised that 
there is a risk of 
recurrence in future 
pregnancies.2++ B The reported rates of 
recurrence varied from 
15% to 81%.
Women who experience HG in pregnancy are at increased 
risk of postnatal depression (PND), anxiety and post- 
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) postpartum.126 [Evidence 
level 2++]
Symptoms of NVP and HG should resolve rapidly after 
the birth. Where symptoms do not resolve further investi -
gation should occur with referrals to endocrinology and gas -
troenterology as appropriate. Case reports have highlighted 
hyperparathyroidism as a potential differential diagnosis for 
HG which does not resolve postnatally.193 [Evidence level 4]
A systematic review published in 2019 found five el -
igible studies reporting on 40 350 women with HG which 
investigated the chance of recurrence of HG in subsequent 
pregnancies.7 The quality of the five studies was low and 
meta- analysis was not possible due to clinical and statistical 
heterogeneity. The reported rates of recurrence varied from 
15% to 81%. The paper concluded that a prospective longi -
tudinal cohort study using an agreed definition of HG and 
outcomes meaningful to patients is required to establish the 
true recurrence rate of HG.9 [Evidence level 2++]8.2 | What are the long- term effects of 
NVP and HG on the infant and child?
Mild- moderate NVP does not appear to have a negative long- 
term effect on the developing fetus and may have a protective 
effect for the pregnancy.194 [Evidence level 2+]
In contrast a recent systematic review and meta- analysis 
of nineteen studies with 619 cases showed an association 
with a small increase in adverse health outcomes of chil -
dren born to women who had suffered with HG.195 A re -
cent meta- analysis suggested a small increase in the risk of 
certain adverse health outcomes in infants born to women 
who suffered with HG including anxiety disorder, testicu -
lar cancer (aged up to 40 years), attention deficit hyperac -
tivity disorder and autism, however there was considerable 
heterogeneity between individual studies. [Evidence level 
2–]
8.3 | What advice should be given about 
future pregnancies?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Early use of lifestyle/
dietary modifications 
and antiemetics that 
were useful in the index 
pregnancy is advisable to 
reduce the risk of NVP 
and HG in the current 
pregnancy.2+ B There is a lower 
recurrence risk 
with pre- emptive 
antiemetics before 
symptoms begin.
The self- reported recurrence risk of HG is extremely high 
(89%).6–9
A Canadian study comparing women with NVP (PUQE 
score of 13 and above) who took pre- emptive antiemetics 
before pregnancy or before the onset of symptoms with 
those who did not, reported a lower recurrence rate of HG 
in the group that took pre- emptive antiemetics.111 There 
was also a significant improvement in the PUQE score of 
NVP severity compared with the previous pregnancy in the 
pre- emptive group. Women who have experienced severe 
NVP in a previous pregnancy may benefit from initiating 
dietary and lifestyle changes, such as arranging childcare 
to facilitate rest and adjusting to a “little and often” diet, 
and commencing antiemetics before or immediately at the 
start of symptoms in a subsequent pregnancy.111 [Evidence 
level 2++]
A small randomised study in women with previous NVP 
demonstrated that pre- emptive treatment with antiemetics 
resulted in fewer women with moderate to severe NVP.196 
[Evidence level 2++]
Women who have experienced HG in two or more preg -
nancies reported that earlier use of antiemetics was a factor 
in reducing the number of hospital admissions they had in 
the second pregnancy.149 [Evidence level 3]
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e14 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
9 | RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
FUTURE RESEARCH
A James Lind Alliance Priority Setting Partnership has re -
ported 26 priorities for research.197 Recommendations based 
on this guideline are:
• To establish optimum dose and route of administration 
for ondansetron to maximise efficacy with the least ad -
verse effects
• To evaluate the feasibility, cost efficiency and patient 
satisfaction of community/home based rehydration 
treatment
• To establish the most effective combinations of therapies 
to maximise efficacy with the least adverse effects
• To develop and assess interventions to reduce the risk of 
negative psychological outcomes
• To evaluate the effect of pre- emptive intervention on 
the severity and duration of symptoms in subsequent 
pregnancies
• To explore the effect of socioeconomic factors and ethnic -
ity on access to appropriate care and management of HG
All future research should use the Core Outcome Set for 
Hyperemesis Gravidarum research.197
10 | AUDITABLE TOPICS
• Percentage of women with access to recommended first 
and second line antiemetic HG treatment (100%)
• Percentage of women prescribed appropriate rehydration 
regimes and VTE risk assessment (100%)
• Service evaluation – incidence of termination of wanted 
pregnancy due to NVP/HG
11 | USEFUL LINKS AND 
SUPPORT GROUPS
• Pregnancy Sickness Support [ https:// www. pregn ancys 
ickne sssup port. org. uk/ ] Provides information and peer 
support to people affected by NVP and HG across the UK
• Hyperemesis Education and Research (HER) Foundation 
[https:// www. hyper emesis. org/ ]
• UK Teratology Information Service (UKTIS): www. uktis. 
org
• bumps (best use of medicines in pregnancy). Treating 
nausea and vomiting in pregnancy [ http:// www. medic 
inesi npreg nancy. org/ Medic ine- - pregn ancy/ NV/ ].
• For professionals: UKTIS. Treatment of nausea and vom-
iting in pregnancy [ https:// uktis. org/ monog raphs/ treat 
ment- of- nause a- and- vomit ing- in- pregn ancy/ ].
FUNDING INFORMATION
All those involved in the development of the Green- top 
Guidelines, including the Guidelines Committee, Guidelines Committee co- chairs, guideline developers, peer reviewers 
and other reviewers, are unpaid volunteers and receive no 
direct funding for their work in producing the guideline. 
The exception to this are the RCOG staff involved who are 
salaried employees of the College and Guidelines Committee 
members who receive reimbursement for expenses for at -
tending Guidelines Committee meetings. Please see more 
information on travel expense rules on the RCOG website.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
CNP reports payment from UCB (manufacturer of Cimzia®) 
for advisory board participation, and speaker and chair -
ing fees from Sanofi and UCB. MS reports speaker fees 
from Alliance Healthcare. RG is Trustee and Treasurer at 
Pregnancy Sickness Support, and reports a consultancy fee 
from Exeltis. MN has been supported by an NIHR-funded 
research training fellowship, and reports speaker fees from 
Exceltis. CD, MOH and KH have declared no conflicts of 
interests. Full disclosures of interest for the Guidelines 
Committee and peer reviewers are available to view online 
as supporting information.
REFERENCES
 1. Gadsby R, Rawson V, Dziadulewicz E, Rousseau B, Collings H. 
Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and resource implications: 
the NVP Impact Study. Br J Gen Pract. Mar 2019;69(680):e217-23. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3399/ bjgp1 8X700745
 2. Lacasse A, Lagoutte A, Ferreira E, Bérard A. Metoclopramide and 
diphenhydramine in the treatment of hyperemesis gravidarum: ef -
fectiveness and predictors of rehospitalisation. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol. Mar 2009;143(1):43-9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 
2008. 11. 007
 3. Gazmararian JA, Petersen R, Jamieson DJ, et  al. Hospitalizations 
during pregnancy among managed care enrollees. Obstet Gynecol. 
Jul 2002;100(1):94-100. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0029 - 7844(02) 
02024 - 0
 4. Atanackovic G, Wolpin J, Koren G. Determinants of the need for 
hospital care among women with nausea and vomiting of preg -
nancy. Clin Invest Med. Apr 2001;24(2):90-3.
 5. Gadsby R, Ivanova D, Trevelyan E, Hutton JL, Johnson S. Nausea 
and vomiting in pregnancy is not just 'morning sickness': data 
from a prospective cohort study in the UK. Br J Gen Pract. 08 
2020;70(697):e534-9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3399/ bjgp2 0X710885
 6. Trogstad LI, Stoltenberg C, Magnus P, Skjaerven R, Irgens 
LM. Recurrence risk in hyperemesis gravidarum. BJOG. Dec 
2005;112(12):1641-5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2005. 
00765. x
 7. Dean CR, Bruin CM, O'Hara ME, et al. The chance of recurrence of 
hyperemesis gravidarum: A systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol X. Jan 2020;5:100105. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. eurox. 
2019. 100105
 8. Einarson TR, Piwko C, Koren G. Quantifying the global rates of 
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: a meta analysis. J Popul Ther 
Clin Pharmacol. 2013;20(2):e171–83.
 9. Nijsten K, Dean C, van der Minnen LM, et al. Recurrence, post -
poning pregnancy, and termination rates after hyperemesis grav -
idarum: Follow up of the MOTHER study. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand. Sep 2021;100(9):1636-43. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ aogs. 
14197 
 10. Fiaschi LN- PC, Deb S, King R, Tata LJ. Clinical management of 
nausea and vomiting in pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum 
across primary and secondary care: a population- based study. 
BJOG: an international journal of obstetrics and gynaecology. 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e15
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
2019;126(10):1201–11. [Comment in: BJOG. 2019 Sep;126(10):1212; 
PMID: 31127655. https:// www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ pubmed/ 31127655 , 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 15662 
 11. Fejzo M, Rocha N, Cimino I, et  al. Fetally- encoded GDF15 and 
maternal GDF15 sensitivity are major determinants of nausea and 
vomiting in human pregnancy. bioRxiv. 2023:2023.06.02.542661. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1101/ 2023. 06. 02. 542661
 12. Marlena S, Fejzo KWM, First O, Quan C, Mullin PM. Whole- exome 
sequencing uncovers new variants in GDF15 associated with hyper -
emesis gravidarum. Review. BJOG. 2022. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 
1471- 0528. 17129 
 13. Fejzo MS, Arzy D, Tian R, MacGibbon KW, Mullin PM. Evidence 
GDF15 Plays a Role in Familial and Recurrent Hyperemesis 
Gravidarum. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd. Sep 2018;78(9):866-70. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1055/ a- 0661- 0287
 14. Gynaecologists RCoOa. Developing a Green- top Guideline: guid-
ance for developers. London: RCOG; 2020.
 15. Gadsby R, Barnie- Adshead AM, Jagger C. A prospective study 
of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. Br J Gen Pract. Jun 
1993;43(371):245-8.
 16. Jansen LAW, Koot MH, Van't Hooft J, et  al. The windsor defini -
tion for hyperemesis gravidarum: A multistakeholder interna -
tional consensus definition. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. Nov 
2021;266:15-22. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2021. 09. 004
 17. Rhodes VA, Watson PM, Johnson MH. Development of reliable 
and valid measures of nausea and vomiting. Cancer Nurs. Feb 
1984;7(1):33-41.
 18. Rhodes VA, McDaniel RW. The Index of Nausea, Vomiting, and 
Retching: a new format of the lndex of Nausea and Vomiting. Oncol 
Nurs Forum. Jun 1999;26(5):889-94.
 19. Koren G, Boskovic R, Hard M, Maltepe C, Navioz Y, Einarson A. 
Motherisk- PUQE (pregnancy- unique quantification of emesis and 
nausea) scoring system for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. May 2002;186(5 Suppl Understanding):S228-31. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1067/ mob. 2002. 123054
 20. Koren G, Piwko C, Ahn E, et al. Validation studies of the Pregnancy 
Unique- Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) scores. J Obstet Gynaecol. 
Apr 2005;25(3):241-4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01443 61050 0060651
 21. Lacasse A, Rey E, Ferreira E, Morin C, Bérard A. Validity of a 
modified Pregnancy- Unique Quantification of Emesis and Nausea 
(PUQE) scoring index to assess severity of nausea and vomiting of 
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Jan 2008;198(1):71.e1-7. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2007. 05. 051
 22. Ebrahimi N, Maltepe C, Bournissen FG, Koren G. Nausea and 
vomiting of pregnancy: using the 24- hour Pregnancy- Unique 
Quantification of Emesis (PUQE- 24) scale. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 
Sep 2009;31(9):803-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1701 - 2163(16) 34298 - 0
 23. MacGibbon KW, Kim S, Mullin PM, Fejzo MS. HyperEmesis Level 
Prediction (HELP Score) Identifies Patients with Indicators of 
Severe Disease: a Validation Study. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd. Jan 
2021;81(1):90-8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1055/ a- 1309- 1997
 24. Goodwin TM, Montoro M, Mestman JH. Transient hyperthyroid-
ism and hyperemesis gravidarum: clinical aspects. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. Sep 1992;167(3):648-52. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0002 - 
9378(11) 91565 - 8
 25. Rotman P, Hassin D, Mouallem M, Barkai G, Farfel Z. Wernicke's 
encephalopathy in hyperemesis gravidarum: association with ab -
normal liver function. Isr J Med Sci. Mar 1994;30(3):225-8.
 26. Koot MH, Grooten IJ, Post JAMV, et al. Ketonuria is not associated 
with hyperemesis gravidarum disease severity. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol. Nov 2020;254:315-20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 
2020. 08. 014
 27. Niemeijer MN, Grooten IJ, Vos N, et al. Diagnostic markers for hy -
peremesis gravidarum: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. Aug 2014;211(2):150.e1-15. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. ajog. 2014. 02. 012
 28. Miele MJ, Souza RT, Calderon I, et al. Proposal of MUAC as a fast 
tool to monitor pregnancy nutritional status: results from a cohort study in Brazil. BMJ Open. May 24 2021;11(5):e047463. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1136/ bmjop en- 2020- 047463
 29. Mayimbo SHC, Kwaleyela C, Phoebe B, Chirwa E, Kaonga P, 
Ngoma C. Assessing Malnutrition in Pregnant Women Using the 
Dietary Diversity Score and the Mid- Upper Arm Circumference: 
A Cross- Sectional Study. Zambia. Food and Nutrition Sciences. 
2021;11:712–25.
 30. Mareschal J, Achamrah N, Norman K, Genton L. Clinical Value of 
Muscle Mass Assessment in Clinical Conditions Associated with 
Malnutrition. J Clin Med. Jul 17 2019;8(7) https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ 
jcm80 71040 
 31. Bharadwaj S, Ginoya S, Tandon P, et  al. Malnutrition: laboratory 
markers vs nutritional assessment. Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf). Nov 
2016;4(4):272-80. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ gastro/ gow013
 32. BAPEN. Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool. Worcestershire: 
BAPEN; 2003.
 33. BAPEN. The 'MUST' Explanatory Booklet. Worcestershire: BAPEN; 
2011.
 34. Jarvis S, Nelson- Piercy C. Management of nausea and vomiting in preg -
nancy. BMJ. Jun 2011;342:d3606. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. d3606 
 35. Figueroa Gray M, Hsu C, Kiel L, Dublin S. Getting through the 
day: a pilot qualitative study of U.S. women's experiences making 
decisions about anti- nausea medication during pregnancy. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. Dec 2018;18(1):475. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 
s1288 4- 018- 2093- 6
 36. Widnes SF, Schjøtt J. Risk perception regarding drug use in preg -
nancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 04 2017;216(4):375-8. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. ajog. 2016. 12. 007
 37. Gill SK, Einarson A. The safety of drugs for the treatment of 
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Expert Opin Drug Saf. Nov 
2007;6(6):685-94. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1517/ 14740 338.6. 6. 685
 38. Erick M. Hyperemesis gravidarum: a case of starvation and altered 
sensorium gestosis (ASG). Med Hypotheses. May 2014;82(5):572-80. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. mehy. 2014. 02. 014
 39. Pacei F, Tesone A, Laudi N, et  al. The Relevance of Thiamine 
Evaluation in a Practical Setting. Nutrients. Sep 13 2020;12(9) 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ nu120 92810 
 40. McParlin C, Carrick- Sen D, Steen IN, Robson SC. Hyperemesis in 
Pregnancy Study: a pilot randomised controlled trial of midwife- led 
outpatient care. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. May 2016;200:6-
10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2016. 02. 016
 41. Lombardi DG, Istwan NB, Rhea DJ, O'Brien JM, Barton JR. 
Measuring outpatient outcomes of emesis and nausea management 
in pregnant women. Manag Care. Nov 2004;13(11):48-52.
 42. McCarthy FP, Murphy A, Khashan AS, et  al. Day care compared 
with inpatient management of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: a 
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. Oct 2014;124(4):743-
8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 00000 00000 000449
 43. TN K, S K, M S. Hyperemesis day centre audit [E- poster EP13.25]. 
BJOG. 2013;120(Suppl 1).
 44. Doxylamine/pyridoxine for nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. 
Drug Ther Bull. Mar 2019;57(3):38-41. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ dtb. 
2018. 000053
 45. Grooten IJ, Vinke ME, Roseboom TJ, Painter RC. A Systematic 
Review and Meta- Analysis of the Utility of Corticosteroids in the 
Treatment of Hyperemesis Gravidarum. Nutr Metab Insights. 
2015;8(Suppl 1):23–32. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4137/ NMI. S29532
 46. Fiaschi L, Housley G, Nelson- Piercy C, et  al. Assessment of dis -
charge treatment prescribed to women admitted to hospital for 
hyperemesis gravidarum. Int J Clin Pract. Jan 2019;73(1):e13261. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ ijcp. 13261 
 47. Oliveira LG, Capp SM, You WB, Riffenburgh RH, Carstairs SD. 
Ondansetron compared with doxylamine and pyridoxine for treat -
ment of nausea in pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet 
Gynecol. Oct 2014;124(4):735-42. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 
00000 00000 000479
 48. Abas MN, Tan PC, Azmi N, Omar SZ. Ondansetron compared 
with metoclopramide for hyperemesis gravidarum: a randomized 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e16 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. Jun 2014;123(6):1272-9. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 00000 00000 000242
 49. Kashifard M, Basirat Z, Golsorkhtabar- Amiri M, Moghaddamnia 
A. Ondansetrone or metoclopromide? Which is more effective 
in severe nausea and vomiting of pregnancy? A randomized trial 
double- blind study. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol. 2013;40(1):127–30.
 50. Boelig RC, Barton SJ, Saccone G, Kelly AJ, Edwards SJ, Berghella 
V. Interventions for treating hyperemesis gravidarum: a Cochrane 
systematic review and meta- analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 
Sep 2018;31(18):2492-505. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14767 058. 2017. 
1342805
 51. Le TN, Adler MT, Ouillette H, Berens P, Smith JA. Observational 
Case Series Evaluation of the Granisetron Transdermal Patch 
System (Sancuso) for the Management of Nausea/Vomiting of 
Pregnancy. Am J Perinatol. 07 2017;34(9):851-5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1055/ s- 0037- 1598652
 52. Aleyasin A, Saffarieh E, Torkamandi H, et al. Comparison of Efficacy 
of Granisetron and Promethazine in Control of Hyperemesis 
Gravidarum. J Obstet Gynaecol India. 12 2016;66(6):409-14. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s1322 4- 015- 0709- 6
 53. Schuster K, Bailey LB, Dimperio D, Mahan CS. Morning sickness 
and vitamin B6 status of pregnant women. Hum Nutr Clin Nutr. Jan 
1985;39(1):75-9.
 54. Boelig RC, Barton SJ, Saccone G, Kelly AJ, Edwards SJ, Berghella 
V. Interventions for treating hyperemesis gravidarum. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. May 11 2016;(5):CD010607. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1002/ 14651 858. CD010 607. pub2
 55. Tan PC, Yow CM, Omar SZ. A placebo- controlled trial of oral 
pyridoxine in hyperemesis gravidarum. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 
2009;67(3):151–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00018 1182
 56. Pope E, Maltepe C, Koren G. Comparing pyridoxine and doxyl-
amine succinate- pyridoxine HCl for nausea and vomiting of preg -
nancy: A matched, controlled cohort study. J Clin Pharmacol. Jul 
2015;55(7):809-14. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jcph. 480
 57. Taylor R. Successful management of hyperemesis gravidarum using 
steroid therapy. QJM. Feb 1996;89(2):103-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ 
qjmed/ 89.2. 103
 58. Nelson- Piercy C, Fayers P, de Swiet M. Randomised, double- blind, 
placebo- controlled trial of corticosteroids for the treatment of hy -
peremesis gravidarum. BJOG. Jan 2001;108(1):9-15. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2001. 00017. x
 59. Safari HR, Fassett MJ, Souter IC, Alsulyman OM, Goodwin TM. 
The efficacy of methylprednisolone in the treatment of hypereme -
sis gravidarum: a randomized, double- blind, controlled study. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. Oct 1998;179(4):921-4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
s0002 - 9378(98) 70189 - 9
 60. Yost NP, McIntire DD, Wians FH, Ramin SM, Balko JA, Leveno KJ. 
A randomized, placebo- controlled trial of corticosteroids for hy -
peremesis due to pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. Dec 2003;102(6):1250-
4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. obste tgyne col. 2003. 08. 013
 61. CR D, ME OH. Ginger is ineffective for hyperemesis gravidarum, 
and causes harm: an internet based survey of sufferers. MIDRIS 
Midwifery Digest. 2015;25(4):449–55.
 62. Pereira N, Hutchinson AP, Irani M, et al. 5- millimeter Trocar- site 
Hernias After Laparoscopy Requiring Surgical Repair. J Minim 
Invasive Gynecol. 2016 May-Jun 2016;23(4):505-11. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. jmig. 2016. 03. 001
 63. Matthews A, Dowswell T, Haas DM, Doyle M, O'Mathúna DP. 
Interventions for nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. Sep 2010;(9):CD007575. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 
14651 858. CD007 575. pub2
 64. Mazzotta P, Magee LA. A risk- benefit assessment of pharmacologi -
cal and nonpharmacological treatments for nausea and vomiting of 
pregnancy. Drugs. Apr 2000;59(4):781-800. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2165/ 
00003 495- 20005 9040- 00005 
 65. Magee LA, Mazzotta P, Koren G. Evidence- based view of safety and 
effectiveness of pharmacologic therapy for nausea and vomiting 
of pregnancy (NVP). Am J Obstet Gynecol. May 2002;186(5 Suppl Understanding):S256-61. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1067/ mob. 2002. 
122596
 66. McParlin C, O'Donnell A, Robson SC, et  al. Treatments for 
Hyperemesis Gravidarum and Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy: 
A Systematic Review. JAMA. 10 2016;316(13):1392-401. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1001/ jama. 2016. 14337 
 67. Koren G, Clark S, Hankins GD, et al. Maternal safety of the delayed- 
release doxylamine and pyridoxine combination for nausea and 
vomiting of pregnancy; a randomized placebo controlled trial. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. Mar 2015;15:59. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 
s1288 4- 015- 0488- 1
 68. Pasternak B, Svanström H, Mølgaard- Nielsen D, Melbye M, Hviid 
A. Metoclopramide in pregnancy and risk of major congenital 
malformations and fetal death. JAMA. Oct 2013;310(15):1601-11. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jama. 2013. 278343
 69. Parker SE, Van Bennekom C, Anderka M, Mitchell AA, Study 
NBDP. Ondansetron for Treatment of Nausea and Vomiting of 
Pregnancy and the Risk of Specific Birth Defects. Obstet Gynecol. 
08 2018;132(2):385-94. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG. 00000 00000 
002679
 70. Huybrechts KF, Hernández- Díaz S, Straub L, et  al. Association 
of Maternal First- Trimester Ondansetron Use With Cardiac 
Malformations and Oral Clefts in Offspring. JAMA. 12 
2018;320(23):2429-37. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jama. 2018. 18307 
 71. Lavecchia M, Chari R, Campbell S, Ross S. Ondansetron in 
Pregnancy and the Risk of Congenital Malformations: A Systematic 
Review. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 07 2018;40(7):910-8. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. jogc. 2017. 10. 024
 72. Kaplan YC, Richardson JL, Keskin- Arslan E, Erol- Coskun H, 
Kennedy D. Use of ondansetron during pregnancy and the risk of 
major congenital malformations: A systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Reprod Toxicol. 2019;06(86):1–13. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. repro tox. 2019. 03. 001
 73. Monograph U. Use of ondansetron in pregnancy. 2019.
 74. Zambelli- Weiner A, Via C, Yuen M, Weiner DJ, Kirby RS. First tri -
mester ondansetron exposure and risk of structural birth defects. 
Reprod Toxicol. 2019;01(83):14–20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. repro 
tox. 2018. 10. 010
 75. Einarson A, Maltepe C, Navioz Y, Kennedy D, Tan MP, Koren G. 
The safety of ondansetron for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: 
a prospective comparative study. BJOG. Sep 2004;111(9):940-3. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2004. 00236. x
 76. Bérard A, Sheehy O, Gorgui J, Zhao JP, Soares de Moura C, Bernatsky 
S. New evidence for concern over the risk of birth defects from med-
ications for nausea and vomitting of pregnancy. J Clin Epidemiol. 
2019;12(116):39–48. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jclin epi. 2019. 07. 014
 77. Huybrechts KF, Hernandez- Diaz S, Straub L, et  al. Intravenous 
Ondansetron in Pregnancy and Risk of Congenital Malformations. 
JAMA. 01 2020;323(4):372-4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jama. 2019. 18587 
 78. Lemon LS, Bodnar LM, Garrard W, et al. Ondansetron use in the 
first trimester of pregnancy and the risk of neonatal ventricular sep -
tal defect. Int J Epidemiol. 04 2020;49(2):648-56. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1093/ ije/ dyz255
 79. J A, E J- S, N A, H P. Ondansetron Use in Early Pregnancy and the 
Risk of Congenital Malformations – A Register Based Nationwide 
Cohort Study [ABSTRACT]. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug 
Safety. 2003;12(Supple 1):13–4.
 80. Pasternak B, Svanström H, Hviid A. Ondansetron in pregnancy and 
risk of adverse fetal outcomes. N Engl J Med. Feb 2013;368(9):814-
23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ NEJMo a1211035
 81. Colvin L, Gill AW, Slack- Smith L, Stanley FJ, Bower C. Off- label use 
of ondansetron in pregnancy in Western Australia. Biomed Res Int. 
2013;2013:909860. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2013/ 909860
 82. Danielsson B, Wikner BN, Källén B. Use of ondansetron during preg -
nancy and congenital malformations in the infant. Reprod Toxicol. 
Dec 2014;50:134-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. repro tox. 2014. 10. 017
 83. Özdemirci SA, F Bilge, M Özdemirci, F Yılmaz, S Esinler, D 
Kahyaoğlu, I. The safety of ondansetron and chlorpromazine for 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e17
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
hyperemesis gravidarum in first trimester pregnancy. Gynecology 
Obstetrics & Reproductive Medicine. 2014;20:81-4.
 84. Fejzo MS, MacGibbon KW, Mullin PM. Ondansetron in pregnancy 
and risk of adverse fetal outcomes in the United States. Reprod 
Toxicol. 2016;07(62):87–91. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. repro tox. 2016. 
04. 027
 85. Picot C, Berard A, Grenet G, Ripoche E, Cucherat M, Cottin J. 
Risk of malformation after ondansetron in pregnancy: An up -
dated systematic review and meta- analysis. Birth Defects Res. 08 
2020;112(13):996-1013. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ bdr2. 1705
 86. Dormuth CRWB, Fisher A, et  al. Comparison of Pregnancy 
Outcomes of Patient Treated With Ondansetron vx Alternative 
Antiemetic Medications in a Multinational, Population- Based 
Cohort. JAMA Network Open. 2021;4(4):e215329. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1001/ jaman etwor kopen. 2021. 5329
 87. Agency EM. European Medicines Agency recommends changes to 
the use of metoclopramide. EMA/13239/2014 Corr. 1st ed. London: 
EMA; 2013.
 88. Regan LA, Hoffman RS, Nelson LS. Slower infusion of metoclo -
pramide decreases the rate of akathisia. Am J Emerg Med. May 
2009;27(4):475-80. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajem. 2008. 03. 044
 89. Monograph U. Use of Corticosteroids in Pregnancy. Version 1 
ed2016.
 90. Sanghvi U, Thankappan KR, Sarma PS, Sali N. Assessing poten -
tial risk factors for child malnutrition in rural Kerala, India. J Trop 
Pediatr. 12 2001;47(6):350-5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ tropej/ 47.6. 350
 91. Fejzo MSPB, Korst LM, Munch S, MacGibbon KW, Romero R, 
Goodwin TM. Symptoms and Pregnancy Outcomes Associated 
with Extreme Weight Loss among Women with Hyperemesis 
Gravidarum. Journal of Women's Health. 2009;18(12):1981–7. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1089/ jwh. 2009. 1431
 92. Gill SK, Maltepe C, Mastali K, Koren G. The Effect of Acid- Reducing 
Pharmacotherapy on the Severity of Nausea and Vomiting of 
Pregnancy. Obstetrics and Gynecology International. 2009;2009.
 93. Bergin PS, Harvey P. Wernicke's encephalopathy and central pon-
tine myelinolysis associated with hyperemesis gravidarum. 
BMJ. Aug 1992;305(6852):517-8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. 
305. 6852. 517
 94. Debby A, Golan A, Sadan O, Glezerman M, Shirin H. Clinical util-
ity of esophagogastroduodenoscopy in the management of recur -
rent and intractable vomiting in pregnancy. J Reprod Med. May 
2008;53(5):347-51.
 95. Gill SK, O'Brien L, Einarson TR, Koren G. The safety of pro -
ton pump inhibitors (PPIs) in pregnancy: a meta- analysis. Am J 
Gastroenterol. Jun 2009;104(6):1541-5; quiz 1540, 1546. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1038/ ajg. 2009. 122
 96. Oudman E, Wijnia JW, Oey M, van Dam M, Painter RC, Postma A. 
Wernicke's encephalopathy in hyperemesis gravidarum: A system -
atic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. May 2019;236:84-93. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2019. 03. 006
 97. Liu S, Rouleau J, Joseph KS, et  al. Epidemiology of pregnancy- 
associated venous thromboembolism: a population- based study in 
Canada. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. Jul 2009;31(7):611-20. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/ S1701 - 2163(16) 34240 - 2
 98. Gynaecologists RCoOa. Reducing the Risk of Venous 
Thromboembolism during Pregnancy and the Puerperium. Green- 
top Guideline No. 37a. London: RCOG; 2015.
 99. Gill SK, Maltepe C, Koren G. The effectiveness of discontinuing 
iron- containing prenatal multivitamins on reducing the sever -
ity of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol. Jan 
2009;29(1):13-6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01443 61080 2628528
 100. Fiaschi L, Nelson- Piercy C, Tata LJ. Hospital admission for hy -
peremesis gravidarum: a nationwide study of occurrence, reoc-
currence and risk factors among 8.2 million pregnancies. Hum 
Reprod. Aug 2016;31(8):1675–84. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ hum -
rep/ dew128
 101. Power Z, Thomson AM, Waterman H. Understanding the stigma 
of hyperemesis gravidarum: qualitative findings from an action research study. Birth. Sep 2010;37(3):237-44. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1111/j. 1523- 536X. 2010. 00411. x
 102. Pregnancy Sickness Support BPAS. I could not survive another day. 
Improving treatment and tackling stigma: lessons from women's ex -
perience of abortion for severe pregnancy sickness. [Par]: PSS; 2015.
 103. Dodds L, Fell DB, Joseph KS, Allen VM, Butler B. Outcomes of preg -
nancies complicated by hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol. 
Feb 2006;107(2 Pt 1):285-92. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 01. AOG. 00001 
95060. 22832. cd
 104. Fiaschi L, Nelson- Piercy C, Gibson J, Szatkowski L, Tata LJ. Adverse 
Maternal and Birth Outcomes in Women Admitted to Hospital 
for Hyperemesis Gravidarum: a Population- Based Cohort Study. 
Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. Jan 2018;32(1):40-51. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1111/ ppe. 12416 
 105. Petry CJ, Ong KK, Beardsall K, Hughes IA, Acerini CL, Dunger 
DB. Vomiting in pregnancy is associated with a higher risk of low 
birth weight: a cohort study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. May 4 
2018;18(1):133. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s1288 4- 018- 1786- 1
 106. Excellence NIoHaC. Intravenous fluid therapy in adults in hospital. 
NICE clinical guideline 174. [Manchester]: NICE; 2013.
 107. Ditto A, Morgante G, la Marca A, De Leo V. Evaluation of treat -
ment of hyperemesis gravidarum using parenteral fluid with or 
without diazepam. A randomized study. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 
1999;48(4):232–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00001 0189
 108. Furyk JS, Meek RA, Egerton- Warburton D. Drugs for the treatment 
of nausea and vomiting in adults in the emergency department set -
ting. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Sep 28 2015;2015(9):Cd010106. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD010 106. pub2
 109. Frise CJ, Mackillop L, Joash K, Williamson C. Starvation keto -
acidosis in pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. Mar 
2013;167(1):1-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2012. 10. 005
 110. Mazzotta P, Stewart DE, Koren G, Magee LA. Factors associated with 
elective termination of pregnancy among Canadian and American 
women with nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. J Psychosom Obstet 
Gynaecol. Mar 2001;22(1):7-12. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 01674 82010 
9049946
 111. Koren G, Maltepe C. Pre- emptive therapy for severe nausea and 
vomiting of pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum. J Obstet 
Gynaecol. Aug 2004;24(5):530-3. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01443 
61041 00017 22581 
 112. Kramer J, Bowen A, Stewart N, Muhajarine N. Nausea and vomit -
ing of pregnancy: prevalence, severity and relation to psychosocial 
health. MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. 2013 Jan-Feb 2013;38(1):21-
7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ NMC. 0b013 e3182 748489
 113. O'Brien B, Evans M, White- McDonald E. Isolation from "being 
alive": coping with severe nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Nurs 
Res. 2002 Sep-Oct 2002;51(5):302-8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 00006 
199- 20020 9000- 00006 
 114. Ezberci İ, Güven ES, Ustüner I, Sahin FK, Hocaoğlu C. Disability 
and psychiatric symptoms in hyperemesis gravidarum patients. 
Arch Gynecol Obstet. Jan 2014;289(1):55-60. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s0040 4- 013- 2934- 5
 115. Lacasse A, Rey E, Ferreira E, Morin C, Bérard A. Nausea and 
vomiting of pregnancy: what about quality of life? BJOG. Nov 
2008;115(12):1484-93. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2008. 
01891. x
 116. Attard CL, Kohli MA, Coleman S, et  al. The burden of illness of 
severe nausea and vomiting of pregnancy in the United States. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. May 2002;186(5 Suppl Understanding):S220-7. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1067/ mob. 2002. 122605
 117. Munch S. Women's experiences with a pregnancy complication: 
causal explanations of hyperemesis gravidarum. Soc Work Health 
Care. 2002;36(1):59–76. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1300/ J010v 36n01_ 05
 118. Magee LA, Chandra K, Mazzotta P, Stewart D, Koren G, Guyatt 
GH. Development of a health- related quality of life instrument 
for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. May 
2002;186(5 Suppl Understanding):S232-8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1067/ 
mob. 2002. 122604
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e18 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
 119. Munch S, Korst LM, Hernandez GD, Romero R, Goodwin TM. 
Health- related quality of life in women with nausea and vomiting of 
pregnancy: the importance of psychosocial context. J Perinatol. Jan 
2011;31(1):10-20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ jp. 2010. 54
 120. Smith C, Crowther C, Beilby J, Dandeaux J. The impact of nausea 
and vomiting on women: a burden of early pregnancy. Aust N Z J 
Obstet Gynaecol. Nov 2000;40(4):397-401. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 
1479- 828x. 2000. tb011 67. x
 121. O'Brien B, Naber S. Nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: effects 
on the quality of women's lives. Birth. Sep 1992;19(3):138-43. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1523- 536x. 1992. tb006 71. x
 122. Wood H, McKellar LV, Lightbody M. Nausea and vomiting in 
pregnancy: blooming or bloomin' awful? A review of the litera -
ture. Women Birth. Jun 2013;26(2):100-4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
wombi. 2012. 10. 001
 123. Clark S, Hughes B, McDonald SS. The Impact of Nausea and 
Vomiting of Pregnancy on Quality of Life: Report of a National 
Consumer Survey and Recommendations for Improving Care. 
Obstetrical and Gynecological Survey. 2013;68(Suppl 1):S1–S10.
 124. Bai G, Korfage IJ, Groen EH, Jaddoe VW, Mautner E, Raat H. 
Associations between Nausea, Vomiting, Fatigue and Health- 
Related Quality of Life of Women in Early Pregnancy: The 
Generation R Study. PLoS One. 2016;11(11):e0166133. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 0166133
 125. Heitmann K, Nordeng H, Havnen GC, Solheimsnes A, Holst L. 
The burden of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: severe im -
pacts on quality of life, daily life functioning and willingness to be -
come pregnant again - results from a cross- sectional study. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. 02 2017;17(1):75. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 
s1288 4- 017- 1249- 0
 126. Mitchell- Jones N, Gallos I, Farren J, Tobias A, Bottomley C, 
Bourne T. Psychological morbidity associated with hyperemesis 
gravidarum: a systematic review and meta- analysis. BJOG. Jan 
2017;124(1):20-30. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 14180 
 127. Kjeldgaard HK, Eberhard- Gran M, Benth J, Vikanes Å. Hyperemesis 
gravidarum and the risk of emotional distress during and after 
pregnancy. Arch Womens Ment Health. 12 2017;20(6):747-56. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s0073 7- 017- 0770- 5
 128. Tan A, Lowe S, Henry A. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: 
Effects on quality of life and day- to- day function. Aust N Z J Obstet 
Gynaecol. Jun 2018;58(3):278-90. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ ajo. 12714 
 129. Beyazit F, Sahin B. Effect of Nausea and Vomiting on Anxiety 
and Depression Levels in Early Pregnancy. Eurasian J Med. 
Jun 2018;50(2):111-5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5152/ euras ianjm ed. 2018. 
170320
 130. Dean C, Bannigan K, Marsden J. Reviewing the effect of hypereme -
sis gravidarum on women's lives and mental health. British Journal 
of Midwifery. 2018;26(2):109–19.
 131. Chandra K, Magee L, Einarson A, Koren G. Nausea and vomiting 
in pregnancy: results of a survey that identified interventions used 
by women to alleviate their symptoms. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2003;24(2):71–5.
 132. Davis M. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: an evidence- based 
review. J Perinat Neonatal Nurs. 2004 Oct-Dec 2004;18(4):312-28. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 00005 237- 20041 0000- 00002 
 133. Dørheim SK, Bjorvatn B, Eberhard- Gran M. Sick leave during preg -
nancy: a longitudinal study of rates and risk factors in a Norwegian 
population. BJOG. Apr 2013;120(5):521-30. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 
1471- 0528. 12035 
 134. Chou FH, Kuo SH, Wang RH. A longitudinal study of nausea and 
vomiting, fatigue and perceived stress in, and social support for, 
pregnant women through the three trimesters. Kaohsiung J Med 
Sci. Jun 2008;24(6):306-14. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1607 - 551X(08) 
70157 - 8
 135. Soltani H, Taylor GM. Changing attitudes and perceptions to hy -
peremesis gravidarum. RCM Midwives. Dec 2003;6(12):520-4.
 136. Support PS. Accessed 1 March 2016. https:// www. pregn ancys ickne 
sssup port. org. uk 137. Foundation HEar. Hyperemesis Education and research Foundation. 
Accessed 1 March 2016, 2016. https:// www. hyper emesis. org
 138. A S, C S. The impact of online information on health related 
quality of life amongst women with nausea and vomiting in preg -
nancy and hyperemesis gravidarum. MIDRIS Midwifery Digest. 
2014;24:179–85.
 139. Tan PC, Zaidi SN, Azmi N, Omar SZ, Khong SY. Depression, anx -
iety, stress and hyperemesis gravidarum: temporal and case con-
trolled correlates. PLoS One. 2014;9(3):e92036. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1371/ journ al. pone. 0092036
 140. Poursharif B, Korst LM, Fejzo MS, MacGibbon KW, Romero R, 
Goodwin TM. The psychosocial burden of hyperemesis grav -
idarum. J Perinatol. Mar 2008;28(3):176-81. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
sj. jp. 7211906
 141. Nana MTF, Bevan G, Boulding H, Kavanagh K, Dean C, Williamson 
C. Termination of wanted pregnancy and suicidal ideation in hyper -
emesis gravidarum: A mixed methods study. Obstetric Medicine. 
2021.
 142. Locock L, Alexander J, Rozmovits L. Women's responses to nau -
sea and vomiting in pregnancy. Midwifery. Jun 2008;24(2):143-52. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. midw. 2006. 12. 001
 143. Sykes C, Swallow B, Gadsby R, et al. Seeking medical help for Nausea 
and Vomiting in Pregnancy and Hyperemesis Gravidarum in pri -
mary careeeking medical help for nausea andvomiting in pregnancy 
and hyperemesis. MIDRIS Midwifery Digest. 2013;23:321–6.
 144. McCarthy FP, Khashan AS, North RA, et al. A prospective cohort 
study investigating associations between hyperemesis gravidarum 
and cognitive, behavioural and emotional well- being in pregnancy. 
PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27678. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 
0027678
 145. Dean C. Does the historical stigma of hyperemesis gravidarum 
impact healthcare professional's attitudes and treatment towards 
women with the condition today? A review of recent literature. 
MIDRIS Midwifery Digest. 2016;26:186–93.
 146. O'Hara M. Survey of HCP attitudes responses: form responses.
 147. O'Hara M. Women's experience of hyperemesis gravidarum: results 
of self reported online surveys.
 148. Havnen GC, Truong MB, Do MH, Heitmann K, Holst L, Nordeng 
H. Women's perspectives on the management and consequences 
of hyperemesis gravidarum - a descriptive interview study. Scand 
J Prim Health Care. Mar 2019;37(1):30-40. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 
02813 432. 2019. 1569424
 149. O'Hara M. Experience of hyperemesis gravid arum in a subsequent 
pregnancy. MIDRIS. 2017;27:309–18.
 150. Kim DR, Connolly KR, Cristancho P, Zappone M, Weinrieb RM. 
Psychiatric consultation of patients with hyperemesis gravidarum. 
Arch Womens Ment Health. Apr 2009;12(2):61-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s0073 7- 009- 0064- 7
 151. Fairweather DV. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. Sep 1968;102(1):135-75. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0002- 
9378(68) 90445 - 6
 152. Munch S. Chicken or the egg? The biological- psychological con -
troversy surrounding hyperemesis gravidarum. Soc Sci Med. 
Oct 2002;55(7):1267-78. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0277 - 9536(01) 
00239 - 8
 153. Swallow B. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: psychological and so -
cial aspects [PhD dissertation]. Lincoln: University of Lincoln. 2009.
 154. McCormack D, Scott- Heyes G, McCusker CG. The impact of hyper -
emesis gravidarum on maternal mental health and maternal- fetal 
attachment. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol. Jun 2011;32(2):79-87. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 01674 82X. 2011. 560691
 155. Chou FH, Lin LL, Cooney AT, Walker LO, Riggs MW. Psychosocial 
factors related to nausea, vomiting, and fatigue in early pregnancy. 
J Nurs Scholarsh. 2003;35(2):119–25. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1547- 
5069. 2003. 00119. x
 156. Bozzo P, Einarson TR, Koren G, Einarson A. Nausea and vomiting of 
pregnancy (NVP) and depression: cause or effect? Clin Invest Med. 
Aug 2011;34(4):E245. https:// doi. org/ 10. 25011/ cim. v34i4. 15367 
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e19
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
 157. Fejzo MS, Macgibbon K. Hyperemesis gravidarum: it is time to put 
an end to the misguided theory of a psychiatric etiology. Gen Hosp 
Psychiatry. 2012 Nov-Dec 2012;34(6):699-700; author reply 700-1. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. genho sppsy ch. 2012. 06. 019
 158. D'Orazio LM, Meyerowitz BE, Korst LM, Romero R, Goodwin 
TM. Evidence against a link between hyperemesis gravidarum 
and personality characteristics from an ethnically diverse sample 
of pregnant women: a pilot study. J Womens Health (Larchmt). Jan 
2011;20(1):137-44. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1089/ jwh. 2009. 1851
 159. Bozzo P, Koren G, Nava- Ocampo AA, Einarson A. The incidence of 
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP): a comparison between 
depressed women treated with antidepressants and non- depressed 
women. Clin Invest Med. Dec 2006;29(6):347-50.
 160. Simpson SW, Goodwin TM, Robins SB, et al. Psychological factors 
and hyperemesis gravidarum. J Womens Health Gend Based 
Med. Jun 2001;10(5):471-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1089/ 15246 09013 
00233948
 161. Magtira A, Schoenberg FP, MacGibbon K, Tabsh K, Fejzo MS. 
Psychiatric factors do not affect recurrence risk of hyperemesis 
gravidarum. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. Apr 2015;41(4):512-6. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1111/ jog. 12592 
 162. Aksoy H, Aksoy Ü, Karadağ Ö, et  al. Depression levels in pa -
tients with hyperemesis gravidarum: a prospective case- control 
study. Springerplus. 2015;4:34. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s4006 
4- 015- 0820- 2
 163. Kara N, Kalem M, Balci H, Kalem Z. Psychiatric Symptoms, 
Perceived Social Support, Coping Styles, and Dyadic Adjustment in 
Pregnant Women with Hyperemesis Gravidarum. Dusunen Adam. 
2016;29(4):307–16.
 164. Yilmaz E, Yilmaz Z, Cakmak B, et al. Nausea and Vomiting in Early 
Pregnancy of Adolescents: Relationship with Depressive Symptoms. 
J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. Feb 2016;29(1):65-8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. jpag. 2015. 06. 010
 165. Sahin S, Ozdemir K, Unsal A, Cevrioglu AS, Beydag KD. 
Evaluation of frequency of nausea and vomiting as well as de -
pression level in pregnant women. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol. 
2016 2016;43(5):691-7.
 166. Swallow BL, Lindow SW, Masson EA, Hay DM. Psychological health 
in early pregnancy: relationship with nausea and vomiting. J Obstet 
Gynaecol. Jan 2004;24(1):28-32. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01443 61031 
00016 20251 
 167. Tan PC, Vani S, Lim BK, Omar SZ. Anxiety and depression in 
hyperemesis gravidarum: prevalence, risk factors and correla -
tion with clinical severity. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. Apr 
2010;149(2):153-8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2009. 12. 031
 168. Chou FH, Avant KC, Kuo SH, Fetzer SJ. Relationships between 
nausea and vomiting, perceived stress, social support, pregnancy 
planning, and psychosocial adaptation in a sample of mothers: 
a questionnaire survey. Int J Nurs Stud. Aug 2008;45(8):1185-91. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ijnur stu. 2007. 08. 004
 169. Mitchell- Jones N, Lawson K, Bobdiwala S, et  al. Association be -
tween hyperemesis gravidarum and psychological symptoms, 
psychosocial outcomes and infant bonding: a two- point prospec-
tive case- control multicentre survey study in an inner city setting. 
BMJ Open. 10 2020;10(10):e039715. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmjop 
en- 2020- 039715
 170. Nana M, Tydeman F, Bevan G, et  al. Hyperemesis gravidarum is 
associated with increased rates of termination of pregnancy and 
suicidal ideation: results from a survey completed by >5000 par -
ticipants. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Mar 2021; https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
ajog. 2021. 03. 006
 171. Seng JS, Oakley DJ, Sampselle CM, Killion C, Graham- Bermann S, 
Liberzon I. Posttraumatic stress disorder and pregnancy complica -
tions. Obstet Gynecol. Jan 2001;97(1):17-22. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
s0029 - 7844(00) 01097 - 8
 172. Kjeldgaard HK, Vikanes Å, Benth J, Junge C, Garthus- Niegel S, 
Eberhard- Gran M. The association between the degree of nausea 
in pregnancy and subsequent posttraumatic stress. Arch Womens Ment Health. 08 2019;22(4):493-501. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s0073 
7- 018- 0909- z
 173. Nicholson M. Women's experiences of the therapeutic value of 
writing about pregnancy sickness. Counselling & Psychotherapy 
Research. 2017;18(1):26–34.
 174. Li L, Zhou X, Xiao S, Gu H, Zhang G. Helicobacter pylori Infection 
Is Associated with an Increased Risk of Hyperemesis Gravidarum: 
A Meta- Analysis. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2015;2015:278905. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2015/ 278905
 175. Loveland Cook CA, Flick LH, Homan SM, Campbell C, McSweeney 
M, Gallagher ME. Posttraumatic stress disorder in pregnancy: 
prevalence, risk factors, and treatment. Obstet Gynecol. Apr 
2004;103(4):710-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 01. AOG. 00001 19222. 
40241. fb
 176. Christodoulou- Smith J, Gold JI, Romero R, et  al. Posttraumatic 
stress symptoms following pregnancy complicated by hyperemesis 
gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. Nov 2011;24(11):1307-11. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 14767 058. 2011. 582904
 177. Jueckstock JK, Kaestner R, Mylonas I. Managing hyperemesis grav -
idarum: a multimodal challenge. BMC Med. Jul 2010;8:46. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 1741- 7015- 8- 46
 178. Holmgren C, Aagaard- Tillery KM, Silver RM, Porter TF, Varner M. 
Hyperemesis in pregnancy: an evaluation of treatment strategies 
with maternal and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Jan 
2008;198(1):56.e1-4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2007. 06. 004
 179. Peled Y, Melamed N, Hiersch L, Pardo J, Wiznitzer A, Yogev Y. The 
impact of total parenteral nutrition support on pregnancy outcome 
in women with hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 
Med. Jul 2014;27(11):1146-50. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/ 14767 058. 
2013. 851187
 180. Tan PC, Omar SZ. Contemporary approaches to hyperemesis 
during pregnancy. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. Apr 2011;23(2):87-
93. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ GCO. 0b013 e3283 42d208
 181. Stokke G, Gjelsvik BL, Flaatten KT, Birkeland E, Flaatten H, Trovik J. 
Hyperemesis gravidarum, nutritional treatment by nasogastric tube 
feeding: a 10- year retrospective cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand. Apr 2015;94(4):359-67. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ aogs. 12578 
 182. Excellence NIfHCa. Nutrition support for adults: oral nutrition sup -
port, enteral tube feeding and parenteral nutrition. NICE. Updated 
04 August 2017. https:// www. nice. org. uk/ guida nce/ cg32/ ifp/ chapt 
er/ About - this- infor mation
 183. Goodwin TM. Hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol Clin 
North Am. Sep 2008;35(3):401–17, viii. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ogc. 
2008. 04. 002
 184. Vaisman N, Kaidar R, Levin I, Lessing JB. Nasojejunal feeding in 
hyperemesis gravidarum—a preliminary study. Clin Nutr. Feb 
2004;23(1):53-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0261 - 5614(03) 00088 - 8
 185. Serrano PVA, Garcia- Luna PP, et al. Enteral nutrition by percuta -
neous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy in severe hyperemesis grav -
idarum: a report of two cases. Clinical Nutrition. 1998;17:135–9.
 186. Kruchko DSN, Broy C, Silas D. Percutaneous Endoscopic 
Jejunostomy Tube Placement for Treatment of Severe Hyperemesis 
Gravidarum in Pregnancy. Journal of investigative Medicine High 
Impact Case Reports. 2020;(8):2324709620975954. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1177/ 23247 09620 975954
 187. Saha S, Loranger D, Pricolo V, Degli- Esposti S. Feeding jejunostomy 
for the treatment of severe hyperemesis gravidarum: a case series. 
JPEN Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. 2009;33(5):529–
34. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 01486 07109 333000
 188. Pregnancy Sickness Support BPAS. I could not survive another day. 
Improving treatment and tackling stigma: lessons from women's 
experience of abortion for severe pregnancy sickness. PSS. https:// 
www. pregn ancys ickne sssup port. org. uk/ docum ents/ HGbpa sPSSr 
eport_ docx. pdf
 189. Al- Ozairi E, Waugh JJ, Taylor R. Termination is not the treatment of 
choice for severe hyperemesis gravidarum: Successful management 
using prednisolone. Obstet Med. Mar 2009;2(1):34-7. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1258/ om. 2008. 080046
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e20 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
 190. Poursharif B, Korst LM, Macgibbon KW, Fejzo MS, Romero R, 
Goodwin TM. Elective pregnancy termination in a large cohort 
of women with hyperemesis gravidarum. Contraception. Dec 
2007;76(6):451-5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. contr acept ion. 2007. 08. 
009
 191. MacGibbon KFM, Mullin P. Mortality Secondary to Hyperemesis 
Gravidarum: A Case Report. Women's Health & Gynecology. 2015;1.
 192. Fossum SV, A. V.; Naess, O.; Vos, L.; Grotmol, T.; Halvorsen, S. 
Hyperemesis gravidarum and long- term mortality: a population- based 
cohort study. BJOG: an international journal of obstetrics and gynaecol-
ogy. 2017;124(7):1080-7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1471- 0528. 14454 
 193. Tsai W, Lee C, Cheng S, Zeng Y. Hyperparathyroidism presenting 
as hyperemesis and acute pancreatitis in pregnancy: A case report. 
Medicine (Baltimore). Apr 9 2021;100(14)e25451. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1097/ MD. 00000 00000 025451
 194. Koren G, Madjunkova S, Maltepe C. The protective effects of nausea 
and vomiting of pregnancy against adverse fetal outcome—A sys -
tematic review. Reproductive Toxicology. 2014;47:77–80.
 195. Nijsten K, Jansen LAW, Limpens J, et  al. Long- term health out -
comes of children born to mothers with hyperemesis gravidarum: 
a systematic review and meta- analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Sep 
2022;227(3):414-429 e17. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2022. 03. 052
 196. Maltepe C, Koren G. Preemptive treatment of nausea and vomit -
ing of pregnancy: results of a randomized controlled trial. Obstet 
Gynecol Int. 2013;2013:809787. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2013/ 809787
 197. Dean CR, Bierma H, Clarke R, et al. A patient- clinician James Lind 
Alliance partnership to identify research priorities for hyperemesis gravidarum. BMJ Open. 01 2021;11(1):e041254. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1136/ bmjop en- 2020- 041254
 198. Irish Medicines in Pregnancy Service: Position Statement on 
Ondansetron Use in Pregnancy. 23 October 2019, 2019. https:// 
rotun da. ie/ rotun da- pdfs/ IMPS% 20Ond anset ron% 20V3% 
20231 019. pdf#: ~: text= The% 20Iri sh% 20Med icines% 20in% 20Pre 
gnancy% 20Ser vice% 20% 28IMPS% 29% 20rec ommen d,in% 20nat 
ional% 20cli nical% 20gui delin es% 2C% 20have% 20not% 20been% 
20eff ective
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information can be found online in 
the Supporting Information section at the end of this article.
How to cite this article: Nelson- Piercy C, Dean C, 
Shehmar M, Gadsby R, O’Hara M, Hodson K, et al; on 
behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists. The Management of Nausea and 
Vomiting in Pregnancy and Hyperemesis Gravidarum 
(Green-top Guideline No. 69). BJOG. 2024;131(7):e1–
e30. https://doi.org/10.1111/1471-0528.17739
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e21
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
APPENDIX I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are ‘systematically developed state -
ments which assist clinicians and patients in making deci -
sions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. 
Each guideline is systematically developed using a stan -
dardised methodology. Exact details of this process can 
be found in the RCOG handbook Developing a Green-top 
Guideline: Guidance for developers . These recommendations 
are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of manage -
ment or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique 
to the institution and variations in local populations. It is 
hoped that this process of local ownership will help to in -
corporate these guidelines into routine practice. Attention is 
drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research 
may be indicated.
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the 
scheme below and the recommendations formulated in a 
similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
Classification of evidence levels
1++ High- quality meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a very low risk of 
bias
1+ Well- conducted meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a low risk of bias
1– Meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of bias
2++ High- quality systematic reviews of case–control or cohort studies or high- quality case–control or cohort studies with a very low risk of 
confounding, bias or chance and a high probability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well- conducted case–control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a moderate probability that the 
relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non- analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series
4 Expert opinion
Grades of Recommendation
A At least one meta- analysis, systematic reviews or RCT rated as 1++, and directly applicable to the target population; or a systematic 
review of RCTs or a body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, directly applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results
B A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
C A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
D Evidence level 3 or 4; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good Practice Points
GPP Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group.
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e22 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
A PPE N DI X I Ia : Pregnancy- Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) index
Total score is sum of replies to each of the three questions. PUQE- 24 Score: Mild 6; Moderate = 7–12; Severe = 13–15.
Motherisk PUQE- 24 scoring system
In the last 24 hours, for how long have you felt nauseated or 
sick to your stomach? Not at all (1)1 hour or 
less (2)2–3 hours 
(3) 4–6 hours (4)More than 6 
hours (5)
In the last 24 hours have you vomited or thrown up? I did not throw 
up (1)1–2 times 
(2)3–4 times 
(3)5–6 times (4) 7 or more times 
(5)
In the last 24 hours how many times have you had retching or 
dry heaves without bringing anything up?No time (1) 1–2 times 
(2)3–4 times 
(3)5–6 times (4) 7 or more times 
(5)
PUQE- 24 Score: Mild 6; Moderate = 7–12; Severe = 13–15.
How many hours have you slept out of 24 hours? Why?
On a scale of 0 to 10, how would you rate your wellbeing?
0 (worst possible) 10 (The best you felt before pregnancy)
Can you tell me what causes you to feel that way?
A PPE N DI X I I b: HELP (HyperEmesis Level Prediction Score)
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e23
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
A PPE N DI X I I I: Recommended antiemetic therapies and dosages
Recommended antiemetic therapies and dosages
First line
Doxylamine and Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) 20/20mg PO at night, increase to additional 10/10 mg in morning and 10/10mg at 
lunchtime if required.
Cyclizine 50 mg PO, IM or IV 8 hourly
Prochlorperazine 5–10 mg 6–8 hourly PO (or 3 mg buccal); 12.5 mg 8 hourly IM/IV; 25 mg PR daily
Promethazine 12.5–25 mg 4–8 hourly PO, IM or IV
Chlorpromazine 10–25 mg 4–6 hourly PO, IM or IV
Second line
Metoclopramide 5–10 mg 8 hourly PO, IV/IM/SC
Domperidone 10 mg 8 hourly PO; 30 mg 12 hourly PR
Ondansetron 4 mg 8 hourly or 8 mg 12 hourly PO; 8 mg over 15 minutes 12 hourly IV; 16 mg daily PR
(Women taking ondansetron may require laxatives if constipation develops)
Third line
Hydrocortisone 100 mg twice daily IV and once clinical improvement occurs, convert to prednisolone 40–50 mg daily PO, 
with the dose gradually tapered (by 5- 10 mg per week) until the lowest maintenance dose that controls the symptoms is 
reached
(Corticosteroids should be reserved for cases where standard therapies have failed; when initiated they should be prescribed 
in addition to previously started effective antiemetics. Women taking corticosteroids should have their blood pressure moni -
tored and a screen for diabetes mellitus)
IM intramuscular; IV intravenous; PO by mouth; PR by rectum.
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e24 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
APPENDIX IV:198
Visual risk summary
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e25
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
A PPE N DI X V: Treatment algorithms for NVP and HG in primary care (Vai and ii), ambulatory care (Vb), emergency 
department (Vc) and inpatient care (Vd)
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e26 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e27
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e28 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e29
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 69
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e30 | 
NELSON- PIERCY et al .
This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal 
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by:
Professor C Nelson- Piercy FRCP FRCOG, 
London; Dr C Dean PhD, Patient Representative 
(Pregnancy Sickness Support); Dr M Shehmar 
FRCOG, Birmingham; Dr R Gadsby, Coventry; 
Ms M O'Hara, Patient Representative (Pregnancy 
Sickness Support); Dr K Hodson FRCGP, Newcastle 
Upon Tyne; Dr M Nana, MRCP. NIHR clinical re -
search fellow and obstetric medicine registrar, 
King’s College London.
Acknowledgement 
Dr Gemma Holder MRCP (neonatalogy), Dr 
Ziva Mrevlje (enteral nutrition) and Dr Amanda 
Farrow (emergency medicine) for their invaluable 
help.
The following organisations have endorsed this 
guideline:
Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM); 
Association of Early Pregnancy Units (AEPU); and 
General Practitioners Championing Perinatal Care 
(GPCPC); and it has been supported by the Royal 
College of General Practitioners (RCGP).
The following organisations and individuals submit -
ted comments at peer review:
R Buabeng, HG Support for All; A Burnett, Black Baby 
Loss Awareness Week; E M Crookes, RCOG Women's 
Network; S Elbeshbeshy MRCOG, Diametta Egypt; M 
Fejzo, Los Angeles USA; B Goulden MRCP, London; 
S Ibuanokpe, London; G Kumar FRCOG, London; B 
Laverick, MRCOG; S Lowe FRACP, Sydney Australia; 
K Maslin British Dietetic Association Maternal and 
Fertility Nutrition Group; D Montague- Coast Fair 
Treatment for the Women of Wales (FTWW); M Mouyis 
FRCP, Luton and Dunstable University Hospital; F 
Nyazika, Liverpool; D Ofili- Yebovi MRCOG, London; 
M Pilling MRCOG; P Prinja, Royal Wolverhampton 
NHS Trust; J Ross FRCOG, London; L Salmon 
Pregnancy Sickness Support; A Self MRCOG, West 
Midlands; J Shakespeare FRCGP, General Practitioners 
championing Perinatal Care (GPCPC); V Sudhakar, 
Kettering General Hospital NHS Foundation Trust.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr M Annappa 
FRCOG1, Lincolnshire; Dr L Knight MRCOG, 
Exeter3; Dr P Timmons MRCOG, Norwich2; Dr M 
Savvidou FRCOG, London4
1 Until June 2021 2 From June 2021 3Until June 2023 4From June 2023The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr MA 
Ledingham MRCOG, Glasgow3; Dr B Magowan 
FRCOG, Melrose3; Mr A McKelvey FROCG, Norwich4 
and Dr N Potdar FRCOG, Leicester4.
3until June 2019, 4from June 2019
The final version is the responsibility of the 
Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.
The review process will commence in 2027, unless otherwise 
indicated.
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educa -
tional aid to good clinical practice. They present 
recognised methods and techniques of clinical 
practice, based on published evidence, for consider -
ation by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other 
relevant health professionals. The ultimate judge -
ment regarding a particular clinical procedure or 
treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other 
attendant in the light of clinical data presented by 
the patient and the diagnostic and treatment op -
tions available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike pro -
tocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are 
not intended to be prescriptive directions defining 
a single course of management. Departure from the 
local prescriptive protocols or guidelines should 
be fully documented in the patient's case notes at 
the time the relevant decision is taken.© 2024 John 
Wiley&Sons Ltd.
 14710528, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17739 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [20/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License