External Cephalic Version (ECV) is a procedure to turn a breech baby to a head-down position. It has a success rate of approximately 50% and reduces the chance of a caesarean section. ECV should be offered at term from 37 weeks of gestation. Tocolysis with betamimetics can improve the success rates of ECV. Regional analgesia may be considered for women unable to tolerate ECV without pain relief. The success of an ECV attempt can be predicted to some extent, but models should not be routinely used. ECV should only be performed by trained practitioners. Women should be informed about the risks and benefits of ECV.

In nulliparous women with a low chance of spontaneous version, ECV from 36 weeks of gestation seems pragmatic. ECV may be considered intrapartum with caution. ECV after one caesarean delivery appears to have no greater risk. ECV has a very low complication rate. ECV should be performed by trained practitioners. ECV can be a painful procedure. Methods to improve ECV uptake and success rates are needed. Postural management alone does not promote spontaneous version. Antenatal detection of breech presentation is important. Further research is needed on improving ECV outcomes.

5. An observational study of the success and complications of external cephalic versions in low-risk pregnant women.
6. External cephalic version does not increase the risk of intrauterine death.
10. The complications of external cephalic version.
11. Mode of delivery after successful external cephalic version.
12. Timing of delivery after external cephalic version and the risk for cesarean delivery.
33. Contraindications for external cephalic version in breech position at term.
35. A retrospective study of the success, safety, and effectiveness of external cephalic version without tocolysis.
36. External cephalic version-related risks.
37. Systematic review of adverse outcomes of external cephalic version and persisting breech presentation at term.
39. Obstetrical and neonatal outcomes following unsuccessful external cephalic version.
40. Fetomaternal hemorrhage during external cephalic version.
46. Prevalence, outcome, and women's experiences of external cephalic version in a low-risk population.
47. Patient satisfaction with childbirth after external cephalic version.
48. Maternal experience of pain during external cephalic version at term.
50. Outcomes of external cephalic version and breech presentation at term.
51. Factors associated with adverse perinatal outcome in external cephalic version.

Case-control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias, or chance and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal. Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series. Good practice point/check. Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group.