BJOG . 2025;132:e1–e41. | e1
 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bjoRCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
Care of late intrauterine fetal death and stillbirth
Green- top Guideline No. 55
Christy Burden | Abi Merriel | Danya Bakhbakhi | Alexander Heazell | 
Dimitrios Siassakos | on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsPublished Online 28 October 2024
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.17844 
© 2024 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.Correspondence
Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, 10–18 Union Street, London 
SE1 1SZ, UK.
Email: clinicaleffectiveness@rcog.org.uk
This is the second edition of this guideline. 
The first edition was published in 2010 under 
the same title.Key recommendations
• A combination of mifepristone and a prostaglandin preparation should usually 
be recommended as the first- line intervention for induction of labour (Grade B).
• A single 200 milligram dose of mifepristone is appropriate for this indication, 
followed by: 
• 24+0–24+6 weeks of gestation – 400 micrograms buccal/sublingual/vaginal/
oral of misoprostol every 3 hours;
• 25+0–27+6 weeks of gestation – 200 micrograms buccal/sublingual/vaginal/
oral of misoprostol every 4 hours;
• from 28+0 weeks of gestation – 25–50 micrograms vaginal every 4 hours, or 
50–100 micrograms oral every 2 hours [Grade C].
• There is insufficient evidence available to recommend a specific regimen of 
misoprostol for use at more than 28+0 weeks of gestation in women who have 
had a previous caesarean birth or transmural uterine scar [Grade D].
• Women with more than two lower segment caesarean births or atypical scars 
should be advised that the safety of induction of labour is unknown [Grade D].
• Staff should be educated in discussing mode of birth with bereaved parents. 
Vaginal birth is recommended for most women, but caesarean birth will need 
to be considered for some [Grade D].
• A detailed informed discussion should be undertaken with parents of both 
physical and psychological aspects of a vaginal birth versus a caesarean birth 
[Grade C].
• Parents should be cared for in an environment that provides adequate safety ac -
cording to individual clinical circumstance, while meeting their needs to grieve 
and feel supported in doing so (GPP).
• Clinical and laboratory tests should be recommended to assess maternal well -
being (including coagulopathy) and to determine the cause of fetal death, the 
chance of recurrence and possible means of avoiding future pregnancy compli -
cations [Grade D].
• Parents should be advised that with full investigation (including postmortem 
and placental histology) a possible or probable cause can be found in up to 
three- quarters of late intrauterine fetal deaths [Grade B].
• All parents should be offered cytogenetic testing of their baby, which should be 
performed after written consent is given (GPP).
• Parents should be advised that postmortem examination can provide infor -
mation that can sometimes be crucial to the management of future pregnancy 
[Grade B].
e2 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
1 | PURPOSE AND SCOPE
• To identify evidence- based options for parents and their 
families who have a late intrauterine fetal death (IUFD) 
after 24+0 completed weeks of pregnancy of a singleton 
fetus.
• To incorporate information on general care before, during 
and after birth, and care in future pregnancies.
The guideline is primarily intended for obstetricians and 
midwives but also for women and their families, general 
practitioners and commissioners of health care. This guide -
line does not include the management of pregnancies at the 
current limit of viability (22+0–23+6 weeks), multiple preg -
nancies with a surviving fetus, fetal death following late fe -
ticide, late birth of fetus papyraceous or the management 
of specific medical conditions associated with increased 
risk of late IUFD, although many of the principles may be 
extrapolated to these clinical situations. Recommendations 
about the psychological aspects of late IUFD are focused 
on the main principles of care to provide a framework of 
practice for maternity clinicians. The section on postmor -
tem examination covers clinical aspects required for obste -
tricians and midwives caring for women who have suffered 
a late IUFD.
This guideline is for healthcare professionals who care for 
women, non- binary and trans people. Within this document 
we use the terms woman and women's health. However, it 
is important to acknowledge that it is not only women for 
whom it is necessary to access women's health and reproduc -
tive services in order to maintain their gynaecological health 
and reproductive wellbeing. Gynaecological and obstetric 
services and delivery of care must therefore be appropri -
ate, inclusive and sensitive to the needs of those individuals 
whose gender identity does not align with the sex they were 
assigned at birth.
2 | INTRODUCTION AND 
BACKGROUND EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the UK, stillbirth is legally defined as ‘a baby delivered 
with no signs of life known to have died after 24+0 completed 
weeks of pregnancy’. Late intrauterine fetal death refers to 
babies with no signs of life in utero after 24+0 completed 
weeks of pregnancy.1 Late IUFD occurs in approximately 1 
in 250 babies; this compares with 1 sudden infant death per 
10 000 live births. In the MBRRACE- UK national perinatal 
mortality surveillance report, extended perinatal mortality 
reduced by 18% over 6 years, from 6.04 per 1000 total births 
in 2013 to 4.96 per 1000 total births in 2019, equivalent to 
approximately 770 fewer deaths in 2019. Perinatal mortality 
rates increased across the UK in 2021 after 7 years of year- 
on- year reduction.
Stillbirth rates have reduced by just over 20% from 4.20 
per 1000 total births in 2013 to 3.35 per 1000 total births in 2019, representing approximately 610 fewer stillbirths in 
2019. The overall reduction in the stillbirth rate was mainly 
due to a reduction in the rate of term stillbirths by one- fifth 
(19%), from 1.45 per 1000 total births in 2015 to 1.17 in 2019. 
However, stillbirth rates per 1000 total births in 2021 for the 
UK were 3.54 and varied between the devolved nations; 3.52 
(England); 3.27 (Scotland); 3.88 (Wales); and 4.09 (Northern 
Ireland). Babies born to women living in the most deprived 
areas are twice as likely to be stillborn.2 Mortality rates 
remain exceptionally high for fetuses of Black and Black 
British ethnicity: stillbirth rates are over twice those for fe -
tuses of white ethnicity.
There has been a substantial reduction in stillbirths re -
corded as having an intrapartum cause in the Causes of 
Death and Associated Conditions (CODAC) classification 
from 189 (5.8%) late IUFDs in 2014 to 51 (1.8%) late IUFDs in 
2017. Using CODAC, the proportion of stillbirths with un -
known cause of death has fallen from around a half (46.0%) 
in 2014 to around one- third (34.6%) in 2017.
The national perinatal mortality surveillance system 
(MBRRACE- UK) reviewed a representative UK sample 
of unexpected stillbirth at term in whom the postmortem 
did not identify a cause. The review revealed that failure to 
screen for gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) both univer -
sally or in the high risk population was one of the most sig -
nificant risk factors that could have prevented stillbirth in 
this group. Additional risk factors for stillbirth are detailed 
in the table below ( Table  1).3-14
In addition to any physical effects, it is important to ac -
knowledge that stillbirth often has profound emotional, psy -
chological and social effects on parents, their families and 
friends. Stillbirth is a potential trigger to major economi -
cal and psychological consequences for women, families, 
healthcare providers and communities.
3 | IDENTIFICATION AND 
ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE
This guideline was developed using standard methodology 
for developing RCOG Green- top Guidelines.15 The Cochrane 
Library (including the Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects 
[DARE] and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled 
Trials [CENTRAL]), EMBASE, MEDLINE and Trip were 
searched for relevant papers. The search was inclusive of all 
relevant articles published from 2011 until June 2021. The 
databases were searched using the relevant Medical Subject 
Headings (MeSH) terms, including all subheadings and 
synonyms, and this was combined with a keyword search. 
Search terms included ‘stillbirth’, ‘stillborn’, ‘fetal death’ or 
‘foetal death’, ‘intrauterine death’ or ‘iufd’. The search was 
limited to studies on humans. Relevant guidelines were 
also searched for using the same criteria in the National 
Guideline Clearinghouse and the National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) Evidence Search.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e3
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
Where possible, recommendations are based on available 
evidence.16 Areas lacking evidence are highlighted and an -
notated as ‘good practice points’. Further information about 
the assessment of evidence and the grading of recommenda -
tions may be found in Appendix I .
4 | DIAGNOSIS
4.1 | What is the optimal method for 
diagnosing late IUFD?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Ultrasonography is 
essential for the 
accurate diagnosis of 
late IUFD and should 
be available at all 
times.3 D Evidence extrapolated 
from series where 
cases were missed 
with auscultation 
alone.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
A second opinion should 
be obtained for the 
diagnosis.4 GPP This is recommended 
to minimise 
the chance of 
diagnostic error.
Auscultation and 
cardiotocography 
should not be used to 
diagnose late IUFD.3 D Evidence extrapolated 
from series where 
cases were missed 
with auscultation 
alone.
Women should be 
prepared for the 
possibility of passive 
fetal movement. If a 
woman reports fetal 
movement after the 
scan to diagnose late 
IUFD, a repeat scan 
should be offered.4 GPP Case reports have 
described 
women have the 
perceptions of fetal 
movements after 
late IUFD.
Auscultation of the fetal heart by Pinard stethoscope or 
Doppler ultrasound is not sufficiently accurate for diag -
nosis of late IUFD and should be avoided. In a series of 70 
late pregnancies in which fetal heart sounds were inaudi -
ble on auscultation, 22 were found to have viable fetuses.17 
[Evidence level 2+]
Real- time ultrasound allows direct visualisation of the 
fetal heart. Imaging can be technically difficult, particularly 
in the presence of maternal BMI over 30 kg/m2, abdominal 
scars and oligohydramnios, but views can often be aug -
mented with colour Doppler of the fetal heart and umbilical 
cord.
In addition to the absence of fetal cardiac activity, other 
secondary features might be seen: collapse of the fetal skull 
with overlapping bones,18 hydrops, or maceration [meaning 
to soften in liquid] resulting in unrecognisable fetal mass. 
Intrafetal gas (within the heart, blood vessels and joints) is 
another feature associated with late IUFD that might limit 
the quality of real- time images.19,20 [Evidence level 3]
Discussion of the ultrasound findings of severe skin 
and body changes (maceration and gross skin oedema) 
should be offered to the parents in anticipation of the ap -
pearance of baby at birth and to sensitively explain the 
estimated time of fetal death. Skin and body changes ob -
served either after birth or on ultrasonography examina -
tion is an important change to recognise in the fetus (see 
Appendix II ). The process is gradual and progressive, al -
lowing a rough estimation of time of fetal death in relation 
to birth.18,20
Evidence of occult placental abruption might also be 
identified, however, the sensitivity to diagnose this by ultra -
sonography can be as low as 15%. Even large abruptions can 
be missed with ultrasound alone.19 [Evidence level 3]
After the diagnosis of late IUFD, women sometimes con -
tinue to experience (passive) fetal movement.21TABLE 1 Risk factors for late IUFD.
Non- modifiable
Nulliparity
Maternal age above 35
Maternal age below 20
Black, Asian and other non- white women
Previous stillbirth
Previous adverse pregnancy outcomes (preterm birth, pre- eclampsia, 
fetal growth restriction [FGR])
Multiple pregnancy
Advanced gestational age > 41+0 weeks
FGR and/or SGA < 10th centile
Low educational attainment
Reduced fetal movements
Thyroid disease
Thrombophilia
Malaria infection
COVID - 19 infection
Cholestasis
Systemic lupus erythematous/antiphospholipid syndrome (APS)
Renal disease
Potentially modifiable
Pre- existing hypertension
Obesity/overweight/weight gain
Smoking more than 10 cigarettes/day
Alcohol use
Illicit drug use
Going to sleep supine
Living in areas of most deprivation
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e4 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
4.2 | What is best practice for 
communicating the diagnosis and subsequent 
care?
4.2.1 | Diagnosis
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
If a women is 
unaccompanied, 
an immediate offer 
should be made to call 
their partner, family 
or friends.4 GPP This is recommended as good 
practice.
An appropriate place 
for the discussions 
should be found.4 D Qualitative research on 
parents’ perceptions 
have highlighted the 
importance of having 
discussions in a place with 
appropriate privacy.
Clear language with 
no euphemisms or 
jargon should be 
used. If an interpreter 
is required, a 
professional one 
is preferable to 
the use of family 
or friends. Other 
formats of conveying 
information to 
those with learning 
difficulties should be 
considered.4 D Qualitative research on 
parents’ perceptions 
has highlighted the 
importance of clear 
language and the 
importance of adequate 
communication.
The woman and her 
family should be 
given time to absorb 
any news, and the 
clinician should 
answer any questions 
they are capable of 
within their scope of 
practice.4 GPP This is recommended as good 
practice.
Discussions should aim 
to support maternal/
parental choice.3 D Evidence from qualitative 
research studies have 
highlighted the need for 
discussions to support 
parents’ thoughts and 
wishes.
The woman and her 
family should 
be given written 
information 
to supplement 
discussions, which 
should include 
information about 
ongoing care and the 
contact details of a 
named healthcare 
professional.4 GPP It is good practice to ensure 
clear ongoing information 
and a key contact. Clear 
easily understandable and 
structured information 
given sensitively at 
appropriate times can 
help the woman and 
their family through the 
experience.
Many strategies have been described for discussing bad 
news. Late IUFD can be sudden and unexpected, although 
in 70% of cases women present to maternity services with 
concerns for their baby's wellbeing.22 A crucial component is 
to determine the feelings and emotional needs of the women 
and their companions.23 This empathetic approach seeks 
to identify and understand parents’ thoughts and wishes but without trying to shape them. Women with a late IUFD 
and their partners value acceptance and recognition of their 
emotions.24,25 [Evidence level 3]
Empathetic techniques, can be learned and retained 
as a skill25-28 and can be helpful in this context ( National 
Bereavement Care Pathway [NBCP] el [elearning] programmes 
www. e- lfh. org. uk/ progr ammes/ natio nal- berea vemen t- care- 
pathw ay/ and the Sands, stillbirth and neonatal death society, 
training train ing. sands. org. uk/ ).29 [Evidence level 4]
It is important to provide written information, such as the 
RCOG patient information When your baby dies before birth 
and to consider alternative formats where this would help 
communication and understanding.28
Sands has led the development of the NBCP project, in 
collaboration with other charities and with the support of 
the Department of Health and Social Care and the All Party 
Parliamentary Group on Baby Loss. The project has aimed 
to ensure bereaved parents are offered equal, high quality, 
individualised, safe and sensitive care in any experience of 
pregnancy or baby loss. They have developed a care path -
way and good practice recommendations for optimal care 
of bereaved parents after an IUFD, including at the time of 
diagnosis.29
4.2.2 | Care following diagnosis
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
The woman and her family 
should be given as 
much privacy and time 
alone as they wish.3 D Research has shown 
that parents need a 
dedicated space for 
privacy, but do not 
want to perceive 
that they have been 
abandoned.
Staff should support 
women and their 
family to express any 
concerns.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
Details of the birth 
plan should be 
discussed, including 
mode of birth, pain 
relief, timings and 
memory- making 
opportunities. If an 
interpreter is required, 
a professional 
interpreter should 
always be offered, 
rather than using 
friends and family. 
Other formats of 
conveying information 
to those with learning 
difficulties should be 
considered.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice to 
ensure parents have 
all the information to 
make a birth plan.
All staff caring for a 
woman and her family 
during labour and 
birth should be made 
aware of the baby's 
death.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e5
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Staff should be sensitive 
to sounds that may be 
upsetting for bereaved 
parents and their 
family to hear and, 
where safely possible, 
cared for away from 
the labour ward 
environment.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
Continuity of caregiver 
should be ensured 
where possible.3 D This has been highlighted 
in qualitative 
research as important 
for parents.
Evidence (INSIGHT study) has shown that parents per -
ceived staff focused on the woman's needs, however, the par -
ents’ priorities were still with their baby.27 It was also shown 
that partners may have different needs to the woman and that 
they want to be involved in decision making.27 Furthermore, 
staff need to be aware of the importance of keeping parents 
informed of what is happening and provide information at 
an appropriate pace, along with written information (RCOG 
patient information When your baby dies before birth )28 and 
expressions of empathy. Continuity of caregiver and supple -
mentary written information are valued by women experi -
encing adverse pregnancy events.26,29
Parents need a dedicated space for privacy, but do not want 
to perceive that they have been abandoned.27 [Evidence level 3]
Healthcare professionals should neither persuade parents 
nor make assumptions that would limit parental choice.26-31 
Parents should be given detailed options about their care 
and the time to consider them. There is some evidence that 
an integrated care pathway combining the psychological and 
medical components of care can improve the delivery of care 
for women and their families after a diagnosis of late IUFD 
has been made.32 [Evidence level 3]
5 | LABOUR AND BIRTH
5.1 | What are the recommendations for 
timing and mode of birth?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
The mode of birth should 
be an informed decision 
between the parents and an 
appropriately experienced 
obstetrician. Vaginal birth 
is recommended for most 
women, but caesarean birth 
will need to be considered 
for some.3 D Qualitative research has 
shown staff should 
be considerate of 
parents’ wishes 
and beliefs when 
discussing mode of 
birth.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
A detailed informed discussion 
should be undertaken with 
parents of both physical 
and psychological aspects 
of a vaginal birth versus a 
caesarean birth.2++ C This recommendation 
is based on 
evidence that 
shows known risks 
and benefits of 
both vaginal birth 
versus a caesarean 
birth should be 
discussed.
Late IUFD is not a 
contraindication to 
pool birth in suitable 
circumstances.3 D Case reports/case series 
have demonstrated 
the use of pool 
birth after late 
IUFD, therefore 
limited evidence 
indicates this could 
be considered. 
Qualitative studies 
highlight the 
importance of 
retaining parent 
choice.
Recommendations about 
labour and birth should 
consider the woman's 
choices, as well as her 
medical condition and 
previous intrapartum 
history.3 D Qualitative research 
studies have 
highlighted the 
need to explore 
parents’ beliefs 
and choices when 
planning birth 
as well as taking 
into account her 
medical condition.
Women who are severely 
unwell or at high risk of 
deterioration should be 
strongly advised to take 
immediate steps towards 
birth, for example if there 
is sepsis, pre- eclampsia, 
placental abruption or 
membrane rupture. A more 
flexible approach can be 
discussed if this is not the 
case.3 D Limited evidence is 
available to guide 
optimal time 
interval from 
diagnosis to birth, 
but there is some 
evidence to suggest 
this should be 
expedited for some 
obstetric conditions 
and sepsis.
Women who are physically well 
with intact membranes 
and no laboratory 
evidence of disseminated 
intravascular coagulation 
(DIC) should be advised 
that they are unlikely to 
come to physical harm 
if they delay labour for a 
short period (48 hours), but 
they may develop severe 
medical complications 
and suffer greater anxiety 
with prolonged delays. 
Women who delay labour 
for periods longer than 48 
hours should be advised 
to have testing for DIC 
(Table 2).3 D Limited evidence has 
shown that an 
increased interval 
between diagnosis 
and birth can 
increase the risk 
of anxiety and of 
developing DIC.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e6 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
If the woman returns home 
before labour, they should 
be given a 24- hour contact 
number for information 
and support this should 
include what signs/
symptoms to be aware of 
that should prompt action/ 
return to hospital.4 GPP A key contact after 
discharge from 
hospital is 
recommended as 
good practice.
Women contemplating 
prolonged expectant 
management should be 
advised that the diagnostic 
value of postmortem 
may be reduced, and the 
appearance of the baby may 
deteriorate.3 D Limited evidence has 
shown that the 
diagnostic value 
of the postmortem 
will be reduced 
in women with 
prolonged 
expectant 
management. It 
is recommended 
good practice 
that women are 
counselled about 
the appearance 
of the baby in 
cases of prolonged 
expectant 
management.
Options for birth after diagnosis of late IUFD include 
spontaneous vaginal birth, immediate induction, delayed 
induction, caesarean birth or expectant management. 
Methods of induction include misoprostol (with or without 
mifepristone), oxytocin infusion and mechanical methods.
Regarding time interval to birth, there is no good evi -
dence to guide the optimal time, as birth is often expedited 
by induction or a caesarean birth. However, evidence has 
shown the degree of maceration does not correlate with dis -
seminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and other factors 
like abruption are more indicative.33 There is a 10% chance 
of maternal DIC within 4 weeks from the date of fetal death 
and an increasing chance thereafter.33,34 [Evidence level 3]
A Swedish study of 380 women with late IUFD and 379 
controls with a live healthy baby showed that an interval of 
24 hours or more from the diagnosis of death in utero to the 
start of labour was associated with an increased risk of mod -
erately severe anxiety or worse (OR 4.8, 95% CI 1.5–15.9).35 
[Evidence level 2+]
Evidence has shown that vaginal birth can occur within 
24 hours of induction of labour for late IUFD in about 90% 
of women.36 [Evidence level 2+]
Vaginal birth is recommended for most women with in -
tent to optimise future pregnancy outcomes, but caesarean 
birth will need to be considered for some. Vaginal birth 
carries the potential advantages of both quicker physical re -
covery and return to home, but with the risks of vaginal/
perineal trauma and the need for forceps/ventouse or an 
emergency caesarean.37
A systematic review has concluded that when compared 
with vaginal birth, caesarean birth is associated with a re -
duced rate of perineal trauma, urinary incontinence and 
pelvic organ prolapse, but this should be weighed against surgical morbidity and the association with increased risks 
for fertility, and risks in future pregnancies.38
Caesarean birth is occasionally recommended because of 
the clinical context or maternal condition.
Qualitative research reported that for some parents, in the 
context of late IUFD, a caesarean birth might be requested 
for reasons not anticipated by staff.27 Vaginal birth was de -
scribed as emotionally distressing by 47% of 314 women with 
a late IUFD compared with just 7% of 322 matched controls 
who had a live birth.39 [Evidence level 2+]
Providers of maternity care should be alert to the rate of 
maternal medical complications associated with labour and 
birth with late IUFD.40,41 A review in the USA has demon -
strated high rates of shoulder dystocia, clinical chorioam -
nionitis, postpartum haemorrhage and retained placenta in 
women with late IUFDs.41 Similarly, a cohort study of over 
25 000 women in the USA who had experienced a late IUFD 
found a four- fold increase in severe maternal morbidity com -
pared with live births using the International Classification 
of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification (18 diag -
nostic codes including blood transfusion, disseminated in -
travascular transfusion, acute renal failure, adult respiratory 
distress syndrome, sepsis, shock and hysterectomy).42 All 
this information necessitates a careful and sensitive discus -
sion with women, and their families, to inform their deci -
sion, including the implications of caesarean birth for future 
pregnancies. [Evidence level 2+]
Evidence has shown that with no medical contraindica -
tions, the use of a birthing pool for the birth of a stillborn 
baby could be considered.43 [Evidence level 4]
5.2 | How should labour be induced for a 
woman with an unscarred uterus?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
A combination of 
mifepristone and 
a prostaglandin 
preparation 
should usually 
be recommended 
as the first- line 
intervention for 
induction of labour.1+ B Good evidence from 
randomised 
controlled trials 
[RCTs] has shown 
the superior 
effectiveness of a 
combination of 
mifepristone and 
a prostaglandin 
preparation 
compared with the 
medications used 
alone.
Misoprostol can be 
used in preference 
to prostaglandin 
E2 because of 
equivalent safety and 
efficacy with lower 
cost but at doses 
lower than those 
currently marketed 
in the UK.1+ B Extrapolated evidence 
from RCTs has 
demonstrated 
that lower dose 
misoprostol is 
more cost effective 
with equal efficacy 
and safety than 
prostaglandin E2 
so can be used for 
induction of birth.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e7
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should be 
advised that vaginal 
misoprostol is 
as effective as 
oral therapy but 
associated with 
fewer adverse effects.1+ B Extrapolated evidence 
from RCTs 
demonstrates that 
vaginal misoprostol 
has fewer adverse 
effects than oral 
therapy but is as 
effective.
A single 200 milligram 
dose of mifepristone 
is appropriate for 
this indication, 
followed by: 
• 24+0–24+6 weeks 
gestation – 400 
micrograms 
misoprostol every 3 
hours;
• 25+0–27+6 weeks 
of gestation – 200 
micrograms 
misoprostol every 4 
hours;
• from 28+0 weeks of 
gestation – 25–50 
micrograms vaginal 
misoprostol every 
4 hours, or 50–100 
micrograms oral 
misoprostol every 
2 hours.4 C There is limited evidence 
to guide doses used 
for this indication. 
There is insufficient 
evidence overall of 
superiority of one 
dose or schedule of 
misoprostol over 
another for use in 
pregnancies at or 
over 13 weeks of 
gestation. These 
recommendations 
have been taken 
from FIGO guidance 
where the aim was 
to have the highest 
overall effectiveness 
with the lowest 
adverse effects, but 
it is acknowledged 
that a range of doses 
could be effective 
and safe.
Previous studies have evaluated various combinations of 
mifepristone, misoprostol and oxytocin, however most re -
search evidence on the induction of labour and late IUFD 
has been extrapolated from data on the termination of preg -
nancy in the second trimester.44
5.2.1 | Mifepristone use
In a small prospective study of 40 women with a late IUFD, 
conducted by Sharma et al., there was significantly shorter time 
to birth for women who received mifepristone and misoprostol 
(6.72 ± 3.34 hours) when compared with the group who received 
misoprostol alone (11.81 ± 6.33 hours).45 [Evidence level 2]
Two further randomised trials have been undertaken. 
Chaudhuri et al. undertook an RCT of 110 women who had 
experienced fetal death later than 20 weeks of gestation, and 
demonstrated that mifepristone prior to misoprostol in -
creased the chance of a vaginal birth from 71.2% to 92.5%.46 
The mean induction- birth interval was also shorter when 
using mifepristone plus misoprostol than using misoprostol 
alone (9.8 hours [SD 4.4] compared with 16.3 hours [SD 5.7], 
respectively; P < 0.001).46 [Evidence level 1+]
Agrawal et  al. undertook a further RCT of 100 women 
to assess using misoprostol with or without mifepristone 
after late IUFD. The number of misoprostol doses needed in 
the combination group was less than the misoprostol alone 
group and women in the combination group had an earlier 
onset of labour.47 However, total induction to birth interval 
was not different.47 In the combination group, 85.7% gave birth within 24 hours of the first dose of misoprostol and in 
the group who received misoprostol alone, 70% gave birth 
within 24 hours ( P = 0.07).47
5.2.2 | Misoprostol dose
A systematic review was conducted in 2009 to assess the ben -
efits and risks associated with the administration of misopros -
tol, which found in 14 studies that vaginal and oral misoprostol 
had up to 100% effectiveness of achieving birth at 48 hours.44
In 2023 FIGO recommended a new dosing regimen for 
the use of misoprostol.48 There is still currently insufficient 
evidence overall of superiority of one dose or schedule of 
misoprostol over another for use in pregnancies at or over 
13 weeks of gestation. In making recommendations, FIGO 
acknowledged that providers might be keen to identify low -
est possible doses because of reduced adverse effect, but that 
it was also important to consider success rates and time to 
birth: low doses have been shown to be associated with a 
longer induction- to- birth interval and lower overall effec -
tiveness and in many studies “higher” doses have been used 
without evidence of harm. Recommendations were com -
piled with this in mind, while also acknowledging that it is 
possible that a range of dosages could be effective and safe.48
FIGO have recommended that a single 200 mg dose of 
mifepristone is appropriate for late IUFD, followed by: 
• 24+0–24+6 weeks of gestation – 400 micrograms buccal/
sublingual/vaginal/oral of misoprostol every 3 hours;
• 25+0–27+6 weeks of gestation – 200 micrograms buccal/
sublingual/vaginal/oral of misoprostol every 4 hours;
• from 28+0 weeks of gestation – 25–50 micrograms vag -
inal every 4 hours, or 50–100 micrograms oral every 2 
hours.48
NICE has also reinforced the view that there is no robust 
evidence to guide optimum dosage of misoprostol,49 espe -
cially in terms of safety and assessing rare outcomes such as 
uterine rupture.
Misoprostol use for induction of labour following a still -
birth is off- label in the UK.50 The 200 microgram tablet can 
dissolved in water and administered in measured aliquots, or 
divided with a tablet cutter, both of which hospital pharma -
cies could be asked to prepare to reduce variation in dose.51 
A 25 microgram tablet is now available in the UK but is not 
licensed for induction in these circumstances.
A systematic review and network meta- analysis of trials 
to assess the effectiveness and safety of prostaglandins used 
for labour induction in women with a live fetus, showed that 
vaginal misoprostol (50 microgram or more) had the highest 
probability of achieving a vaginal birth within 24 hours. The 
trials were inconsistent with regards to risk of hyperstimula -
tion.52-53 [Evidence level 1+ extrapolated]
There is no evidence available to make recommendations 
on maximum doses of misoprostol so local protocols should 
be followed.48
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e8 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
TABLE 2 A summary of the investigations for late IUFD and their indications136,143-171.
Test Reason(s) for testEvidence 
level Additional comments Timing
Maternal standard haematology and 
biochemistry including CRP and bile salts143Pre- eclampsia and its 
complications
Multiorgan failure in sepsis 
or haemorrhage
Obstetric cholestasis3 • Platelet count to test for occult DIC
• If abnormally low, discuss with haematologist 
and suggest repeating, according to adviceAs soon as possible after fetal death.
Repeat platelets as required based on the clinical 
picture
Maternal coagulation times and plasma 
fibrinogenDIC 3 • Not a test for cause of late IUFD
• Maternal sepsis, placental abruption and pre- 
eclampsia increase probability of DIC
• Especially important for regional anaesthesia 
use or if there has been an interval of more than 
48 hours since IUFD until birthAs soon as possible after diagnosis of sepsis, 
abruption, pre- eclampsia, or other pre- 
disposing condition(s); before regional 
anaesthesia
Kleihauer144Lethal fetomaternal 
haemorrhage (FMH)
Decide level of requirement 
for anti- Rh(D) 
gammaglobulin2 • FMH is a cause of late IUFD
• Kleihauer should be recommended for all, not 
simply those who are Rh(D) negative (ensure 
laboratory aware if Rh(D) positive)
• Tests should be undertaken before birth as 
red cells might clear quickly from maternal 
circulation
• In Rh(D) negative women, a second Kleihauer 
test also determines whether sufficient anti- 
Rh(D) has been givenAs soon as possible after diagnosis of fetal death, 
or latest within 3 hours from birth
Maternal bacteriology145-148
- Blood cultures
- Midstream urine
- Vaginal swabs
- Cervical swabsSuspected infection 
including Listeria 
monocytogenes and 
Chlamydia spp1++ Indicated in the presence of:
• Maternal fever
• Flu- like symptoms
• Abnormal liquor (purulent appearance/
offensive odour)
Prolonged ruptured membranes before late IUFD
Abnormal bacteriology is of doubtful significance 
in the absence of clinical or histological 
evidence of chorioamnionitis ( Evidence level 3 )
Also used to direct maternal antibiotic therapyAs soon as possible after diagnosis of fetal death
Maternal serology:
- Viral screen
- Tropical infectionsUndiagnosed maternal- fetal 
infection2+ • Stored serum from booking tests can provide 
baseline serology
• Hydrops not necessarily feature of Parvovirus- 
related late IUFD
• Treponemal serology – usually known already
• Others – if presentation suggestive, e.g. travel 
to endemic areasBefore discharge
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e9
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
Test Reason(s) for testEvidence 
level Additional comments Timing
Maternal random blood glucose149,152Undiagnosed maternal 
diabetes mellitus3 Rarely a woman will have incidental, undiagnosed 
pre- existing diabetes mellitus. The presence of 
severe ketoacidosis and other symptoms should 
alert clinicians to the need for glucose testing. 
Women with gestational diabetes mellitus 
(GDM) return to euglycaemia within few hours 
after late IUFD has occurredAs soon as possible after diagnosis
Maternal HbA1c149-153Undiagnosed maternal pre- 
existing diabetes mellitus 
or GDM2+ • Excludes occult type 1 or type 2 diabetes 
mellitus
• Can be indicative of GDM if HbA1c >41Before discharge
Maternal thyroid function154Undiagnosed maternal 
thyroid disease3 • TSH, FT4 & FT3 Before discharge
Maternal thrombophilia screen 98,99,155-157Maternal thrombophilia 1++ Indicated to screen for APS especially if: 
• Evidence of FGR or placental disease
Antiphospholipid screen to be repeated if abnormal
Advised to include antibodies against beta 
2- glycoprotein I, lupus anticoagulant and 
anticardiolipin antibodies in antiphospholipid 
screen
Inherited thrombophilia screen is not routinely 
indicated.Screen – 6 weeks after birth not reliable in 
pregnancy
Anti- red cell antibody serology158-160Immune haemolytic disease 3 Indicated if: 
• Fetal hydrops evident clinically or on 
postmortemAs soon as possible after the diagnosis of 
hydrops
Maternal anti- Ro and anti- La antibodies161Occult maternal 
autoimmune disease3 Indicated if: 
• Evidence of hydrops, endomyocardial 
fibroelastosis, or AV node calcification at 
postmortemAs soon as possible after diagnosis of hydrops or 
endomyocardial fibroelastosis
Maternal alloimmune antiplatelet antibodies162Alloimmune 
thrombocytopenia3 Indicated if: 
• If fetal intracranial haemorrhage found on 
postmortemAs soon as possible after diagnosis of fetal 
intracranial haemorrhageTABLE 2 (Continued)
(Continues)
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e10 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
Test Reason(s) for testEvidence 
level Additional comments Timing
Parental blood for karyotype163-165Parental balanced 
translocation
Parental mosaicism3 Indicated if: 
• Fetal unbalanced translocation
• Recommended by geneticist
• Fetal genetic testing fails and history suggestive 
of aneuploidy (fetal anomaly on postmortem, 
previous unexplained IUFD, recurrent 
miscarriage)As soon as possible after diagnosis of fetal 
genetic anomaly or suspicion of genetic 
anomaly
Maternal toxicology166Occult drug use 1++ • With consent, if history and/or presentation are 
suggestive
• Urine is efficient and effective; nails and hair 
can be used
• Meconium toxicology may become widely 
availableAs soon as possible after diagnosis of fetal death
Fetal and placental microbiology
- Fetal blood
- Fetal swabs
- Placental swabsFetal infections 2+
3• More informative than maternal serology for 
detecting viral infections
• Cord sample if possible, in lithium heparin
• Written consent advisable if cardiac 
bloods – cardiac blood can be taken by the 
histopathologist and used for bacterial culture 
and/or genetic testing if there is no cord blood.
• Need to be obtained using clean techniqueAs soon as possible after birth
Fetal and placental tissues for cytogenetics (and 
possible single gene testing)167-171
- Fetal cord
- PlacentaAneuploidy
Single gene disorders
See section 5.4 on sexing
Suspected genetic anomaly2+ • Send several specimens – cell cultures might 
fail
• Cultures bottles must be kept on labour ward in 
a refrigerator – stored separately from formalin 
preservation bottles
• Genetic material should be stored if a single- 
gene syndrome is suspected
Absolutely contraindicated
if:
• Parents do not wish (written consent essential)As soon as possible after birth and after parents’ 
consent
Postmortem examination136,172
- External
- Autopsy
- Microscopy
- X- ray
- Placenta and cord
- Ultrasound scan/magnetic resonance imagingSee section 7.6 3 • External examination should include weight 
and length measurements
• FGR is a significant association for late IUFD
• Perinatal pathologist or neonatologist can 
examine for dysmorphic features if parents do 
not want autopsy
Absolutely contraindicated if:
• Parents do not wish (written consent essential)As soon as possible after birth and after parents’ 
consent
COVID- 19 PCR test See section 7.2 1 As soon as possible after diagnosisTABLE 2 (Continued)
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e11
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
5.2.3 | Misoprostol versus other methods of 
induction
An RCT comparing intravenous oxytocin with intravagi -
nal misoprostol for induction of labour in women with a 
late IUFD showed that misoprostol was more effective.54 
[Evidence level 1+]
Two further RCTs comparing prostaglandin E2 with low- 
dose misoprostol for women with a live fetus found miso -
prostol to be more efficacious in cervical ripening and labour 
induction. The studies demonstrated a similar maternal safety 
profile for both groups.55-56 [Evidence level 1+ extrapolated]
For third- (and second- ) trimester termination of preg -
nancy, a systematic review found that vaginal misoprostol 
for induction of labour appears equally effective as geme -
prost but is much cheaper, but information about maternal 
safety was limited.57 [Evidence level 1+]
5.3 | What is best practice for induction of 
labour for a woman with a history of lower 
segment caesarean birth?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
A discussion of the potential 
benefits and harms of 
induction of labour 
should be undertaken 
by an appropriately 
experienced 
obstetrician.4 GPP It is good practice to have 
an informed discussion 
with parents about 
induction of labour for 
women with a history 
of lower segment 
caesarean birth.
Women undergoing vaginal 
birth after caesarean 
birth (VBAC) should be 
closely monitored for 
features of scar rupture.4 D Maternal clinical features 
could alert to signs 
of scar rupture so 
should be monitored 
for during induction 
and labour.
Oxytocin augmentation 
can be used for VBAC, 
but the decision 
should be made 
following discussion 
with a consultant 
or obstetrician with 
equivalent training.4 GPP This is recommended 
as there is lack of 
evidence to guide the 
decision.
Misoprostol can be used for 
women with previous 
caesarean birth or other 
transmural uterine 
scar between 13+0 and 
27+6 weeks of gestation 
–24+0 –24+6 weeks 
of gestation – 400 
micrograms buccal/
sublingual/vaginal/oral 
of misoprostol every 3 
hours; –25+0 –27+6 weeks 
of gestation – 200 
micrograms buccal/
sublingual/vaginal/oral 
of misoprostol every 4 
hours4 D A Cochrane meta- analysis 
has concluded there 
are insufficient data to 
assess the occurrence 
of uterine rupture with 
IUFD and a previous 
caesarean scar. The 
use of misoprostol is 
considered justified 
on the basis of FIGO 
recommendations, and 
extrapolation of data 
from midtrimester 
termination of 
pregnancy.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
There is insufficient 
evidence available to 
recommend a specific 
regimen of misoprostol 
for use at more than 
27+6 weeks of gestation 
in women who have had 
a previous caesarean 
birth or transmural 
uterine scar.4 D There is insufficient 
evidence to guide a 
recommendation for 
more than 27+6 weeks 
of gestation.
Women with more than 
two lower segment 
caesarean births or 
atypical scars should be 
advised that the safety 
of induction of labour is 
unknown.4 D There is insufficient 
evidence to guide a 
recommendation for 
this indication.
Overall, RCT evidence on methods of induction of labour 
for women with a prior caesarean birth is inadequate, and 
studies are underpowered to detect clinically relevant differ -
ences for many outcomes.
FIGO have concluded that misoprostol can be used for 
women with a history of caesarean birth or other transmu -
ral uterine scar between 13+0 and 27+6 weeks of gestation.48 
They state that there is insufficient evidence available to 
recommend a regimen of misoprostol for use at more than 
28 weeks of gestation in women who have had a previous 
caesarean birth or transmural uterine scar. Therefore, 
without evidence to support a safe regimen, the recommen -
dation is to follow local protocol for women with uterine 
scars.48
5.3.1 | One previous caesarean birth
RCOG Green- top Guideline No. 45 states that women should 
be informed of the two- to three- times increase in the risk of 
uterine rupture and around 1.5- times increase in the risk of 
caesarean birth in induced and/or augmented labour com -
pared with spontaneous VBAC labour.58 In a population- 
based case–control study of 611 late IUFDs, induction of 
labour resulted in vaginal birth for 91% (41 of 45) of women 
with a history of caesarean birth with two cases of uterine 
rupture.59
5.3.2 | Two or more previous caesarean births
No studies looking into the safety of induction of labour 
in women with two or more caesarean births and late 
IUFD were found. VBAC is not ordinarily recommended 
for women with three previous caesarean births, previous 
uterine rupture or upper segment incisions.58-60 [Evidence 
level 4]
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e12 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
5.3.3 | Uterine rupture
Fetal heart rate anomaly, the most common early sign of 
scar dehiscence, does not apply to late IUFD. Other clinical 
features include maternal tachycardia, atypical pain, vaginal 
bleeding, high head on examination, shoulder tip pain, hae -
maturia on catheter specimen and maternal collapse.58
After 28 weeks of gestation with a previous caesarean, 
cervical ripening with a transcervical Foley catheter has 
been associated with uterine rupture rates comparable to 
spontaneous labour so could be helpful, especially in women 
with an unfavourable cervical examination.61
5.4 | What are considered suitable facilities 
for labour?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
During labour, women 
should be cared for in 
an environment that 
provides appropriate 
facilities for obstetric 
emergency care according 
to their individual 
circumstances.4 GPP This is recommended, 
as individual 
circumstances 
will vary.
Maternity units should aim to 
develop a special labour 
ward room for women 
who are physically 
well with an otherwise 
uncomplicated late 
IUFD that pays special 
heed to emotional and 
practical needs without 
compromising safety. 
This can include a bed 
for her partner or other 
companion to share, away 
from the sounds of other 
women and babies. Busy 
units should consider 
provision of a second 
room.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Care in labour should be 
given by an experienced 
midwife with an 
accessible experienced 
obstetrician.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
In development of special labour ward rooms, maternity 
units should balance the location of the room with the need 
for parents and families to have their loss recognised and not 
feel shut away and isolated.62-63 This element of isolation may 
be addressed and mitigated via appropriate communication 
with the parent and family by the medical and midwifery 
team. Studies both in the UK and elsewhere have shown that 
formal education and training of healthcare professionals in 
bereavement care is important. However, this needs to be sup -
plemented by mentoring of midwives through the process of 
caring for bereaved women and families.62,63 [Evidence level 3]
The National Bereavement Care Pathway highlights the 
need to be always open and honest about the situation and to ensure introduction of any new members of staff throughout 
the labour process. It reinforces the importance of enabling 
the birthing parent to have a partner or support person(s) with 
them at all times and, with the woman's consent, keep the 
partner or support person(s) informed. Providing the partner 
or support person with emotional support is also vital.29
5.5 | What are the recommendations for 
intrapartum antimicrobial therapy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women with sepsis 
should be treated 
with intravenous 
broad- spectrum 
antibiotic therapy 
(including 
antichlamydial 
agents).2– C No studies were found 
on the routine use 
of antibiotics for 
late IUFD so women 
should only be treated 
in cases of sepsis.
Routine antibiotic 
prophylaxis should 
not be used.3 C No studies were found 
on the routine use of 
antibiotics for late 
IUFD, so women 
should only be treated 
in cases of sepsis.
Intrapartum antibiotic 
prophylaxis for 
women colonised 
with group B 
streptococcus is 
not indicated.4 GPP The use of antibiotics for 
women colonised with 
group B streptococcus 
is not indicated as its 
use is for prevention of 
neonatal infection and 
there is no evidence 
to guide use in these 
circumstances.
A cross- sectional study reported that chorioamnionitis 
can occur in up to 26% of late IUFDs.41 This relatively com -
mon complication can lead to the development of severe sep -
sis from a wide range of bacteria, including severe systemic 
chlamydial infection.64 Regardless of the primary cause of 
death, the fetus can act as a focus for severe secondary sepsis, 
including gas- forming clostridial species, which can result 
in severe DIC.65-66 [Evidence level 2]
Artificial rupture of membranes may facilitate ascending 
infection, but no studies exist to support this association in 
the context of late IUFD. No studies were found on the use of 
antibiotics for the prevention of maternal infection in preg -
nant people with a late IUFD.
5.6 | Are there any special recommendations 
for pain relief in labour?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All usual modalities of 
intrapartum pain relief 
should be made available 
to women with late IUFD, 
unless there are specific 
contraindications.2+ D As evidence overall 
is limited, it is 
reasonable to offer 
all modalities of 
pain relief.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e13
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
Analgesia was more frequently used during labour for 
late IUFD,67 [Evidence level 3] however choice of analgesia 
can be influenced by different factors.67 [Evidence level 2 
extrapolated]
All usual modalities of pain relief should be made avail -
able, including regional analgesia, patient- controlled analge -
sia and water birth if there are no clinical contraindications. In 
a non- IUFD population a study of pethidine compared with 
diamorphine for intramuscular injections showed that dia -
morphine provided better pain relief.68 However, when using 
diamorphine, the duration of labour is longer and women 
therefore experience more pain overall.68 Overall, findings 
from the 2019 Cochrane review indicated that parenteral opi -
oids provided some pain relief and moderate satisfaction with 
analgesia in labour, but there was not enough evidence to as -
sess which opioid drug provided the best pain relief with the 
least adverse effects.69 [Evidence level 3 extrapolated]
A retrospective case–control study has indicated that 
there is no increased risk of perinatal laceration with neurax -
ial labour analgesia following a stillbirth.70
Regional anaesthesia is contraindicated in the presence 
of DIC.71
6 | PUERPERIUM
6.1 | What care should women receive before 
returning home?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should be 
cared for in an 
environment that 
provides adequate 
safety according to 
individual clinical 
circumstance, 
while meeting 
their needs to 
grieve and feel 
supported in doing 
so.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
Lactation, milk 
donation and milk 
suppression should 
be discussed with 
the woman.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice, 
as for some women 
lactation not being 
suppressed could be 
distressing.
Women should be 
advised which 
ongoing physical 
symptoms, such 
as bleeding and 
pain, can be 
expected and 
when to contact 
a healthcare 
professional.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should have 
continuity of 
care specialist/
bereavement 
midwife if one is 
employed by the 
hospital.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice, 
including having 
a key contact after 
leaving hospital.
A discussion on 
contraception 
should take place 
prior to discharge 
home.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
Some women have acute medical problems after birth 
(e.g. sepsis, pre- eclampsia etc.) with possible critical care 
needs. Women without acute medical issues who do not 
want to return home immediately and/or wish to be with 
their baby might wish to receive care within the hospital but 
away from the maternity unit (if such a facility is available). 
Postnatal care should include GP follow up to assess any 
ongoing physical or mental health issues and a discussion 
on contraception should take place prior to discharge home 
(FSRH Clinical Guideline Contraception After Pregnancy , 
available online: www. fsrh. org/ stand ards- and- guida nce/ 
docum ents/ contr acept ion- after - pregn ancy- guide line- janua 
ry- 2017/ ).72
Some parents may choose to donate their milk to a breast 
milk bank. While discussing milk donation may be difficult, 
staff should sensitively give parents information about do -
nating milk (further information can be found on page 28 of 
the National Bereavement Care Pathway).29
To improve the information on lactation following a peri -
natal bereavement, a helpful 25- point framework has been 
developed to support healthcare professionals and organ -
isations.73 This framework categorises information based 
on acknowledgment of human milk and lactation; breast 
changes commonly associated with milk production; advice 
on alleviation of symptoms of discomfort and engorgement; 
and descriptions of on the full range of suppression, sus -
tained expression and milk donation options.73
6.2 | What are the options for suppression of 
lactation?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should be 
advised that almost 
one- third of those 
who choose non- 
pharmacological 
measures to suppress 
lactation experience 
excessive discomfort.1+ A Clear evidence from RCTs 
shows the benefit 
of pharmacological 
measures for lactation 
suppression.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e14 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should be advised 
that dopamine 
agonists successfully 
suppress lactation 
and are generally well 
tolerated; cabergoline 
may be superior to 
bromocriptine.1 A Evidence from one RCT 
suggests cabergoline 
compared with 
no treatment or 
bromocriptine is well 
tolerated and had 
less rebound breast 
activity.
Careful consideration 
and a balance of risks 
and benefits should 
be undertaken when 
using dopamine 
agonists in women 
with hypertension or 
pre- eclampsia.3 D Recommendation 
from observational 
research.
Lactation suppression is frequently not discussed with 
women; with about half of women experiencing a late IUFD 
in qualitative studies not receiving information.74-78 Despite 
the use of simple measures, such as a support bra, ice packs 
and analgesics, up to one- third of women experience severe 
breast pain.78 It is therefore important to provide women 
with adequate postnatal information about lactation sup -
pression.75-78 [Evidence level 2]
A single double- blind RCT of 272 women requesting lac -
tation suppression compared a single dose of cabergoline (1 
mg) with bromocriptine (2.5 mg twice daily) for 14 days. The 
two regimens had very similar effectiveness, but cabergo -
line was reported to be simpler to use and had significantly 
lower rates of rebound breast activity and adverse events.79 
[Evidence level 1+]
Dopamine agonists are cautioned for use in women with 
hypertension or pre- eclampsia.80 as they can increase blood 
pressure and have been associated with intracerebral haem -
orrhage.81-82 However, in a study of 85 women with late IUFD 
and hypertensive disorders, no adverse maternal effects were 
shown with their use.83 After discussing simple physical 
measures, risks versus benefits of dopamine agonists should 
be discussed in women with hypertension or pre- eclampsia. 
Women commencing bromocriptine should have blood pres -
sure monitoring especially during the first days of treatment.84
A 2012 Cochrane review of treatments for lactation sup -
pression included 62 trials (6428 women). The trials were 
generally small and of limited quality. Seven trials involving 
estrogen preparations (diethylstilbestrol, quinestrol, chlo -
rotrianisene, hexestrol) suggested that they significantly re -
duced the proportion of lactating women compared with no 
treatment at, or within, 7 days postpartum (RR 0.40, 95% CI 
0.29–0.56). No trials comparing non- pharmacologic methods 
with no treatment were found. Trials comparing bromocrip -
tine with other pharmacologic agents such as metergoline, 
prostaglandins, pyridoxine, cabergoline, diethylstilbestrol 
and cyclofenil suggested similar effectiveness. At day 14 post -
partum, bromocriptine had similar risks of treatment failure 
compared with cabergoline (two trials included, 308 women; RR 1.38, 95% CI 0.93–2.05)85 Adverse effects were poorly re -
ported in the trials and no case of thromboembolism was re -
corded in the four trials that reported it as an outcome.85
6.3 | What are the criteria for 
thromboprophylaxis?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should be 
routinely assessed for 
thromboprophylaxis, 
noting that late 
IUFD in the current 
pregnancy is an 
independent risk 
factor for venous 
thromboembolism 
(VTE).2+ B Evidence has shown that 
late IUFD increases 
the risk of VTE 
up to six times so 
risk assessment for 
thromboprophylaxis 
is vital.
Heparin 
thromboprophylaxis 
should be discussed 
with a haematologist 
if the woman has DIC.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice, as DIC 
necessitates specialist 
haematology input 
and multidisciplinary 
care.
Late IUFD in a current pregnancy increases the risk of post -
partum VTE up to six times compared with a live birth, with 
a rate of 2444 (109–5440) per 1000 person years.86,87 RCOG 
Green- top Guideline No. 37a Reducing the Risk of Venous 
Thromboembolism during Pregnancy and the Puerperium in -
dicates that late IUFD in a current pregnancy should be con -
sidered as a risk factor for VTE.88 [Evidence level 2+]
6.4 | Who should be informed of the late 
IUFD?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All key staff responsible for 
the care of the woman 
during pregnancy and 
afterwards should be 
informed of events.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
All existing antenatal 
appointments should be 
cancelled – maternity 
units should keep a list 
of likely specialties that 
need to be contacted and 
should also notify other 
healthcare providers 
involved in care.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Primary care healthcare 
professionals should 
be informed where the 
woman will be staying 
when they leave the 
hospital.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e15
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
All key staff groups must be informed to ensure cancel -
lation of existing antenatal appointments and continuity of 
follow- up. This includes the community midwives, health 
visitor, antenatal class coordinator and general practitioner. 
In the event of a woman who has been transferred between 
localities, extra care must be taken to ensure relevant parties 
have been informed.
Other existing healthcare professionals, such as psychi -
atrists, secondary care specialists and drug workers, should 
also be contacted. Voluntary groups who distribute free 
items to new parents should also be contacted, but specific 
details should not be released to maintain confidentiality. 
Appointments for antenatal clinics (hospital and commu -
nity), ultrasound scans and preoperative assessment should 
be cancelled.
7 | INVESTIGATIONS OF THE 
CAUSE OF LATE IUFD
7.1 | What are the general principles of 
investigations?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Detailed history taking is 
a vital first step that 
will guide subsequent 
investigations into the 
cause of death of the 
baby.3 D Verbal autopsy tool 
enables a structure 
for history taking.
Clinical and laboratory 
tests should be 
recommended to 
assess maternal 
wellbeing (including 
coagulopathy) and to 
determine the cause 
of fetal death, the 
chance of recurrence 
and possible 
means of avoiding 
further pregnancy 
complications.2++ D Evidence has shown an 
important purpose 
of investigation is 
to assess maternal 
wellbeing and 
that performing 
laboratory 
assessments, 
placental pathology 
and postmortem all 
play an important 
role in finding a 
probable cause of 
death.
Parents should be 
advised that with 
full investigation 
(including 
postmortem and 
placental histology) a 
possible or probable 
cause can be found in 
up to three- quarters of 
late IUFDs, and they 
should be kept updated 
throughout the process2++ B Recommendation from 
large population- 
based studies 
suggest that full 
investigations have a 
high rate of finding 
a probable cause for 
late IUFDs.
Parents should be 
advised that when a 
cause is found it can 
potentially influence 
care in a future 
pregnancy.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice 
when counselling 
parents regarding 
investigations.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Healthcare professionals 
should be aware that an 
abnormal test result is 
not necessarily related 
to the late IUFD; 
correlation between 
tests and postmortem 
examination should be 
sought. Further tests 
might be indicated 
following the results 
of the postmortem 
examination.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice 
when counselling 
parents regarding 
investigations.
Systems that take 
into account fetal 
birthweight centile 
and capture multiple 
contributing factors 
should be used to 
categorize late IUFDs.2++ B Evidence has shown 
that the proportion 
of unclassified 
late IUFDs can be 
significantly reduced 
with use of the 
definition of FGR in 
late IUFD.75
History, including family history,89 and tests aim to iden -
tify the cause of late IUFD and so provide the answer to 
the parents’ question ‘Why?’ In a study of 314 women, 95% 
stated that it was important emotionally to have an explana -
tion of their baby's death. However, parents are sometimes 
reluctant to proceed with investigations, in particular a peri -
natal postmortem examination. This can be for a variety of 
reasons, including a perception that their baby's body will 
be unavailable for burial. Studies have shown that following 
late IUFD, parents realise the importance of decisions they 
make around the time of diagnosis and birth of their baby. 
The information parents receive and the understanding that 
postmortem is respectful and useful is valuable in informing 
their decision making.27 [Evidence level 3]
A Cochrane systematic review90 of interventions for in -
vestigating and identifying the causes of stillbirth found no 
RCTs comparing stillbirth investigation strategies.
A review of stillbirth investigation guidelines in four high 
income countries found agreed recommendations including 
medical history evaluation, postmortem examination (in -
cluding minimally invasive techniques), placental patholog -
ical examination, genetic analysis, microbiology of fetal and 
placental tissues, and a Kleihauer test.91
Taking a thorough clinical history, performing labora -
tory assessments, placental pathology and postmortem all 
play an important role in finding a probable cause of death.
Another important purpose of investigation is to assess 
maternal wellbeing and ensure prompt management of ma -
ternal disease.
It is important to recognise that there is a distinction 
between the underlying cause of death (the disease pro -
cess), the mode of death (for example asphyxia) and the 
classification of the death (for example growth restriction). 
Conventional diagnostic systems fail to identify a specific 
cause in about half of IUFDs. The proportion of unclassified 
late IUFDs can be significantly reduced with systems that use 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e16 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
customised weight for gestational age charts,92,93 such as the 
relevant condition at death (ReCoDe) system,94 or systems 
that capture multiple and/or sequential contributing fac -
tors, such as Tulip, Initial Causes of Fetal Death Evaluation 
(INCODE), Perinatal Society of Australia and New Zealand 
– Perinatal Death Classification (PSANZ- PDC), Wisconsin 
Stillbirth Service Programme (WiSSP), Causes of Death and 
Associated Conditions (CODAC).95 [Evidence level 2++]
A Delphi consensus method has aimed to define growth 
restriction in late IUFD.96 Further research is required to de -
termine the optimal classification method and tools.96
Comprehensive investigation can be important, even 
though one cause in particular may be suspected. With a 
very clear cause such as massive abruption, non- lethal fetal 
malformations might be identified at postmortem that 
would only have been revealed had the baby lived.
7.2 | What tests should be recommended to 
identify the cause of late IUFD?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All women with a 
late IUFD should 
be offered a 
postmortem, 
genetic testing and 
placental pathology. 
See Table 2 for 
more detail on 
investigations.2+ B Evidence has 
shown that 
these are the 
most useful 
tests for 
investigating 
late IUFD.
A secondary analysis of 512 stillbirths enrolled in the 
Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network from 2006–08 
was performed to determine the usefulness of each test for 
diagnosing late IUFD. The usefulness of each test was as 
follows: placental pathology 64.6% (95% CI 57.9–72.0), post -
mortem 42.4% (95% CI 36.9–48.4), genetic testing 11.9% 
(95% CI 9.1–15.3), testing for antiphospholipid antibodies 
11.1% (95% CI 8.4–14.4), FMH 6.4% (95% CI 4.4–9.1), glu -
cose screen 1.6% (95% CI 0.7–3.1), parvovirus 0.4% (95% CI 
0.0–1.4) and syphilis 0.2% (95% CI 0.0–1.1). They concluded 
the most useful tests were placental pathology and fetal post -
mortem followed by genetic testing and testing for antiphos -
pholipid antibodies.97 [Evidence level 2+]
A number of mostly retrospective cohort studies have 
found weak associations between heritable thrombophilia 
and late IUFD, however the published literature is incon -
sistent.98 Acquired thrombophilia does appear to be asso -
ciated with placenta- mediated pregnancy complications, 
specifically antiphospholipid antibodies and late IUFD. 
Furthermore, late IUFD and miscarriage were shown to be 
more common in women with APS who had had a previous 
thrombosis compared with women with APS who had not. 
Poorer outcome was also associated with triple positive anti -
bodies. The 2022 British Society for Haematology guidance 
has therefore recommended against heritable thrombophilia 
screening for adverse pregnancy outcomes but that screening for antiphospholipid antibodies should be considered.99 
[Evidence level 2+]
Transplacental infections associated with IUFD in -
clude: cytomegalovirus [Evidence level 2+] ; syphilis100 
[Evidence level 1+] ; parvovirus101 [Evidence level 2+] ; liste -
ria100,102,103 [Evidence level 2+] ; rubella104 [Evidence level 
3]; toxoplasmosis100 [Evidence level 2+] ; herpes simplex105 
[Evidence level 2+] ; coxsackievirus; leptospira; Q fever; and 
Lyme disease.106 Malaria parasitaemia has also been asso -
ciated with IUFD (OR 2.3, 95% CI 1.3–4.1).107 [Evidence 
level 2++]
Ascending infection, with or without membrane rup -
ture, with Escherichia coli , Klebsiella pneumoniae, Group 
B Streptococcus, Enterococcus, Mycoplasma/Ureaplasma, 
Haemophilius influenzae , and chlamydia are the more 
common infectious causes in developed countries.100,108,109 
[Evidence level 2+]
British Association for Sexual Health and HIV (BASHH) 
provide guidance on treatment for syphilis ( www . 
bashh guidelines. org/ curre nt- guide lines/ genit al- ulcer ation/ 
syphi lis- 2015/ ).
An increased rate of stillbirth among women who were 
not vaccinated and acquired a COVID- 19 infection during 
pregnancy was described across different studies and coun -
tries.110-112 Higher rates of stillbirth were associated with the 
delta variant of COVID- 19,110-113 however, other variants, 
such as omicron, had a lower associated stillbirth risk.114
7.3 | What special actions should be 
recommended for women with rhesus D negative 
blood group?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women who are rhesus D 
(RhD) negative should 
be offered a Kleihauer 
test undertaken 
urgently to detect large 
FMH that might have 
preceded late IUFD. 
Anti RhD should 
be administered as 
soon as possible after 
presentation.2+ C FMH is a silent 
cause of late 
IUFD.
If there has been a large 
FMH, the dose of anti- 
RhD should be adjusted 
and the Kleihauer test 
should be repeated at 48 
hours to ensure the fetal 
red cells have cleared.2+ C Evidence suggests 
doses of anti- 
RhD should be 
increased with 
large FMH.
Anti- RhD immunoglobulin 
should be given within 
72 hours of FMH but 
has beneficial effects up 
to 10 days.2+ C Evidence has shown 
benefit of anti- 
RhD up to 10 days 
post sensitising 
event although 
should be given 
within 72 hours.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e17
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Fetal blood group should 
be determined by cell 
free fetal DNA testing 
of maternal blood when 
required.2 D Evidence shows fetal 
blood group can 
be determined 
by free fetal 
DNA testing of 
maternal blood.
Anti- RhD immunoglobulin has beneficial effects up to 10 
days after a sensitising event, but its effect is reduced when 
given beyond 72 hours.115-120[Evidence level 2+]
Women who have had a late IUFD and who are RhD- 
negative, could potentially have had a sensitising bleed days 
prior to diagnosis compromising the window for optimal 
administration of anti- RhD immunoglobulin (72 hours).118
Persistent Kleihauer positivity usually occurs because the 
baby's blood group is also RhD- negative but can also occur 
with very large RhD- positive FMH. It is important to distin -
guish between the two; the baby's blood type can be typed using 
conventional serology on cord blood. If a fetal blood sample is 
not available or obtainable, typing with free fetal DNA from 
maternal blood is now widely available and in antenatal setting 
is highly accurate in predicting the RhD type of the fetus.119,120 
This is routinely performed for RhD- negative women in many 
units in the first trimester. [Evidence level 2–]
7.4 | What precautions should be taken when 
determining the fetal sex?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Parents should be advised 
before the birth about 
the potential difficulty 
in sexing the baby.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice when 
counselling parents.
Two experienced healthcare 
practitioners 
(midwives, 
obstetricians, 
neonatologists, 
pathologists) should 
examine the external 
genitalia of babies born 
extremely preterm, 
severely macerated or 
with hydrops.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice to aid 
in determining the 
fetal sex.
If there is any difficulty or 
doubt, rapid genetic 
testing could be 
offered.2++ B Sexing can also be 
performed rapidly 
and reliably by 
fluorescence in situ 
hybridisation 
(FISH).
Errors in fetal sexing can result in severe emotional harm 
for parents.121 Extreme prematurity, maceration and hy -
drops can all make the diagnosis difficult. Where possible, 
the difficulties should be discussed with the parents before 
birth and consideration given to the genetic sex being tested 
rapidly on skin or placental tissue, even of macerated ba -
bies.121 [Evidence level 3]QF- PCR with additional Y chromosome markers can 
provide a highly accurate result within 2 working days in 
more than 99.9% of samples.122 Sexing can also be performed 
rapidly and reliably by FISH. If these techniques fail, sex can 
be determined on cell culture or at postmortem, but these 
methods can take longer. [Evidence level 2++ extrapolated]
If the genital sex is not clear and the parents do not wish 
for postmortem testing in any form, they might wish to judge 
the sex themselves for registration purposes, perhaps based 
on an earlier scan, or ask the midwife or doctor to make a 
judgement. Other parents might choose not to sex the baby 
before choosing a name. Stillborn babies can be registered as 
having indeterminate sex.
7.5 | What is the best practice guidance for 
cytogenetic analysis of the baby?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All women should 
be offered 
cytogenetic testing 
of their baby and 
given information 
both verbally and 
in writing and 
only performed if 
consent is given.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice 
when counselling 
parents regarding 
investigations.
The chance of 
informative 
results should be 
increased by using 
multiple cytogenetic 
techniques and 
samples from 
multiple fetal 
tissues.4 D Increased use 
of varied 
cytogenetic 
techniques and 
different tissues 
can increase 
the information 
provided in 
results.
Cytogenetic testing is an important element of the inves -
tigation as 6–13% of stillborn babies will have a cytogenetic 
anomaly.123 Some anomalies may be recurrent and could be 
tested for in future pregnancies.123 If cytogenetic testing is 
abnormal, advise referral to clinical geneticists.
Karyotyping, microarray analysis and QF- PCR can all 
be used to screen for and identify anomalies. Karyotyping 
is useful for detecting mosaicism, however it can underes -
timate the contribution of genetic anomalies to late IUFD 
because in up to 50% of karyotype attempts cell culture is 
unsuccessful.124 Microarray analysis provides more results 
than karyotyping as it not only detects aneuploidy but also 
detects copy number variants (smaller deletion and duplica -
tions) not detectable by karyotype, but has the disadvantage 
that it identifies variations of unknown clinical signifi -
cance.125 QF- PCR can be performed on directly extracted 
DNA.126,127 Certain postmortem findings usually trigger 
specific requests for microarray analysis.
There is no recommendation for pre- birth amniocentesis.
Placentas should not be placed in formalin before the bi -
opsy is taken. A placental biopsy approximately 1 cm diam -
eter should be taken from the fetal surface close to the cord 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e18 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
insertion to avoid tissue of maternal origin. Cord biopsy can 
be undertaken and should be about 0.5 cm in length. Place 
specimens in a sterile tissue culture medium of lactated 
Ringer's solution. [Evidence level 4]
7.6 | What information should be discussed 
with women and their families regarding 
perinatal postmortem?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Parents should be offered 
full postmortem 
examination to help 
explain the cause of a 
late IUFD.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice 
when counselling 
parents regarding 
the postmortem.
Ample time should be 
allowed for this 
discussion, and ensure 
the discussion takes 
place in a quiet, private 
place.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
Parents should be advised 
that postmortem 
examination can 
provide information 
that can sometimes 
be crucial to the 
management of future 
pregnancy.2+ B Recommendation from 
large observational 
studies have 
demonstrated 
the benefit of 
postmortem 
in providing 
information on 
causation of late 
IUFD.
Consent must be given 
for any invasive 
procedure on the baby, 
and prior discussion 
should be with a senior 
obstetrician or midwife 
with appropriate 
knowledge given the 
nature and specifics of 
perinatal postmortem.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice 
when counselling 
parents regarding 
the postmortem, 
to support parents 
to make informed 
decisions.
Pathological examination 
of the cord, membranes 
and placenta 
should always be 
recommended.4 C Evidence has 
highlighted the 
usefulness of the 
examination of 
the placenta and 
cord in providing 
information on 
causation of late 
IUFD and should 
be therefore always 
recommended.
The examination should 
be undertaken by a 
specialist perinatal 
pathologist.4 D This is recommended 
under published 
national standards.
Parents who decline full 
postmortem might 
be offered a limited 
examination (sparing 
certain organs), but this 
should be discussed 
with a perinatal 
pathologist before 
being offered.4 GPP Parents should be 
counselled about 
the options of a 
limited examination 
after discussion 
with a perinatal 
pathologist.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Non- invasive, minimally 
invasive, and 
limited postmortem 
examination methods 
should be offered, 
where expertise and 
facilities are available, 
to parents who decline 
a full postmortem 
examination after 
discussion of their 
advantages and 
disadvantages.3 C Parents should be 
counselled on the 
current evidence 
for non- invasive, 
minimally invasive 
and limited 
postmortems, if a 
full postmortem 
is declined and 
facilities are 
available.
Ultrasound and magnetic 
resonance imaging 
(MRI) can be offered 
as a substitute 
for conventional 
postmortem, 
depending on 
local expertise 
and availability of 
resources.3 C Postmortem ultrasound 
and MRI have 
high sensitivity 
and specificity 
compared 
with standard 
postmortem.
If imaging is the only 
option, ultrasound 
scan (USS) and MRI 
remain the first line 
imaging non- invasive 
investigations for 
perinatal autopsy.3 C The time interval has 
been reported to be 
the most significant 
factor in acquiring 
a diagnostic quality 
postmortem 
ultrasound study 
owing to the tissue 
breakdown and 
laxity of skull 
sutures. It would be 
preferential when 
there is suspicion 
of an underlying 
cardiac anomaly or 
if the time interval 
time is more than 
24 hours between 
death and birth to 
consider an MRI.
In a population- based study in the USA including IUFDs 
from 20 weeks in 59 centres, 500 women consented to post -
mortem. In 60.9% (95% CI, 56.5%–65.2%) a probable cause 
was found, and a possible or probable case found in 76.2% 
(95% CI, 72.2%–79.8%).128[Evidence level 2++]
In a cohort study in the USA, clinical findings led to a 
probable cause in 24.3% of cases, adding placental pathol -
ogy increased this to 61.1%. A subsequent postmortem led 
to 74.3% having a probable cause of death.129 Performing 
placental pathology alone can lead to identifying a proba -
ble cause of death in 11.2–64.9% of cases, therefore gross 
and microscopic examination of the placenta, umbili -
cal cord and fetal membranes by a trained pathologist 
is the single most useful aspect of the evaluation of late 
IUFD.129[Evidence level 2+]
A systematic review of placental pathology reported in 
association with late IUFD showed that 65% had placental 
anomaly identified.130 Furthermore, a retrospective study 
(n = 1064) showed that 32% of late IUFDs had the cause of 
death assigned to placental anomalies.131[Evidence level 1++]
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e19
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
Independent of full postmortems, placental pathology 
therefore should be offered even if a postmortem examina -
tion of a baby is declined.
The National Bereavement Care pathway recommends 
that a minimum of 1 hour should be dedicated for the dis -
cussion regarding the postmortem, in a quiet private place. 
The pathway highlights the need to tell the parents if the 
postmortem examination will take place at a different hos -
pital and explain where and why. Furthermore, they state 
that attempts to persuade parents to choose postmortem 
must be avoided; individual, cultural and religious beliefs 
must be respected. Parents should be offered a description 
of what happens during the procedure and the likely ap -
pearance of their baby afterwards. This should include in -
formation on how their baby is treated with dignity and any 
arrangements for transport, and that all discussions should 
be supplemented by the offer of written information.29 
[Evidence level 3]
It is essential to offer conventional postmortem examina -
tion to all parents. It is recommended that all practitioners 
who discuss postmortems with parents have a responsibility 
to understand the process so that consent is fully informed. 
It is also recommended that the consent form should include 
sections on the purpose of the postmortem; the extent of the 
examination; possible organ/tissue retention and purpose; 
what should happen to tissues/organ after postmortem; and 
research and education.29,132[Evidence level 2+]
All consent takers should be trained and specifically ap -
proved to take informed consent and decision making for 
a post mortem examination and should have observed a 
postmortem examination of a baby. If possible see Code of 
Practice A: Guiding principles and the fundamental princi -
ple of consent .133
Postmortem examination might reveal the cause(s) and 
time of death, inform discussions of relevance to risk of re -
currence and provide information for any medicolegal pro -
ceedings.134,135[Evidence level 3]
In terms of information for subsequent pregnancies, 
in a study of late IUFDs, abnormal findings were found 
in 51.1% of postmortems which is in keeping with a study 
which demonstrated that postmortem alone provided a 
classification of death in 45.9% of cases.130 When combined 
with other diagnostic tests, it offered information relevant 
to recurrence risk in 40.1% of cases and to management of 
next pregnancy in 51%. Important information that affected 
management of next pregnancy was elicited in 10% of still -
born babies with no recognisable cause of death from other 
clinical or laboratory investigations.130[Evidence level 3]
There are published standards for the conduct of perina -
tal postmortems.136[Evidence level 4]
Alternatives to a standard postmortem include less in -
vasive alternatives such as using only postmortem imaging 
– X- ray, USS or MRI (non- invasive postmortem) – or the ad -
dition of image guided organ biopsies (minimally invasive 
autopsy). Different imaging modalities have different advan -
tages and disadvantages according to the clinical scenario and gestational age. Local expertise and availability should 
be confirmed before they are offered, and their advantages 
and disadvantages discussed in the light of available evi -
dence.137[Evidence level 2]
In the largest prospective paediatric postmortem study to 
date (the MARIAS study, including 400 children of whom 
277 (69%) were perinatal losses) there was more than 90 con -
cordance of MRI for overall diagnoses compared with stan -
dard postmortem (sensitivity of 89.7%, specificity of 95%) 
particularly for anomalies of the heart, brain and musculo -
skeletal system.138
When the imaging is of diagnostic quality, ultrasound has 
been reported to have similar accuracy to both 1.5T and 3T 
MRI with an estimated overall sensitivity of 73% and spec -
ificity 97%.139 The highest sensitivity was found for brain 
imaging (84%) and the lowest for cardiothoracic anomalies 
(51%). The time interval has been reported to be the most 
significant factor in acquiring a diagnostic quality postmor -
tem ultrasound study because of the tissue breakdown and 
laxity of skull sutures. It would be preferential when there 
is suspicion of an underlying cardiac anomaly or if the time 
interval time is more than 24 hours between death and birth 
to consider an MRI over USS. [Evidence level 1]
Use of X- rays has been repeatedly shown to have minimal 
yield in routine use, and should be reserved for targeted use 
only when there is a suspected skeletal anomaly.140 [Evidence 
level 3]
Minimally invasive postmortem with laparoscopically 
assisted sampling has the potential to increase the diagnostic 
yield of less invasive postmortem by improving the quality 
and quantity of tissue samples obtained, while permitting 
visualisation, extraction and examination of internal organs 
through a small incision, but will also depend on local skill 
and expertise.141 [Evidence level 3]
A mixed methods study demonstrated that less invasive 
perinatal postmortem methods are viable and acceptable 
(except for unexplained deaths), and likely to potentially in -
crease uptake.142
8 | PHYSICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL 
AND SOCIAL ASPECTS OF CARE
8.1 | What physical, psychological and social 
problems can follow late IUFD and what is best 
practice for the use of interventions that might 
aid psychological recovery?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Healthcare professionals 
should be aware of, 
and responsive to, 
possible variations 
in individual and 
cultural approaches 
to death.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e20 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Appropriate counselling 
should be offered to 
all women and their 
partners although 
clinicians should be 
aware that evidence 
on the effectiveness 
of counselling is 
limited.4 D There is limited 
evidence to 
guide this 
recommendation. 
Best practice is for 
all bereaved parents 
to be informed 
about and, if 
requested, referred 
for emotional 
support and for 
specialist mental 
health support 
when needed.
Other family members, 
especially existing 
children and 
grandparents, 
should also be 
considered for 
counselling.4 D This is recommended 
as good practice, as 
late IUFD has been 
known to have 
deleterious impact 
on the wider 
family.
Parents should be 
advised about 
support groups.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Experiencing the birth of a stillborn child is a life- 
changing event. The focus of the consequences may vary 
with parent, gender and culture. Late IUFD can have devas -
tating psychological, physical and social costs, with ongoing 
effects on interpersonal relationships and subsequently born 
children.173,174 [Evidence level 1+]
Healthcare professionals must be alert to the fact that 
women, partners, children and grandparents are all at risk 
of prolonged severe psychological reactions, including post- 
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), but that their reactions 
might be very different.173,174 [Evidence level 3]
Parents who experience perinatal death are at increased 
risk of hospital admission owing to postnatal depression and 
suicide.175,176 A nested case–control study has shown that the 
risk of completed suicide was higher in women who experi -
enced a late IUFD [adjusted odds ratio (aOR) 5.2; 95% CI 1.77–
15.32] than in those who had a live birth. [Evidence level 2]
Unresolved grief responses can evolve into PTSD.175,176 
Parents with poor social support are particularly vulnera -
ble.176 [Evidence level 3]
Partners of women with a late IUFD can also experience 
severe grief responses, but the prevalence of such psycho -
logical disorders in partners is not precisely known, and 
they can also develop PTSD.175 Discordant grief reactions 
between partners are more common after IUFD than after 
neonatal death and this is a risk factor for developing a pro -
longed grief disorder.175 [Evidence level 3]
An online survey of LGBTQ+, mostly lesbian people 
from the UK, USA, Canada and Australia demonstrated that 
the experience of loss was amplified due to contextual fac -
tors and the investment respondents made into impending 
motherhood.177 [Evidence level 3]
A review of qualitative studies of the psychosocial im -
pact of IUFD has shown that recurrent themes ranged from 
negative psychological symptoms post bereavement and in subsequent pregnancies, to disenfranchised grief, and in -
congruent grief. There was also impact on siblings and on 
the wider family. They included mixed- feelings about de -
cisions made when the baby died, avoidance of memories, 
anxiety over other children, chronic pain and fatigue and 
a different approach to the use of healthcare services. Grief 
suppression, employment difficulties, financial debt and 
substance use were particularly prominent in fathers. These 
included motivation for engagement in healthcare improve -
ment and changed approaches to life and death, self- esteem, 
and own identity.173,174 [Evidence level 1+]
A study in 2011 has shown that bereaved parents who 
experience late IUFD or infant death have markedly in -
creased mortality compared with non- bereaved parents, up 
to 25 years after the death of their child.178 Furthermore, pa -
rental relationships have a 40% higher risk of dissolving after 
late IUFD compared with live birth.179 [Evidence level 2]
A systematic review in 2017 failed to identify evidence 
of sufficient quality on which to base recommendations of 
interventions to reduce the psychosocial impact after late 
IUFD.180 [Evidence level 1+]
A further systematic review in 2023 identified only four 
research studies evaluating counselling as an intervention fol -
lowing late IUFD.181 Simpson et al. assessed grief, anxiety and 
depression following bereavement counselling and found that 
symptoms had significantly reduced following the interven -
tion, although it was noted that grief in the control group had 
also declined within the study period.182 Rogers et al. evalu -
ated a specialised bereavement counselling service in the UK 
using the CORE (Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation) 
to assess the severity of subjective wellbeing, symptoms or 
problems, function, and risk to self and others. It was noted 
that the severity of psychological problems had decreased fol -
lowing bereavement counselling.183 Navidian et al. measured 
PTSD severity following psychological grief counselling and 
found that symptoms had reduced.184 Cacciatore et al. evalu -
ated whether or not counselling was ‘helpful’ for parents and 
found that the majority of respondents thought that counsel -
ling was either ‘very helpful’ or ‘helpful’.185[Evidence level 4]
A randomised trial explored the feasibility and accept -
ability of a 12- week, home- based, online- streamed yoga 
intervention, among women after a late IUFD. The results 
demonstrated the intervention was acceptable and feasible 
and preliminary efficacy was shown; there were significant 
decreases in PTSD and depression, and improvements in self- 
rated health. They concluded a larger RCT was warranted.186
Guilt is a common emotion after late IUFD but is not nec -
essarily voiced.187
A 10- year study of 843 parents who experienced a late 
IUFD, newborn death or sudden unexpected death in in -
fancy included extended family members, primarily grand -
parents. The most common response of grandparents was a 
profound need to protect their own child. The study found 
that grandparents need information on how they can help 
their children recover from their loss, how long grief lasts 
and the differences between men's and women's grief re -
sponses.188 [Evidence level 3]
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e21
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
Child–parent relationships can be affected and some par -
ents wish to have guidance on how to explain the death to 
siblings and how to help them mourn.189 [Evidence level 2+]
Support groups, such as Sands, have been developed to 
offer help to both partners. In an observational study of 23 
women who attended pregnancy loss groups, interviews 
showed that the primary focus for women was the need to 
seek recognition and acceptance of their grief. The intro -
duction of bereavement support officers has been shown to 
improve the care for those who have experienced perinatal 
loss.190 Support services or charities (such as PETALS, the 
baby loss counselling charity) are available to provide spe -
cialised counselling services for individuals or couples who 
experience trauma or loss during pregnancy or birth.191 
[Evidence level 3]
8.2 | What is the evidence for seeing, holding, 
naming and mementos?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
The opportunity to spend 
time with a baby, and to 
make memories with a 
baby should be actively 
supported and offered.1+ A Recommendation 
from systematic 
review which 
showed benefit of 
memory making.
It is reasonable to offer 
parents a chance to see 
their baby more than 
once, and they should 
be informed that they 
can change their mind at 
any point, but once this 
decision has been made it 
should be respected.1+ A A systematic review 
assessing 
outcomes 
after stillbirth 
suggested positive 
outcomes for 
parents who saw 
or held their 
baby, but this 
option may not be 
beneficial for all.
Some parents who choose not 
to see their baby may find 
it helpful for healthcare 
professionals to describe 
the appearance as an 
alternative. It is, however, 
an informed choice and 
parents' views should be 
respected. An ‘options 
form’ can be a useful way 
to help make this decision 
(e.g. ‘Creating memories 
– offering choices’ is 
available from www. nbcpa 
thway. org. uk)4 D This is considered 
good clinical 
practice.
Artefacts of remembrance 
should be offered to 
parents to keep.3 C Recommendation 
from qualitative 
studies showed 
this to be of 
benefit.
Maternity units should 
have the facilities for 
producing good- quality 
photographs, palm and 
footprints and locks of 
hair with presentation 
frames.3 C Recommendation 
from survey and 
qualitative studies 
showed this to be 
of benefit so this 
should be offered.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Consent should be sought 
from the parents and 
information governance 
regulations should be 
complied with for clinical 
photography.4 GPP Information 
governance 
regulations 
should be 
followed.
It should be explained that 
clothes on a macerated 
baby might become 
stained.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Give parents time to react and decide what they want. 
Refer to NBCP www. nbcpa thway. org. uk/ pathw ays/ still birth 
- berea vemen t- care- pathway . Consider the condition of the 
baby when offering memory- making options. Discuss with 
parents:
• Washing and dressing the baby
• Photographs
• Hand and footprints
• Certificate of birth (a template certificate is available from 
www. nbcpa thway. org. uk)
• Taking the baby out of the hospital environment (a tem -
plate form is available from www. nbcpa thway. org. uk)
• Memory box
• Other memorials.
At present there is a mixed body of evidence surround -
ing seeing and holding the baby after birth. Some studies 
have described beneficial effects of memory making, such 
as facilitating grief,74,192 as opposed to others which have 
documented more adverse outcomes such as depression and 
PTSD.26 In 2013, a Cochrane review concluded that the ev -
idence of the effect of seeing and holding the baby remains 
inconclusive193. A subsequent systematic review (2014) found 
that the evidence of the impact of holding a stillborn baby on 
mental health and wellbeing is sparse and poor quality.194 
The studies included within the systematic review were too 
heterogeneous in their outcome measurements and the au -
thors were unable to quantitatively synthesise the results to 
form a meaningful conclusion.194 A secondary analysis of 
survey data from a postal survey in 2016 of 468 women who 
had experienced a stillbirth, found that women who had seen 
and held their baby had higher self- reported anxiety levels, 
PTSD and relationship difficulties.195 However, there should 
be caution in interpreting these data, as the survey had a low 
response rate (30.2%) and used an unvalidated self- reported 
symptoms checklist.195 Conversely, another systematic re -
view suggested that parents seeing and holding their baby 
could be beneficial to their future wellbeing.196 In summary, 
due to the mixed body of research, parents should continue 
to be offered to hold their stillborn baby. It is essential that 
when parents express a desire to see and hold their baby that 
this is supported by experienced staff. [Evidence level 1+]
An online survey of bereaved parents’ experiences con -
cluded that women who have given birth to stillborn babies 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e22 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
felt more natural, good, comfortable and less frightened if 
the staff supported assumptive bonding by simply offering 
the baby to the woman.197[Evidence level 3]
Some parents may wish to name their baby, but others 
may decide not to do so. Either option is allowable in law, 
but once the stillbirth has been registered, names cannot be 
added or changed (Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953; 
amended by the Still- Birth (Definition) Act 1992).198
8.3 | What are the legal requirements for 
medical certification of stillbirth?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Parents should be 
provided with the 
medical certificate 
certifying late IUFD.4 GPP This should 
follow legal 
requirements.
Parents should have a 
discussion and be 
provided with written 
information about 
the registration 
process, including 
where and how to 
register. Inform 
parents that a baby 
must be registered 
within 42 days.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice 
to ensure parents 
have clear 
information.
It should be ensured that 
parents have any 
other information 
they will need for 
medical certification 
of stillbirth.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Obstetricians and 
midwives should 
be aware of the law 
related to late IUFD.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
The following practice guidance is derived from statute 
and code of practice (for further detail see Appendix III ):
• Stillbirth must be medically certified by a fully registered 
doctor or midwife; the doctor or midwife must have been 
present at the birth or examined the baby after birth. 
(Statute)
• HM Coroner must be contacted if there is doubt about 
the status of a birth. (Statute) Babies born later than 24+0 
weeks who are known to have died before 24+0 weeks do 
not have to be certified or registered. (Code of Practice)
• The baby can be registered as indeterminate sex awaiting 
further tests. (Code of Practice)
• The parents are responsible in law for registering the birth 
but can delegate the task to a healthcare professional. 
(Statute)
Evidence suggests that medical certificates of stillbirth 
contain a number of inaccuracies with a large amount of still -
births incorrectly classified as “unexplained”. FGR is par -
ticularly overlooked as the cause of stillbirth. Practitioners should complete medical certificates of stillbirth consider -
ing all potential causes.199 [Evidence level 3]
8.4 | What are the recommendations for 
spiritual guidance, burial, cremation and 
remembrance?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Maternity units should 
have arrangements 
with all common 
faiths and non- 
religious spiritual 
organisations as a 
source of guidance 
and support for 
parents.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
The legal responsibility 
for the child's 
body rests with the 
parents but can 
be delegated to 
hospital services.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Maternity units should 
provide a book of 
remembrance for 
parents, relatives 
and friends.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Healthcare 
professionals 
should offer 
parents the option 
of leaving toys, 
pictures and 
messages in the 
coffin.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Parents might wish to seek guidance from a spiritual 
leader or religious elder. Funeral options including burial 
and cremation should be discussed with parents, taking into 
account religious and cultural considerations.200
Practical issues should be discussed with the parents, at a 
time and to an extent that suits them.
An observational study found that most parents appreci -
ate rapid arrangements for the funeral or cremation.201[Evi-
dence level 3]
Some parents choose to leave messages, toys and photo -
graphs in the coffin.
If the parents request cremation they have to complete 
Cremation Form 3 (CF3) (application for cremation of re -
mains of a stillborn child). Together with a copy of the 
Stillbirth Certificate (known also as Cremation Form 
9), they submit CF3 to the Medical Referee, who issues 
Cremation Form 10 (authorisation to cremate a stillborn 
child). Cremation Form 2 is the equivalent of CF3 for re -
tained body parts of a stillborn child when the body has al -
ready been cremated. The systems and procedures vary in 
Scotland202 and Northern Ireland,203 however the following 
guidance is adhered to ( www. crema tion. org. uk/ crema tion- 
codes - of- practice ).204
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e23
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
8.5 | What advice should be given about 
fertility?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
With regards to 
inter- pregnancy 
intervals, it 
is important 
to balance 
physical and 
psychological 
considerations.1+ A Evidence suggests a higher 
rate of adverse events with 
shorter inter- pregnancy 
intervals, although the 
absolute risks are low and 
other evidence has found 
no increased risk. Some 
parents may feel disinclined 
to delay before attempting to 
conceive again.
An international study including a cohort from Finland, 
Norway and Western Australia found the median inter- 
pregnancy interval after stillbirth was 9 months (interquar -
tile range 4–19 months) and 63% of women conceived within 
12 months of the stillbirth.205 This large international co -
hort study found that conception within 6–12 months of a 
stillbirth was not associated with increased risk of the ma -
jority of adverse outcomes in the subsequent pregnancy.205 
[Evidence level 2]
A 2006 meta- analysis206 of the general maternity popu -
lation suggested that there is a higher rate of adverse events 
with shorter inter- pregnancy intervals, but the absolute 
risk remained low. Inter- pregnancy intervals shorter than 
6 months were associated with increased risks of preterm 
birth, low birthweight and small- for- gestational- age (SGA) 
babies (aOR [95% CI] 1.40 [1.24–1.58], 1.61 [1.39–1.86] and 
1.26 [1.18–1.33], respectively).206 [Evidence level 1+]
A further systematic review in 2012 found that short 
inter- pregnancy intervals were associated with stillbirth 
(aOR 1.35, 95% Cl 1.07–1.71) and early neonatal death (aOR 
1.29, 95% Cl 1.02–1.64).207 [Evidence level 1+]
8.6 | How should healthcare professionals 
caring for women who experience a stillbirth be 
supported?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Healthcare professionals 
should be offered training 
and support when caring for 
parents who experience a late 
IUFD.1++ A This is recommended 
from evidence from a 
systematic review.
In a qualitative study of obstetricians’ experiences of 
caring for women with a late IUFD it was found that late 
IUFD was identified as being among the most difficult 
experiences for consultants. Two superordinate themes 
emerged: the human response to late IUFD and the weight 
of responsibility. The human response to late IUFD was 
characterised by the personal impact for consultants and, 
in turn, how this shapes the care they provide.208[Evidence 
level 3]Furthermore, a systematic review has highlighted the need 
for targeted training and support for healthcare professionals 
who have cared for parents experiencing perinatal loss.209
Examples include training by Sands ( train ing. sands. org. 
uk) or the SUPPORT perinatal bereavement care course 
which has demonstrated pre- and post- course improvement 
in attendees’ confidence in communication, providing be -
reavement care and understanding parent's experiences, 
as well as improved accuracy with clinical knowledge 
assessments.210
9 | FOLLOW- UP
9.1 | What are the options for the perinatal 
mortality review process and follow- up 
meetings?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
The wishes of the woman, 
and of those who she 
wishes to be involved, 
should be considered 
when arranging 
follow- up.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
Before the visit, it is 
essential to ensure that 
all results are available, 
and if results are 
delayed, an interim visit 
offered.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
Parents should be informed 
about the review 
process(es) in place for 
reviewing their baby's 
death before they leave 
hospital.3 C A national consensus group 
advise all parents should 
be informed about any 
and all review processes 
prior to leaving hospital.
Parents should be given 
the opportunity to 
engage in the review 
process(es).3 C A national consensus group 
and qualitative study 
advise all parents should 
be given the opportunity 
to be engaged in the 
review process after the 
death of their baby.
Engaging bereaved parents 
in the review process, 
does not mean having 
the parents present at 
the review, it means 
talking to them and 
asking them for their 
views and any questions 
so that these can be 
taken into account in 
the review.
A plain English summary of 
the review process(es) 
findings should be given 
and discussed with 
parents at the follow- up 
meeting or offered to be 
communicated to them, 
for example sent by post 
or email if a follow- up 
meeting is declined.3 C A national consensus group 
and qualitative study 
advise all parents should 
be given the findings of 
the review process after 
the death of their baby.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e24 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Families should be fully 
informed of the likely 
timescales to review 
and follow up, any 
unexpected delays should 
be clearly communicated 
to avoid further distress.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice including 
having a key contact 
after leaving hospital.
A collaboration led by MBRRACE- UK has established 
a national standardised Perinatal Mortality Review Tool 
(PMRT) building on the work of the Department of Health 
and Social Care/Sands Perinatal Mortality Review ‘Task and 
Finish Group’ (see Appendix IV ). The PMRT aims to sup -
port objective, robust and standardised reviews of deaths 
of babies (up to 28 days post birth) to provide answers for 
bereaved parents about why their baby died, other local and 
national review process may be also undertaken depending 
on the circumstances of the late IUFD.
The PARENTS 2 study led by the University of Bristol has 
developed, piloted and evaluated parental engagement in the 
perinatal review process. They have recommended that parents 
should be informed that a review process will occur to review 
the death of their baby and they should be given the option 
to contribute comments and questions to the meeting.211,212 
Furthermore, a plain English summary of the meeting should 
be produced for parents after the review meeting.211,212 Parent 
engagement materials have been developed in conjunction with 
the PMRT group [ www. npeu. ox. ac. uk/ pmrt/ paren t- engag 
ement - mater ials; www. sands. org. uk/ profe ssion als/ fewer - baby- 
deaths/ revie wing- every - baby- death ].213 [Evidence level 3]
It is recognised that some parents find it very distressing 
to return to the unit where their baby was stillborn.29 The 
option of home visits or virtual appointments should be of -
fered to parents. Six to twelve weeks is common practice for 
the timing of the appointment, when the placental and the 
postmortem histology results usually become available, but 
this can vary across the UK and a flexible approach is appro -
priate according to the needs of the parents and the range 
of tests and reviews performed. The outcome of the review 
process should be communicated to parents.
9.2 | What are the recommendations for the 
content of the follow- up appointment?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Parents should be advised 
about the cause of 
late IUFD, chance of 
recurrence and any 
specific means of 
preventing further loss.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice 
to fully inform 
parents on the 
results of any 
investigations.
Parents should be offered 
general pre- pregnancy 
advice, including support 
for smoking cessation.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice, 
to optimise health 
for any future 
pregnancies.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women should be advised 
on healthy weight 
management. This 
should be discussed and 
approached sensitively.2++ B Evidence has shown 
that BMI of over 
30 kg/m2 is a risk 
factor for late 
IUFD.
Healthcare professionals 
should be aware that 
wishes relevant to 
conception timing tend to 
be individual.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
The meeting should be 
documented for the 
parents in a letter that 
includes an agreed outline 
plan for future pregnancy. 
This should be in clear 
non- medicalised language, 
using the name of the baby 
and sent directly to the 
woman and a copy sent to 
their general practitioner.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
Clinicians can use a proforma to 
aid preparation discussions 
during the meeting.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
For the meeting, women and those who the woman wishes 
to be involved might wish to keep a written log of questions 
and comments. As well as an opportunity to ask about the 
physical and emotional wellbeing of the pregnant person and 
those who the pregnant person has chosen to be involved, the 
meeting allows parents time to discuss the results of tests and 
the likely cause of late IUFD. The meeting can also focus on 
the prognosis and options for future pregnancies. The discus -
sion should cover general preparation for pregnancy: lifestyle, 
smoking status, folic acid supplementation and rubella vacci -
nation. There should be an open, honest discussion with an 
opportunity to make comments and the chance to raise any 
concerns they might have. If any investigation reveals inci -
dences of poor care leading to harm, clinicians have a duty of 
candour (under GMC Good Clinical Practice Regulation 20) 
to disclose this and advise parents of the investigatory process 
to ensure review and that appropriate lessons are learned.
A suggested summary checklist for postnatal consulta -
tions is included in Appendix V of this guideline.
10 | PREGNANCY FOLLOWING 
STILLBIRTH
10.1 | What recommendations should be 
made for subsequent antenatal care following 
late IUFD?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Parents with a previous 
unexplained IUFD should 
be recommended to have 
obstetrician- led antenatal 
care with continuity of 
healthcare professional.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e25
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
The single most important 
risk factor for recurrent 
late IUFD is the history 
of previous late IUFD. A 
woman's recurrence risk 
should be stratified based 
on the investigations 
following index late IUFD 
and other known maternal 
risk factors.1+ A Systematic review and 
meta- analysis showed 
that previous late IUFD 
is associated with a 
4.8- fold increased 
risk of late IUFD. 
Recommendations 
from high quality 
observational studies 
have reinforced 
the importance of 
the risk in the next 
pregnancy being based 
on previous history 
and risk factors; 
therefore, highlighting 
the importance in 
establishing these 
in subsequent 
pregnancies to plan the 
antenatal care.
Women in a subsequent 
pregnancy after late IUFD 
either associated with 
placental dysfunction 
or in unexplained cases 
should be offered fetal 
biometry and amniotic 
fluid measurement with 
additional Doppler 
flow velocimetry of the 
umbilical artery where 
appropriate (at a minimum 
of every 3–4 weeks from 
26–28 weeks of gestation).2 B SGA infants are found 
approximately 2–3 
times more frequently 
in women who 
had a late IUFD 
than live births; 
therefore, assessment 
of fetal growth 
is recommended 
in subsequent 
pregnancies.
Given that those with a 
previous IUFD may 
be at risk of placental 
insufficiency, low dose 
aspirin (150 mg) may 
be offered to all women 
with a previous IUFD 
either associated with 
placental dysfunction or in 
unexplained cases.1++ B Evidence from high 
quality systematic 
reviews and RCTs has 
shown the efficacy 
of low dose aspirin 
in reducing placental 
disorders, because 
of the association of 
placental disorders 
with late IUFD 
and low risk of 
harm with low dose 
aspirin this should 
be recommended 
in all subsequent 
pregnancies following 
late IUFD with 
previous evidence of 
placental insufficiency 
or pre- eclampsia, and 
unexplained.
Women with a previous 
unexplained late IUFD 
and/or if there were signs 
of macrosomia or placental 
findings consistent with 
glucose dysmetabolism 
such as delayed villous 
maturity or fetal vascular 
malperfusion should be 
recommended to have 
screening for GDM.2 C Women with previous late 
IUFD have a higher 
risk of GDM in a 
subsequent pregnancy 
and further evidence 
has shown women not 
screened for GDM 
have a 44% higher 
risk for late IUFD 
so consideration 
should be given to 
test women and 
pregnant people for 
GDM in a subsequent 
pregnancy.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women in subsequent 
pregnancies after late 
IUFD should not routinely 
be offered low- molecular- 
weight heparin (LMWH) 
throughout pregnancy 
unless there are other 
medical considerations, 
thrombophilias or APS 
present.3 D There is currently no 
evidence for routine 
use of LMWH.
Women and families who have 
experienced prior late 
IUFD may need emotional 
support and should be 
provided with support 
during pregnancy.1+ A A meta- synthesis 
demonstrated 
that women and 
their partners 
have additional 
psychological needs 
in subsequent 
pregnancies.
Women in subsequent 
pregnancies after late 
IUFD should be offered 
induction of labour or 
birth by 39+0 weeks of 
gestation.2+ C At 39 weeks of gestation 
and beyond, evidence 
suggests induction 
of labour is not 
associated with an 
increase in caesarean 
birth, assisted vaginal 
birth, fetal morbidity 
or admission to the 
neonatal intensive 
care unit. This 
discussion and 
decision should 
however also be 
balanced against 
the specific medical 
and emotional 
considerations 
around timing of 
birth in women and 
pregnant people 
with a history of 
IUFD (including 
an increased risk of 
recurrence secondary 
to a placental cause).
Future reproductive choices and management decisions 
made in subsequent pregnancies can be altered after a late 
IUFD occurs. Care in the subsequent pregnancy varies among 
providers as demonstrated by large national and multinational 
surveys,214,215 and a Cochrane review has demonstrated that 
evidence to guide such care is sparse.216[Evidence level 1+]
Parents and families who have experienced prior late 
IUFD need emotional support and should be provided with 
support during pregnancy.217 [Evidence level 1+]
There is an international consensus statement to provide 
guidance on care for women in pregnancies after late IUFD, 
which should be used as a basis for care.218 There is evidence 
that routine “high- risk” antenatal care does not address 
women's needs in pregnancy/ies after late IUFD and some 
evidence from specialist services, such as pregnancy after 
loss clinics, demonstrates improved psychological outcomes 
for women.219
Late IUFD due to placental causes or preterm birth are 
the most likely to recur. Causes like antiphospholipid anti -
body syndrome may benefit from treatment and can lead to 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e26 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
more favourable outcomes in the future pregnancy if iden -
tified. Women with known risk factors, such as smoking, a 
BMI above 30 kg/m2, and poorly controlled pre- gestational 
diabetes, can benefit from modification and optimisation of 
health prior to a subsequent pregnancy.220–225 These risk fac -
tors must be addressed sensitively. [Evidence level 2 ]
When the cause of late IUFD has not been found, treat -
ment for a likely placental cause may improve outcomes in 
the subsequent pregnancy.226[Evidence level 2]
With respect to mode of birth in pregnancy subsequent 
to late IUFD, there is an absence of data from studies to in -
form the role of a caesarean birth for non- medical reasons 
in women with a history of late IUFD in reducing perina -
tal mortality or morbidity, or maternal psychological mor -
bidity. Therefore, as with all other choices related to timing 
and mode of birth in women who have had a late IUFD, a 
planned caesarean birth needs to be part of an informed 
decision- making process. This decision may be greatly in -
fluenced by the timing of the previous late IUFD. Families 
report the wish to have the option of flexible and additional 
appointments for additional monitoring that is above stan -
dard care. They also report a wish for increased emotional 
support and to provide a compassionate and understanding 
response to anxiety.219[Evidence level 3]
10.1.1 | Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM)
Evidence has shown that history of previous GDM is a risk 
factor for late IUFD.227 A case–control study reported that 
women ‘at risk’ of GDM, but not screened, experienced 44% 
greater risk of late stillbirth than those not ‘at risk’ (aOR 
1.44, 95% CI 1.01–2.06), therefore a test for GDM in a preg -
nancy subsequent to stillbirth should be offered, as well as 
vigilance for signs and symptoms; especially if the previous 
late IUFD was unexplained227 and/or if there were signs of 
macrosomia or placental findings consistent with glucose 
dysmetabolism, such as delayed villous maturity or fetal vas -
cular malperfusion.228
10.1.2 | Ultrasonography
Impaired fetal growth secondary to placental dysfunction 
is considered to be one of the main reasons for perinatal 
morbidity and mortality. Fetuses under the 10th centile are 
found approximately 2–3 times more frequently among late 
IUFDs than live births.229,230 Furthermore, a systematic re -
view found that women with a history of a late IUFD have 
an increased risk of birth of a SGA baby (OR 1.39, 95% CI 
1.10−1.76).231 Consequently, additional ultrasound exami -
nations are among the most frequently offered tests of fetal 
wellbeing in pregnancies after late IUFD.232,233 [Evidence 
level 2+]
However, this strategy is undermined by data demon -
strating that the relationship between fetal size and adverse 
outcome weakens significantly with advancing gestation such that near term, the majority of late IUFDs occur in nor -
mally sized fetuses.234
The key evidence- based measurement in performing 
scans in high- risk pregnancies is Doppler flow velocimetry 
of the umbilical artery. Uterine artery Doppler anomalies 
may help identify women at risk in their subsequent preg -
nancy after late IUFD. Low cerebroplacental ratio (CPR) 
values in the third trimester of pregnancy have been shown 
to be an independent predictor of late IUFD and perina -
tal mortality.235,236 Studies looking at first and second tri -
mester uterine artery Doppler anomalies have suggested a 
correlation with late IUFD, however these models have not 
yet proven applicable to the subsequent pregnancy after late 
IUFD population.235,236 [Evidence level 2 extrapolate d]
The evidence for using fetal growth velocity to predict 
adverse perinatal outcomes is inconclusive. Studies of fetal 
growth velocity have reported inconsistent results, with lack of 
consensus of what constitutes a suboptimal fetal growth veloc -
ity, whether this varies with gestational age and the relation -
ship of growth velocity to adverse pregnancy outcome.236,237
In view of the association of SGA with late IUFD, in a 
subsequent pregnancy after late IUFD serial fetal biometry 
and amniotic fluid measurements with Doppler flow should 
be considered. There are no data to determine the optimal 
frequency for ultrasound assessment of fetal growth in preg -
nancy after late IUFD. Women's perceptions as to the ideal 
frequency of ultrasound monitoring should be taken into 
consideration when formulating a pregnancy plan. Care 
providers should be aware that some parent's anxiety may 
increase before ultrasound scans, because of the association 
with the confirmation of death of their previous stillborn ba -
by.238[Evidence level 3]
10.1.3 | Induction of labour
The ARRIVE trial239 showed that induction of labour at 
39 weeks reduces caesarean birth rate significantly. In the 
trial, perinatal death and other adverse events were 4.4% 
in the induction of labour group and 5.4% in the expectant 
management group (RR 0.81, 95% CI 0.64–1.01; P =0.06). 
Epidemiological evidence showed that universal induction 
at 39 weeks would reduce overall rates of late IUFD.240 At 
37–38 weeks, induction has been associated with increased 
risks of perinatal morbidity, whereas perinatal outcomes 
after induction are optimal at 39–41 weeks.240 The 35/39 
trial showed that for women over 35 years old, routine induc -
tion at 39 weeks might prevent stillbirths without increasing 
caesarean birth rates.241[Evidence level 1 extrapolated]
There is no evidence for the value of an unindicated birth 
prior to 37 weeks with no risk factors other than prior stillbirth. 
Overall, there is enough evidence to consider and discuss in -
duction of labour or birth by 39 weeks of gestation in women 
and pregnant people in a subsequent pregnancy after late IUFD. 
Earlier birth might be considered for women and pregnant peo -
ple with an earlier IUFD, cholestasis, pre- eclampsia, insulin- 
dependent diabetes and other maternal conditions, including 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e27
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
psychological considerations, and the decision is always a risk/
benefit balance with prematurity of the fetus.
A study of 306 women with a previous IUFD found that 
161 had a clear indication for earlier intervention. Of the re -
maining 145 women, 42 of the remaining participants (with 
no known previous medical problems) developed compli -
cations during their pregnancy necessitating earlier (before 
39 weeks) birth. Of the remaining 92 women 47 (51%) went 
into spontaneous labour before their induction date; all 92 
pregnant people gave birth without major complications.242
It is vital to carefully consider maternal wellbeing and 
emotional state throughout the pregnancy and to provide 
ongoing psychosocial support. It may be helpful to outline 
the possible pathway early in pregnancy such as birth at 
39 weeks of gestation as a clear goal from the beginning, and 
it may help alleviate anxiety.
10.1.4 | Low dose aspirin
Low- dose aspirin may reduce the risk of perinatal death in 
women at risk for placental insufficiency, and women with a 
history of stillbirth may fall into this category.
Low- dose aspirin (60–150 mg) has been widely evaluated 
as a method for preventing placental- related complications 
in pregnancy, and in particular pre- eclampsia. Early studies 
showed that women who took low dose aspirin as prophylaxis 
during pregnancy were less likely to develop pre- eclampsia 
than women who had not taken aspirin.243 Aspirin prophy -
laxis in pregnancies at risk of pre- eclampsia resulted in a re -
duction in the rate of FGR (RR 0.44, 95% CI 0.30–0.65) and 
fetal or neonatal death (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.76–0.98).244
The 2013 systematic review of RCTs showed reduced pre- 
eclampsia, perinatal death, and FGR among individuals at 
high risk commenced on aspirin before 16 weeks.245 A fur -
ther systematic review of 45 RCTs identified increased bene -
fits with more than 100 mg aspirin daily, without increasing 
adverse effects.246
There is limited evidence assessing low dose aspirin use 
in pregnancy that are powered to detect stillbirth risk re -
duction. The ASPRE trial247 randomly assigned 2971 par -
ticipants at high risk of pre- eclampsia to 150 mg aspirin or 
placebo; they reported a possible lower rate of stillbirth and 
neonatal death among those receiving low dose aspirin ver -
sus placebo (8 [1.0%] of 798 versus 14 [1.7%] of 822, OR 0.59 
[95% CI 0.19–1.85]).
Studies have shown that the effectiveness of low 
dose aspirin on pre- eclampsia reduced with decreasing 
compliance.248,249
The Saving Babies Lives Care Bundle version 3 (SBLCBv3) 
recommends low dose aspirin as prophylaxis for a number of 
indications related to placental disorders in order to reduce the 
number of stillbirths.250 Therefore, aspirin should be consid -
ered for woman at risk of late IUFD starting from 12 weeks of 
gestation to 36 weeks of gestation. [Evidence level 1++]10.1.5 | Low- molecular- weight heparin 
(LMWH)
LMWH use should only be used to prevent maternal VTE 
and further research is required before its use is recom -
mended for the primary aim of preventing adverse fetal 
outcomes, unless there are other medical considerations, 
thrombophilias or APS present.251
11 | CLINICAL GOVERNANCE
11.1 | What are the risk management 
standards for IUFD?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Maternity units should 
ensure they are 
tracking their 
outcomes and 
benchmarking against 
other organisations 
using the national 
indicators dashboard.4 GPP This is recommended as 
good practice.
The Maternity Action Plan252 and SBLCBv3250 both aim 
to reduce stillbirths by 50% by 2025 and provide relevant au -
ditable standards.
11.2 | What are the standards for 
documentation?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Standardised checklists can 
be used to ensure that all 
appropriate care options are 
offered and the response to 
each is recorded.3 D A retrospective study 
of an integrated 
care pathway 
for stillbirth 
improved 
delivery of care 
for women who 
experienced a 
stillbirth.
Consent for perinatal 
postmortem examination 
should be documented 
using the nationally 
recommended form.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
All stillbirths should be 
reviewed in a multi- 
professional meeting using 
the standardised PMRT to 
ensure lessons are learned 
from each IUFD and 
shared widely. Results of 
the discussion should be 
recorded in the woman's 
case record and discussed 
with the parents.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e28 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All stillbirths should be 
reported to:
• MBRRACE- UK,
• National Maternity and 
Perinatal Audit,
• PMRT database.
• Maternity and Newborn 
Safety Investigations (MNSI) 
(if intrapartum)
All research studies in 
bereavement care or evaluations 
of bereavement service for 
stillbirth should consider the 
use the developed core outcome 
set for stillbirth care (iCHOOSE 
study) to assess effectiveness.4 GPP This is recommended 
as good practice.
An international core outcome set to evaluate the effec -
tiveness of stillbirth care was developed in 2022 (iCHOOSE 
Study).253 This was developed using a mixed- methods re -
search methodology including a systematic review, quali -
tative interviews with bereaved families, an international 
Delphi survey and consensus meetings with key stakehold -
ers, including 542 bereaved families, stillbirth researchers, 
healthcare professionals and stillbirth advocates from 29 
different countries. The core outcome set for stillbirth care 
includes:
Mandatory outcomes in all circumstances : life- threatening 
complications and death, parents’ experience of respectful and 
supportive care, grief, mental health and emotional wellbeing, 
isolation, stigma, impact on work, impact on relationship with 
immediate family.
Mandatory outcomes in investigation of stillbirth studies : cause of 
death identified and parents’ understanding of cause of death.
Mandatory subsequent pregnancy care outcomes : antenatal 
complications for women, antenatal complications for baby, survival 
of baby, neonatal outcomes and attachment to baby.
Mandatory outcomes for when a baby dies in a twin or multiple 
pregnancy : Survival of baby/ies, preterm birth, pregnancy 
complications for baby and neonatal outcomes.
12 | RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
FUTURE RESEARCH
• Effectiveness of stillbirth care guidelines and the bereave -
ment care pathway on core outcomes (core outcome set for 
stillbirth care)
• Feasibility and utility of non- invasive and minimally in -
vasive postmortem examination of the baby.
• Impact of models of care in subsequent pregnancies after 
late IUFD.
• Induction of labour to prevent adverse outcome in subse -
quent pregnancies after late IUFD.
• Association between microbiome and pregnancy loss in -
cluding late IUFD.
• Effectiveness of bereavement counselling or other inter -
ventions post late IUFD.• Optimal methods of induction for women with late IUFD.
• Validation and clinical evaluation of risk prediction mod -
els for late IUFD.
13 | AUDITABLE TOPICS
• Proportion of women who were offered postmortem after 
late IUFD. (100% target)
• Proportion of women who had placental histopathology 
after late IUFD. (100% target)
• Proportion of women who had cytogenetic analysis after 
late IUFD. (100% target)
• Patient experience following late IUFD (using established 
validated tools).
• Proportion of women who were involved in the PMRT 
process after a late IUFD. (> 95% target)
• Proportion of women who had a postnatal visit after a late 
IUFD. (100% target)
• Proportion of women who had access to postnatal coun -
selling after a late IUFD. (100% target)
• Percentage of staff who have had bereavement care train -
ing. (> 95% target)
14 | USEFUL LINKS AND 
SUPPORT GROUPS
Sands www. sands. org. uk/ suppo rt- you
PETALS www. petal schar ity. org
RCOG Patient information When your baby dies before 
birth www. rcog. org. uk/ for- the- public/ brows e- our- patie nt- 
infor mation/ when- your- baby- dies- befor e- birth/ 
FUNDING INFORMATION
All those involved in the development of the Green-top 
Guidelines, including the Guidelines Committee, Guidelines 
Committee co-chairs, guideline developers, peer reviewers 
and other reviewers, are unpaid volunteers and receive no 
direct funding for their work in producing the guideline. 
The exception to this are the RCOG staff involved who are 
salaried employees of the College and Guidelines Committee 
members who receive reimbursement for expenses for at -
tending Guidelines Committee meetings. Please see more 
information on travel expense rules on the RCOG website.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST STATEMENT
CB has received a National Institute of Health and 
Research (NIHR) Research for Patient Benefit award for 
the RECOGNISE study (Reference: NIHR203182), NHSX 
Award ID: AI_AWARD02591 and Clinical Decision Tool to 
Reduce Placental Disorders in Pregnancy - a multi-centre 
cluster RCT. AH is the director of the Tommy’s Maternal 
and Fetal Health Research Centre and has received cen -
tre funding to the University of Manchester; he has also 
received a grant to the University of Manchester for the 
Evaluation of MNSI and PMRT reviews after perinatal 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e29
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
deaths as part of the NIHR Research Policy Programme and 
received a grant to Manchester University NHS Foundation 
Trust for MiNESS20-28 study (to find antenatal risk factors 
for stillbirth between 20 and 28 weeks’ gestation) as part 
of the NIHR Research for Patient Benefit. He has received 
consulting fees from Norgine Ltd for a video on induction 
of labour, payment from Canon Ultrasound for a lecture on 
the Evaluation of NHS England Saving Babies Lives Care 
Bundle, as well as medicolegal expert witness work relating 
to stillbirth. He has also acted as medical advisor for Count 
the Kicks and the Star Legacy Foundation. DB has received 
an award from the NIHR (Award ID: DRF-2017-10-130) 
and is a Trainee Scientific Editor at BJOG. DS has received 
grants from Welcome LEAP for Near Infrared Spectroscopy 
and Stillbirth, MRC for MRI to predict birth outcome and 
NIHR for rotational birth and provides medicolegal reports 
on stillbirth. He is also chair of the DMC of the PANDA 
stillbirth trial, chair of the DMC of the CRAFT RCT and 
is on the advisory board of Sands. He is the former chair of 
the ISA Bereavement and Clinical Care Group. AM has re -
ceived the NIHR Advanced Fellowship about birth Options, 
has participated in the PARTNER Trial and is the BMFMS 
Labour and Delivery Representative.
REFERENCES
 1. Stillbirth (Definition) Act 1992. Available from: https:// www. legis 
lation. gov. uk/ ukpga/ 1992/ 29 . Accessed 7 Apr 2021
 2. MBRRACE- UK Perinatal Mortality Surveillance Reports. Available 
from: https:// www. npeu. ox. ac. uk/ mbrra ce- uk/ reports. Accessed Jan 
2020
 3. Fretts RC. Etiology and prevention of stillbirth. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2005;193:1923–35.
 4. Lamont K, Scott NW , Jones GT, Bhattacharya S. Risk of recurrent still-
birth: systematic review and meta- analysis. BMJ. 2015; 24:350.
 5. Cronin RS, Li M, Thompson JMD, Gordon A, Raynes- Greenow CH, 
Heazell AEP , et  al. An individual participant data meta- analysis of 
maternal going- to- sleep position, interactions with fetal vulnerability, 
and the risk of late stillbirth. EClinicalMedicine. 2019;10:49–57.
 6. Flenady V, Koopmans L, Middleton P, Frøen JF, Smith GC, Gibbons 
K, et al. Major risk factors for stillbirth in high- income countries: a 
systematic review and meta- analysis. Lancet. 2011;377:1331–40.
 7. Muglu J, Rather H, Arroyo- Manzano D, Bhattacharya S, Balchin 
I, Khalil A, et  al. Risks of stillbirth and neonatal death with 
advancing gestation at term: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of cohort studies of 15 million pregnancies. PLoS Med. 
2019;16:e1002838.
 8. Gardosi J, Madurasinghe V, Williams M, Malik A, Francis A. 
Maternal and fetal risk factors for stillbirth: population based study. 
BMJ. 2013;346:f108. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. f108
 9. Bukowski R, Hansen NI, Willinger M, Reddy UM, Parker CB, Pinar 
H, et al. Fetal growth and risk of stillbirth: a population- based case- 
control study. PLoS Med. 2014;11(4):e1001633. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1371/ journ al. pmed. 1001633
 10. Stacey T, Thompson JM. Mitchell EA Maternal perception of 
fetal activity and late stillbirth risk: findings from the Auckland 
Stillbirth Study. Birth. 2011;38:311–6.
 11. Escañuela Sánchez T, Meaney S, O’Donoghue K. Modifiable risk 
factors for stillbirth: a literature review. Midwifery. 2019;79:102539.
 12. Sarmon KG, Eliasen T, Knudsen UB, Bay B. Assisted reproductive 
technologies and the risk of stillbirth in singleton pregnancies: a sys-
tematic review and meta- analysis. Fertil Steril. 2021;116(3):784–92. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. fertn stert. 2021. 04. 007 13. Moore KA. Quantification of the association between malaria in 
pregnancy and stillbirth: a systematic review and meta- analysis. 
Lancet Glob Health. 2017;5(11):e1101–e1112.
 14. Gurol- Urganci I, Jardine JE, Carroll F, Draycott T, Dunn G, Fremeaux 
A, et al. Maternal and perinatal outcomes of pregnant women with 
SARS- CoV- 2 infection at the time of birth in England: national cohort 
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2021;225(5):522.e1–522.e11.
 15. Development guide.
 16. Harbour R, Miller J. A new system for grading recommendations in 
evidence based guidelines. BMJ. 2001;323:334–6.
 17. Platt LD, Manning FA, Murata Y, Keegan KA, Druzin ML, Socol 
ML, et al. Diagnosis of fetal death in utero by real- time ultrasound. 
Obstet Gynecol. 1980;55(2):191–3.
 18. Weinstein BJ, Platt LD. The ultrasonic appearance of intravascular 
gas in fetal death. J Ultrasound Med. 1983;2:451–4.
 19. McCully JG. Gas in the fetal joints: a sign of intrauterine death. 
Obstet Gynecol. 1970;36:433–6.
 20. Cohen M. Chapter 4 Stillbirth and Intrauterine growth retardation. 
The Pediatric and Perinatal Autopsy Manual.
 21. Burden C, Male S, Fox R. Spurious fetal movement after late fetal 
death. Br J Midwifery. 2010;18(10):659.
 22. Erlandsson K, Lindgren H, Davidsson- Bremborg A, Rådestad I. 
Women's premonitions prior to the death of their baby in utero and 
how they deal with the feeling that their baby may be unwell. Acta 
Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2012;91:28–33.
 23. Lalor JG, Begley CM, Devane D. Exploring painful experiences: im -
pact of emotional narratives on members of a qualitative research 
team. J Adv Nurs. 2006;56:607–16.
 24. McCreight BS. Perinatal loss: a qualitative study in Northern 
Ireland. Omega. 2008;57:1–19.
 25. Buckman R. Communications and emotions. BMJ. 2002;325:672.
 26. Hughes P, Turton P, Hopper E, Evans CD. Assessment of guidelines 
for good practice in psychosocial care of mothers after stillbirth: a 
cohort study. Lancet. 2002;360:114–8.
 27. Siassakos D, Jackson S, Gleeson K, Chebsey C, Ellis A, Storey C, et al. 
All bereaved parents are entitled to good care after stillbirth: a mixed- 
methods multicentre study (INSIGHT). BJOG. 2018;125:160–70.
 28. RCOG patient information leaflet when your baby dies before birth. 
Available from: https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ en/ patie nts/ patie nt- leafl 
ets/ when- your- baby- dies- befor e- birth/ . Accessed Feb 2020
 29. National bereavement care pathway. Available from: https:// nbcpa 
thway. org. uk/ pathw ays/ still birth - berea vemen t- care- pathway . 
Accessed Jan 2019
 30. Rand CS, Kellner KR, Revak- Lutz R, Massey JK. Parental behav -
ior after perinatal death: twelve years of observations. Psychosom 
Obstet Gynaecol. 1998;19:44–8.
 31. Fox R, Pillai M, Porter H, Gill G. The management of late fetal death: 
a guide to comprehensive care. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1997;104:4–10.
 32. Tomlinson AJ, Martindale EA, Bancroft K, Heazell A. Improved 
management of stillbirth using a care pathway. Int J Health Gov. 
2017;2018(23):18–3.
 33. Muin DA, Haslacher H, Koller V, Kiss H, Scharrer A, Farr A. Impact 
of fetal maceration grade on risk of maternal disseminated intra -
vascular coagulation after intrauterine fetal death - A retrospective 
cohort study. Sci Rep. 2018;8:12742.
 34. Parasnis H, Raje B, Hinduja IN. Relevance of plasma fibrin -
ogen estimation in obstetric complications. J Postgrad Med. 
1992;38:183–5.
 35. Rådestad I, Steineck G, Nordin C, Sjögren B. Psychological com -
plications after stillbirth – influence of memories and immediate 
management: population based study. BMJ. 1996;312:1505–8.
 36. Wagaarachchi PT, Ashok PW, Narvekar NN, Smith NC, Templeton 
A. Medical management of late intrauterine death using a combina -
tion of mifepristone and misoprostol. BJOG. 2002;109:443–7.
 37. RCOG considering a caesarean patient information leaflet. 
Available from: https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ for- the- public/ brows 
e- all- patie nt- infor matio n- leafl ets/ consi derin g- a- caesa rean- birth 
- patie nt- infor matio n- leafl et/ 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e30 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
 38. Keag OE, Norman JE, Stock SJ. Long- term risks and benefits as -
sociated with caesarean delivery for mother, baby, and subsequent 
pregnancies: systematic review and meta- analysis. PLoS Med. 
2018;15:e1002494.
 39. Rådestad I, Nordin C, Steineck G, Sjögren B. A comparison of wom-
en's memories of care during pregnancy, labour and delivery after 
stillbirth or live birth. Midwifery. 1998;14:111–7.
 40. Larsen S, Dobbin J, McCallion O, Eskild A. Intrauterine fetal death 
and risk of shoulder dystocia at delivery. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand. 2016;95:1345–51.
 41. Gold K. Maternal complications associated with stillbirth delivery: 
a cross- sectional analysis. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2016;36(2):208–12.
 42. Wall- Wieler E, Carmichael SL, Gibbs RS, Lyell DJ, Girsen AI, El- 
Sayed YY, et  al. Severe maternal morbidity among stillbirth 
and live birth deliveries in California. Obstet Gynecol Int. 
2019;134:310–7.
 43. Stocks LP, Rowland JS, Martindale EA, Heazell AE. The use of 
the birthing pool after a diagnosis of stillbirth. J Obstet Gynaecol. 
2010;30:200–1.
 44. Ponce G, de Leon R, Wing DA. Misoprostol for termination of 
pregnancy with intrauterine fetal demise in the second and third 
trimester of pregnancy; a systematic review. Contraception. 
2009;1(79):259–71.
 45. Sharma D, Singhal SR, Poonam PA, Kunika. Comparison of mife -
pristone combination with misoprostol and misoprostol alone in 
the management of intrauterine death: condensation - misoprostol 
and mifepristone combination is more effective than misoprostol 
alone in the management of intrauterine death. Taiwan J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2011;50:322–5.
 46. Chaudhuri P. Mifepristone and misoprostol compared with miso -
prostol alone for induction of labor in intrauterine fetal death: a 
randomized trial. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2015;41:1884–990.
 47. Agrawal A, Basnet P, Thakur A, Rizal P, Rai R. Induction of labor 
using misoprostol with or without mifepristone in intrauterine 
deat. J Nepal Med Assoc. 2014;52:785–90.
 48. FIGO. FIGO mifepristone & misoprostol and misoprostol only 
dosing charts 2023. 2023. Available from: https:// www. figo. org/ 
figo- mifep risto ne- misop rosto l- and- misop rosto l- only- dosin g- chart 
s- 2023#: ~: text= An% 20upd ate% 20from% 20the% 20wid ely,fetal% 
20dem ise% 2C% 20ind uction% 20of% 20lab our% 2C
 49. NICE Evidence Summary ESUOM 11 Induction of labour in late in -
trauterine fetal death: vaginal misoprostol (after oral mifepristone). 
Available from: https:// www. nice. org. uk/ advice/ esuom 11/ chapt er/ 
Key- point s- from- the- evidence . Accessed Feb 2020
 50. British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of 
Great Britain. British National Formulary (BNF) 58. London: BMJ 
Publishing Group Ltd and RPS Publishing; 2009.
 51. Weeks A, Fiala C, editors. How to dilute 200 mcg of misoprostol 
in 200ml water. Misoprostol in obstetrics and gynaecology; 2010. 
http:// misop rostol. org/ File/ about. php
 52. Alfirevic Z, Keeney E, Dowswell T, Welton NJ, Dias S, Jones LV, 
et  al. Labour induction with prostaglandins: a systematic review 
and network meta- analysis. BMJ. 2015;350:h217.
 53. Perri JB, Burke A, Edelman AB. Interruption of nonviable pregnan -
cies of 24- 28 weeks’ gestation using medical methods: release date 
June 2013 SFP guideline #20133. Contracepon. 2013;88:341–9.
 54. Nakintu N. A comparative study of vaginal misoprostol and in -
travenous oxytocin for induction of labour in women with intra 
uterine fetal death in Mulago Hospital, Uganda. Afr Health Sci. 
2001;1:55–9.
 55. Calder AA, Loughney AD, Weir CJ, Barber JW. Induction of labour 
in nulliparous and multiparous women: a UK, multicentre, open- 
label study of intravaginal misoprostol in comparison with dino -
prostone. BJOG. 2008;115:1279–88.
 56. Prager M, Eneroth- Grimfors E, Edlund M, Marions L. A ran -
domised controlled trial of intravaginal dinoprostone, intravaginal 
misoprostol and transcervical balloon catheter for labour induc-
tion. BJOG. 2008;115:1443–50. 57. Dodd JM, Crowther CA. Misoprostol versus cervagem for the in-
duction of labour to terminate pregnancy in the second and third 
trimester: a systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
2006;125:3–8.
 58. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Green- top 
Guideline No. 55. Birth after previous caesarean birth. London: 
RCOG; 2015.
 59. Boyle A, Preslar JP, Hogue CJ, Silver RM, Reddy UM, Goldenberg RL. 
Route of delivery in women with stillbirth; results from the Stillbirth 
Collaborative Research Network. Obstet Gynaecol. 2017;129:693–8.
 60. Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada. SOGC clin -
ical practice guidelines. Guidelines for vaginal birth after previous 
caesarean birth. Number 155 (Replaces guideline number 147), 
February 2005. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2005;89:319–31.
 61. Bujold E, Blackwell SC, Gauthier RJ. Cervical Ripening and tran -
scervical Foley catheter and the risk of uterine rupture. Obstet 
Gynaecol. 2004;103:18–23.
 62. Pullen S, Golden MA, Cacciatore J. “I’ll never forget those cold 
words as long as I live”: parent perceptions of death notification for 
stillbirth. J Soc Work End Life Palliat Care. 2012;8:339–55.
 63. Hollins Martin CJ, Robb Y. Women's views about the importance 
of education in preparation for childbirth. Nurse Educ Pract. 
2013;13:512–8.
 64. Flanagan PG, Westmoreland D, Stallard N, Stokes IM, Ovine EJ. 
Chlamydiosis in pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1996;103:382–5.
 65. Catanzarite V, Schibanoff JM, Chinn R, Mendoza A, Weiss R. 
Overwhelming maternal sepsis due to a gas- forming Escherichia coli 
chorioamnionitis. Am J Perinatol. 1994;11:205–7.
 66. Braun U, Bearth G, Dieth V, Corboz L. A case of disseminated in -
travascular coagulation (DIC) in a cow with endometritis and fetal 
death. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd. 1990;132:239–45. Article in German.
 67. Sitras V, Šaltytė Benth J, Eberhard- Gran M. Obstetric and psycho -
logical characteristics of women choosing epidural analgesia during 
labour: a cohort study. PLoS One. 2017;1210:e0186564.
 68. Wee MYK, Tuckey JP , Thomas PW , Burnard S. A comparison of in-
tramuscular diamorphine and intramuscular pethidine for labour 
analgesia: a two- centre randomised blinded controlled trial. BJOG. 
2014;121:447–56.
 69. Smith LA, Burns E, Cuthbert A. Parenteral opiods for maternal pain 
management in labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019;6.
 70. Lee JH, Peralta FM, Palatnik A, Gaupp CL, McCarthy RJ. Neuraxial 
labor analgesia is not an independent predictor of perineal lacer -
ations after vaginal delivery of patients with intrauterine fetal de -
mise. Int J Obstet Anesth. 2017;32:21–7.
 71. Ashken T, West S. Regional anaesthesia in patients at risk of bleed-
ing. BJA Educ. 2021;21:84–94.
 72. FSRH clinical guideline contraception after pregnancy. Available from: 
https:// www. fsrh. org/ stand ards- and- guida nce/ docum ents/ contr acept 
ion- after - pregn ancy- guide line- janua ry- 2017/ . Accessed 17 Aug 2022
 73. Carroll K, Noble- Carr D, Sweeney L, Waldby C. The “Lactation 
after infant death (AID) framework”: a guide for online health in -
formation provision about lactation after stillbirth and infant death. 
J Hum Lact. 2020;36(3):480–91.
 74. Basile ML, Thorsteinsson EB. Parents’ evaluation of support in 
Australian hospitals following stillbirth. PeerJ. 2015;3:e1049.
 75. Ellis A, Chebsey C, Storey C, Bradley S, Jackson S, Flenady V, et al. 
Systematic review to understand and improve care after stillbirth: a 
review of parents’ and healthcare professionals’ experiences. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. 2016;16:16.
 76. Downe S, Schmidt E, Kingdon C, Heazell AE. Bereaved parents’ ex -
perience of stillbirth in UK hospitals: a qualitative interview study. 
BMJ Open. 2013;3:e002237.
 77. Peters MDJ, Lisy K, Riitano D, Jordan Z, Aromataris E. Caring for 
families experiencing stillbirth: evidence- based guidance for ma -
ternity care providers. Women Birth. 2015;28:272–8.
 78. Spitz AM, Lee NC, Peterson HB. Treatment for lactation suppres-
sion: little progress in one hundred years. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1998;179:1485–90.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e31
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
 79. European Multicentre Study Group for Cabergoline in Lactation 
Inhibition. Single dose cabergoline versus bromocriptine in inhibi -
tion of puerperal lactation: randomised, double blind, multicentre 
study. BMJ. 1991;302:1367–71.
 80. British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of 
Great Britain. British National Formulary (BNF) 54. London: BMJ 
Publishing Group Ltd and RPS Publishing; 2007.
 81. Iffy L, Zito GE, Jakobovits AA, Ganesh V, McArdle JJ. Postpartum 
intracranial haemorrhage in normotensive users of bromocriptine 
for lactation. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 1998;7:167–71.
 82. Niebyl JR, Bell WR, Schaaf ME, Blake DA, Dubin NH, King TM. The 
effect of chlorotrianisene as postpartum lactation suppression on 
blood coagulation factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1979;134:518–22.
 83. AlSaad D, ElSalem S, Abdulrouf PV, Thomas B, Alsaad T, Ahmed A, 
et al. A retrospective drug use evaluation of cabergoline for lactation 
inhibition at a tertiary care teaching hospital in Qatar. Ther Clin 
Risk Manag. 2016;12:155–60.
 84. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Bromocriptine: 
monitor blood pressure when prescribing bromocriptine for preven -
tion or inhibition of post-partum physiological lactation. London: 
MHRA; 2024. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/drug-safety-update/
bromocriptine-monitor-blood-pressure-when-prescribing-bro -
mocriptine-for-prevention-or-inhibition-of-post-partum-physiologi -
cal-lactation . Accessed 24 October 2024.
 85. Oladapo OT, Fawole B. British medical association and royal phar -
maceutical society of Great Britain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;(9):CD005937. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD005 937. pub3
 86. Rybstein MD. Risk factors for and clinical management of venous 
thromboembolism during pregnancy. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 
2019;17:396–404.
 87. Sultan AA, Tata LJ, West J, Fiaschi L, Fleming KM, Nelson- Piercy C, 
et al. Risk factors for first venous thromboembolism around preg -
nancy: a population- based cohort study from the United Kingdom. 
Blood. 2013;12119:3953–61.
 88. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. RCOG green- 
top guideline No. 37a. reducing the risk of venous thromboembo -
lism during pregnancy & puerperium. London: RCOG; 2015.
 89. Engmann C, Garces A, Jehan I, Ditekemena J, Phiri M, Mazariegos 
M, et al. Causes of community stillbirths and early neonatal deaths 
in low- income countries using verbal autopsy: an International, 
multicenter study. J Perinatol. 2012;32:585–92.
 90. Wojcieszek AM, Shepherd E, Middleton P, Middleton P, Gardener 
G, Ellwood DA, et  al. Interventions for investigating and iden -
tifying the causes of stillbirth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2018a;4:CD012504. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 14651 858. CD012504
 91. Tsakiridis I, Giouleka S, Mamopoulos A, Athanasiadis A, Dagklis T. 
Investigation and management of Stillbirth: a descriptive review of 
major guidelines. J Perinat Med. 2022;50:796–813. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1515/ jpm- 2021- 0403
 92. Beune IM, Damhuis SE, Ganzevoort W, Hutchinson JC, Khong TY, 
Mooney EE, et al. Consensus definition of fetal growth restriction 
in intrauterine fetal death: a Delphi procedure. Arch Pathol Lab 
Med. 2021;145:428–36.
 93. Vergani P, Cozzolino S, Pozzi E, Cuttin MS, Greco M, Ornaghi S, 
et al. Identifying the causes of stillbirth: a comparison of four clas -
sification systems. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2008;199(319):e1–e4.
 94. Gardosi J, Kady SM, McGeown P, Francis A, Tonks A. Classification 
of stillbirth by relevant condition at death (ReCoDe): population 
based cohort study. BMJ. 2005;331:1113–7.
 95. International Stillbirth Alliance Collaborative for Improving 
Classification of Perinatal Deaths, Flenady V, Wojcieszek AM, 
Ellwood D, Leisher SH, Erwich JJHM, et al. Classification of causes 
and associated conditions for stillbirths and neonatal deaths. Semin 
Fetal Neonatal Med. 2017;22(176):185.
 96. Gordijn SJ, Beune IM, Thilaganathan B, Papageorghiou A, Baschat 
AA, Baker PN, et al. Consensus definition of fetal growth restriction: 
a Delphi procedure. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2016;48:333–9. 97. Page JM, Christiansen- Lindquist L, Thorsten V, Parker CB, Reddy 
UM, Dudley DJ, et al. Diagnostic tests for evaluation of stillbirth: 
results from the stillbirth collaborative research network. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2017;129:699–706.
 98. Korteweg FJ, Erwich JJHM, Folkeringa N, Timmer A, Veeger 
NJGM, Ravisé JM, et  al. Prevalence of parental thrombophilic 
defects after fetal death and relation to cause. Obstet Gynecol. 
2010;116:355–64.
 99. Arachchillage DJ, Mackillop L, Chandratheva A, Motawani J, 
MacCallum P, Laffan M. Thrombophilia testing: a British society 
for haematology guideline. Br J Haematol. 2022;198:443–58.
 100. Moyo SR, Tswana SA, Nyström L, Bergström S, Blomberg J, Ljungh 
A. Intrauterine death and infections during pregnancy. Int J 
Gynaecol Obstet. 1995;51:211–8.
 101. Tolfvenstam T, Papadogiannakis N, Norbeck O, Petersson K, 
Broliden K. Frequency of human parvovirus B19 infection in intra -
uterine fetal death. Lancet. 2001;357:1494–7.
 102. Smerdon WJ, Jones R, McLauchlin J, Reacher M. Surveillance of 
listeriosis in England and Wales, 1995–1999. Commun Dis Public 
Health. 2001;4:188–93.
 103. Smith B, Kemp M, Ethelberg S, Schiellerup P, Bruun BG, Gerner- 
Smidt P, et al. Listeria monocytogenes: maternal- foetal infections in 
Denmark 1994–2005. Scand J Infect Dis. 2009;41:21–5.
 104. Andrade JQ, Bunduki V, Curti SP, Figueiredo CA, de Oliveira 
MI, Zugaib M. Rubella in pregnancy: intrauterine transmission 
and perinatal outcome during a Brazilian epidemic. J Clin Virol. 
2006;35:285–91.
 105. Syridou G, Spanakis N, Konstantinidou A, Piperaki E, Kafetzis 
D, Patsouris E, et  al. Detection of cytomegalovirus, parvovi -
rus B19 and herpes simplex viruses in cases of intrauterine 
fetal death: association with pathological findings. J Med Virol. 
2008;80:1776–82.
 106. Goldenberg RL, Thompson C. The infectious origins of stillbirth. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003;189:861–73.
 107. Poespoprodjo JR, Fobia W, Kenangalem E, Lampah DA, Wariker 
N, Seal A, et  al. Adverse pregnancy outcomes in an area where 
multidrug- resistant plasmodium vivax and plasmodium falci -
parum infections are endemic. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;80:1776–82.
 108. Osman NB, Folgosa E, Gonzales C, Bergström S. Genital infections 
in the aetiology of late fetal death: an incident case- referent study. J 
Trop Pediatr. 1995;41:258–66.
 109. Moyo SR, Hägerstrand I, Nyström L, Tswana SA, Blomberg J, 
Bergström S, et al. Stillbirths and intrauterine infection, histologic 
chorioamnionitis and microbiological findings. Int J Gynaecol 
Obstet. 1996;54:115–23.
 110. DeSisto CL, Wallace B, Simeone RM, Polen K, Ko JY, Meaney- 
Delman D, et  al. Risk for Stillbirth among women with and 
without COVID- 19 at delivery hospitalization - United States, 
March 2020- September 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2021;70:1640–5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15585/ mmwr. mm7047e1
 111. Cruz Melguizo S, de la Cruz Conty ML, Carmona Payán P, Abascal- 
Saiz A, Pintando Recarte P, González Rodríguez L, et al. Pregnancy 
outcomes and SARS- Cov- 2 infection: the Spanish obstetric emer -
gency group study. Viruses. 2021;13(853). https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ 
v1305 0853
 112. Kumar M, Puri M, Yadav R, Biswas R, Singh M, Chaudhary V, et al. 
Stillbirths and the COVID- 19 pandemic: looking beyond SARS- 
Cov- 2 infection. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2021;153:76–82. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ ijgo. 13564 
 113. Mahajan NN, Pophalkar M, Patil S, Yewale B, Chaaithanya IK, 
Mahale SD, et al. Pregnancy outcomes and maternal complications 
during the second wave of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID- 19) in 
India. Obstet Gynecol. 2021;138:660–2.
 114. Stock SJ, Moore E, Calvert C, Carruthers J, Denny C, Donaghy J. 
Pregnancy outcomes after SARS- Cov- 2 infection in periods dom -
inated by Delta and Omicron variants in Scotland: a population- 
based cohort study. Lancet Respir Med. 2022;10:1129–36.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e32 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
 115. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Green- top 
Guideline No. 22. Anti- D immunoglobulin for Rh prophylaxis. 
London: RCOG; 2002.
 116. Lee D, Contreras M, Robson SC, Rodeck CH, Whittle MJ. 
Recommendations for the use of anti- D immunoglobulin for Rh pro -
phylaxis. British Blood Transfusion Society and the Royal College of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Transfus Med. 1999;9:93–7.
 117. BCSH Blood Transfusion and Haematology Task Forces. The esti -
mation of fetomaternal haemorrhage. Transfus Med. 1999;9:87–92.
 118. Fox R. Preventing RhD haemolytic disease of the newborn. RhD 
negative women who have intrauterine death may need anti- D im -
munoglobulin. BMJ. 1998;316:1164–5.
 119. Chitty LS. Diagnostic accuracy of routine antenatal determination 
of fetal RHD status across gestation: population based cohort study. 
BMJ. 2014;349:g5243.
 120. Clark- Ganheart CA, Fries MH, Leifheit KM, Jensen TJ, Moreno- 
Ruiz NL, Ye PP, et  al. Use of cell- free DNA in the investigation 
of intrauterine fetal demise and miscarriage. Obstet Gynecol. 
2015;125:1321–9.
 121. Hills A, Fox R, Siassakos D. Incorrect sexing after pregnancy loss a 
note of caution. BJM. 2013;19:566–7.
 122. Derom C, Vlietinck R, Derom R, Boklage C, Thiery M, Van den 
Berghe H. Genotyping of macerated stillborn fetuses. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 1991;164:797–800.
 123. Korteweg FJ, Bouman K, Erwich JJ, Timmer A, Veeger NJ, Ravisé 
JM, et al. Cytogenetic analysis after evaluation of 750 fetal deaths: 
proposal for diagnostic workup. Obstet Gynecol. 2008;111:865–74.
 124. Laury A, Sanchez- Lara PA, Pepkowitz S, Graham JM. A study of 
534 fetal pathology cases from prenatal diagnosis referrals analysed 
from 1989 through 2000. Am J Med Genet A. 2007;143A:3107–20.
 125. Reddy UM, Page GP, Saade GR, Silver RM, Thorsten VR, Parker CB, 
et al. NICHD Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network. Karyotype 
versus microarray testing for genetic abnormalities after stillbirth. 
N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2185–93.
 126. Diego- Alvarez D, Garcia- Hoyos M, Trujillo MJ, Gonzalez- Gonzalez 
C, Rodriguez de Alba M, Ayuso C, et  al. Application of quanti -
tative fluorescent PCR with short tandem repeat markers to the 
study of aneuploidies in spontaneous miscarriages. Hum Reprod. 
2005;20:1235–43.
 127. Zou G, Zhang J, Li XW, He L, He G, Duan T. Quantitative fluores -
cent polymerase chain reaction to detect chromosomal anomalies 
in spontaneous abortion. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2008;103:237–40.
 128. Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network Writing Group. Causes 
of death among stillbirths. JAMA. 2011;306:2459–68.
 129. Miller ES, Minturn L, Linn R, Weese- Mayer DE, Ernst LM. 
Stillbirth evaluation: a stepwise assessment of placental pathology 
and autopsy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2016;214(115):e1–e6.
 130. Ptacek I, Sebire NJ, Man JA, Brownbill P, Heazell AE. Systematic 
review of placental pathology reported in association with stillbirth. 
Placenta. 2014;35:552–62.
 131. Man J, Hutchinson JC, Heazell AE, Ashworth M, Jeffrey I, SEbire 
N. Stillbirth and intrauterine fetal death: role of routine histopatho -
logical placental findings to determine cause of death. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol. 2016;48:579–84.
 132. Confidential Enquiry into Stillbirths and Deaths in Infancy. 8th annual 
report. London: Maternal and Child Health Research Consortium; 
2001. Available from: http:// www. cmace. org. uk/ getat tachm ent/ 8ce7d 
c4e- 6d7d- 47cc- 8cee- 7c086 79416 06/ 8th- annua lrepo rt. aspx
 133. HTA. Human tissue authority. Available from: https:// www. hta. gov. 
uk/ polic ies/ post- morte m- model - conse nt- forms . Accessed Jan 2019
 134. Martinek IE, Vial Y, Hohlfeld P. Management of in utero foe -
tal death: which assessment to undertake? J Gynecol Obstet Biol 
Reprod (Paris). 2006;35:594–606. Article in French.
 135. Kidron D, Bernheim J, Aviram R. Placental findings contributing 
to fetal death, a study of 120 stillbirths between 23 and 40 weeks 
gestation. Placenta. 2009;30:700–4.
 136. Available from: https:// www. engla nd. nhs. uk/ wp- conte nt/ uploa ds/ 
2013/ 06/ e12- perin atal- path. pdf. Accessed 17 Aug 2022. 137. Shelmerdine SC, Hutchinson JC, Lewis C, Simcock IC, Sekar T, 
Sebire NJ, et  al. A pragmatic evidence- based approach to post- 
mortem perinatal imaging. Insights Imaging. 2021;12(1):101.
 138. Thayyil S, Seibre NJ, Chitty LS. Post –mortem MRI versus con -
ventional autopsy in fetusus and children: a prospective validation 
study. Lancet. 2013;382:223–33.
 139. Shelmerdine S, Langdan D, Seibre NJ, Arthurs O. Diagnostic accu -
racy of post- mortem ultrasound (PMUS); a systematic review. BMJ 
Paediatr Open. 2019;3:e00056.
 140. Arthurs OJ, Calder AD, Kiho L, Taylor AM, Sebire NJ. Routine peri -
natal and paediatric post- mortem radiography: detection rates and 
implications for practice. Pediatr Radiol. 2014;44:252–7.
 141. Shelmerdine SC, Hutchinson JC, Ward L, Sekar T, Ashworth MT, 
Levine S, et al. Feasibility of INTACT (INcisionless TArgeted Core 
Tissue) biopsy procedure for perinatal autopsy. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol. 2020;55(5):667–75.
 142. Cannie M, Votino C, Moerman P, Vanheste R, Segers V, Van Berkel 
K, et al. Acceptance, reliability and confidence of diagnosis of fetal 
and neonatal virtuopsy compared with conventional autopsy: a pro -
spective study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2012;39:659–65.
 143. Glantz A, Marschall HU, Mattsson LA. Intrahepatic cholestasis of 
pregnancy: relationships between bile acid levels and fetal compli -
cation rates. Hepatology. 2004;40:467–74.
 144. Biankin SA, Arbuckle SM, Graf NS. Autopsy findings in a se -
ries of five cases of fetomaternal haemorrhages. Pathology. 
2003;35:319–24.
 145. Thorp JM Jr, Katz VL, Fowler LJ, Kurtzman JT, Bowes WA Jr. Fetal 
death from chlamydial infection across intact amniotic membranes. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1989;161:1245–6.
 146. Jain A, Nag VL, Goel MM, Chandrawati, Chaturvedi UC. Adverse 
foetal outcome in specific IgM positive Chlamydia trachomatis in -
fection in pregnancy. Indian J Med Res. 1991;94:420–3.
 147. Benedetto C, Tibaldi C, Marozio L, Marini S, Masuelli G, Pelissetto 
S, et  al. Cervicovaginal infections during pregnancy: epidemio -
logical and microbiological aspects. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 
2004;16(Suppl 2):9–12.
 148. Blackwell S, Romero R, Chaiworapongsa T, Kim YM, Bujold E, 
Espinoza J, et  al. Maternal and fetal inflammatory responses 
in unexplained fetal death. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 
2003;14:151–7.
 149. Aberg A, Rydhström H, Källén B, Källén K. Impaired glucose toler -
ance during pregnancy is associated with increased fetal mortality 
in preceding sibs. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 1997;76:212–7.
 150. Engel PJ, Smith R, Brinsmead MW, Bowe SJ, Clifton VL. Male sex 
and pre- existing diabetes are independent risk factors for stillbirth. 
Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2008;48:375–83.
 151. Günter HH, Scharf A, Hertel H, Hillemanns P, Wenzlaff P, Maul H. 
Perinatal morbidity in pregnancies of women with preconceptional 
and gestational diabetes mellitus in comparison with pregnancies of 
non- diabetic women. Results of the perinatal registry of Lower Saxony, 
Germany. Z Geburtshilfe Neonatol. 2006;210:200–7. Article in German.
 152. Keshavarz M, Cheung NW, Babaee GR, Moghadam HK, Ajami 
ME, Shariati M. Gestational diabetes in Iran: incidence, risk 
factors and pregnancy outcomes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 
2005;69:279–86.
 153. Maternity care during the COVID- 19 pandemic. 2020. Available 
from: https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ globa lasse ts/ docum ents/ guide lines/ 
2020- 12- 09- guida nce- for- mater nal- medic ine- servi ces- in- the- 
coron aviru s- covid - 19- pande mic. pdf. Accessed 7 Apr 2021
 154. Allan WC, Haddow JE, Palomaki GE, Williams JR, Mitchell ML, 
Hermos RJ, et al. Maternal thyroid deficiency and pregnancy com -
plications: implications for population screening. J Med Screen. 
2000;7:127–30.
 155. Kist WJ, Janssen NG, Kalk JJ, Hague WM, Dekker GA, de Vries JI. 
Thrombophilias and adverse pregnancy outcome – A confounded 
problem! Thromb Haemost. 2008;99:77–85.
 156. Gonen R, Lavi N, Attias D, Schliamser L, Borochowitz Z, Toubi 
E, et  al. Absence of association of inherited thrombophilia with 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e33
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
unexplained third trimester intrauterine fetal death. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2005;192:742–6.
 157. Alfirevic Z, Roberts D, Martlew V. How strong is the association be -
tween maternal thrombophilia and adverse pregnancy outcome? A 
systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2002;101:6–14.
 158. Wikman A, Edner A, Gryfelt G, Jonsson B, Henter JI. Fetal hemo -
lytic anemia and intrauterine death caused by anti- M immuniza -
tion. Transfusion. 2007;47:911–7.
 159. Cannon M, Pierce R, Taber EB, Schucker J. Fatal hydrops feta -
lis caused by anti- D in a mother with partial D. Obstet Gynecol. 
2003;102:1143–5.
 160. Howard H, Martlew V , McFadyen I, Clarke C, Duguid J, Bromilow 
I, et al. Consequences for fetus and neonate of maternal red cell allo- 
immunisation. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 1998;78:F62–F66.
 161. Nield LE, Silverman ED, Taylor GP, Smallhorn JF, Mullen JB, 
Silverman NH, et al. Maternal anti- Ro and anti- La antibody associ -
ated endocardial fibroelastosis. Circulation. 2002;105:843–8.
 162. Kjeldsen- Kragh J, Killie MK, Tomter G, Golebiowska E, Randen I, 
Hauge R, et al. A screening and intervention program aimed to re-
duce mortality and serious morbidity associated with severe neonatal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia. Blood. 2007;110:833–9.
 163. Pauli RM, Reiser CA. Wisconsin stillbirth service program: II. 
Analysis of diagnoses and diagnostic categories in the first 1,000 
referrals. Am J Med Genet. 1994;50:135–3.
 164. Tsenghi C, Metaxotou- Stavridaki C, Strataki- Benetou M, Kalpini- 
Mavrou A, Matsaniotis N. Chromosome studies in couples with re-
peated spontaneous abortions. Obstet Gynecol. 1976;47:463–8.
 165. Sikkema- Raddatz B, Bouman K, Verschuuren- Bemelmans CC, Stoepker 
M, Mantingh A, Beekhuis JR, et al. Four years’ cytogenetic experience 
with the culture of chorionic villi. Prenat Diagn. 2000;20:950–5.
 166. Lutiger B, Graham K, Einarson TR, Koren G. Relationship between 
gestational cocaine use and pregnancy outcome: a meta- analysis. 
Teratology. 1991;44:405–14.
 167. Thein AT, Abdel- Fattah SA, Kyle PM, Soothill PW. An assessment 
of the use of interphase FISH with chromosome specific probes as 
an alternative to cytogenetics in prenatal diagnosis. Prenat Diagn. 
2000;20:275–80.
 168. Smith A, Bannatyne P , Russell P , Ellwood D, den Dulk G. 
Cytogenetic studies in perinatal death. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 
1990;30:206–10.
 169. Tabet AC, Aboura A, Dauge MC, Audibert F, Coulomb A, Batallan 
A, et  al. Cytogenetic analysis of trophoblasts by comparative ge -
nomic hybridization in embryo- fetal development anomalies. 
Prenat Diagn. 2001;21:613–8.
 170. Saal HM, Rodis J, Weinbaum PJ, DiMaggio R, Landrey TM. 
Cytogenetic evaluation of fetal death: the role of amniocentesis. 
Obstet Gynecol. 1987;70:601–3.
 171. Khare M, Howarth E, Sadler J, Healey K, Konje JC. A comparison 
of prenatal versus postnatal karyotyping for the investigation of in -
trauterine fetal death after the first trimester of pregnancy. Prenat 
Diagn. 2005;25:1192–5.
 172. Heazell AE, Martindale EA. Can post- mortem examination of the 
placenta help determine the cause of stillbirth? J Obstet Gynaecol. 
2009;29:225–8.
 173. Heazell AE, Siassakos D, Blencowe H, Burden C, Bhutta ZA, 
Cacciatore J, et  al. Stillbirths: economic and psychosocial conse -
quences. Lancet. 2016;387:604–16.
 174. Burden C, Bradley S, Storey C, Ellis A, Heazell AE, Downe S, et al. 
From grief, guilt pain and stigma to hope and pride - a systematic re-
view and meta- analysis of mixed- method research of the psychosocial 
impact of stillbirth. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2016;16:9.
 175. Schaap AH, Wolf H, Bruinse HW, Barkhof- van de Lande S, Treffers 
PE. Long- term impact of perinatal bereavement. Comparison of 
grief reactions after intrauterine versus neonatal death. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1997;75:161–7.
 176. Weng SC, Chang JC, Yeh MK, Wang SM, Lee CS, Chen YH. Do still-
birth, miscarriage, and termination of pregnancy increase risks of attempted and completed suicide within a year? A population- based 
nested case- control study. BJOG. 2018;125:983–90.
 177. Peel E. Pregnancy loss in lesbian and bisexual women: an online 
survey of experiences. Hum Reprod. 2010;25:721–7.
 178. Harper M, O’Connor RC, O’Carroll RE. Increased mortality in 
parents bereaved in the first year of their child's life. BMJ Support 
Palliat Care. 2011;1:306–9.
 179. Gold KJ, Sen A, Hayward RA. Marriage and cohabitation outcomes 
after pregnancy loss. Pediatrics. 2010;125:e1202–e1207.
 180. Huberty JL, Matthews J, Leiferman J, Hermer J, Cacciatore J. When 
a baby dies: a systematic review of experimental interventions for 
women after stillbirth. Reprod Sci. 2017;24:967–75.
 181. Bakhbakhi D, Siassakos D, Davies A, Merriel A, Barnard K, Stead 
E, et al. Interventions, outcomes and outcome measurement instru -
ments in stillbirth care research: a systematic review to inform the 
development of a core outcome set. BJOG. 2023;130:560–76.
 182. Simpson C, Lee P, Lionel J. The effect of bereavement counseling on 
women with psychological problems associated with late pregnancy 
loss. J Asian Midwives. 2015;2:5–21.
 183. Rogers J, Spink M, Magrill A, Burgess K, Agius M. Evaluation of a 
specialised counselling service for perinatal bereavement. Psychiatr 
Danub. 2015;27(Suppl 1):S482–S485.
 184. Navidian A, Saravani Z. Impact of cognitive behavioral- based 
counseling on grief symptoms severity in mothers after stillbirth. 
Iran J Psychiatry Behav Sci. 2018;12:650–4.
 185. Cacciatore J. ‘She used his name’: provider trait mindfulness in peri -
natal death counselling. Estud Psicol. 2017;38:639–66.
 186. Huberty J, Sullivan M, Green J, Kurka J, Leiferman J, Gold K, et al. 
Online yoga to reduce post- traumatic stress in women who have 
experienced stillbirth: a randomized control feasibility trial. BMC 
Complement Med Ther. 2020;20:173.
 187. Hsu MT, Tseng YF, Banks JM, Kuo LL. Interpretations of stillbirth. 
J Adv Nurs. 2004;47:408–16.
 188. DeFrain J. Learning about grief from normal families: SIDS, still -
birth, and miscarriage. J Marital Fam Ther. 1991;17:215–32.
 189. Dowden S. Young children's experiences of sibling death. J Pediatr 
Nurs. 1995;10:72–9.
 190. Appleton R, Gibson B, Hey E. The loss of a baby at birth: the role of 
the bereavement officer. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1993;100:51–4.
 191. Petals. Available from: https:// petal schar ity. org/ wp- conte nt/ uploa 
ds/ Petal s- infor matio n- flier. pdf
 192. Crawley R, Lomax S, Ayers S. Recovering from stillbirth: the ef -
fects of making and sharing memories on maternal mental health. J 
Reprod Infant Psychol. 2013;3:195–207.
 193. Koopmans L, Wilson T, Cacciatore J, Flenady V. Support for moth -
ers, fathers and families after perinatal death. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2013;2013(6):CD000452.
 194. Hennegan JM, Henderson J, Redshaw M. Contact with the baby fol-
lowing stillbirth and parental mental health and well- being: a sys -
tematic review. BMJ Open. 2015;5(11):e008616.
 195. Redshaw M, Hennegan JM, Henderson J. Impact of holding the 
baby following stillbirth on maternal mental health and well- being: 
findings from a national survey. BMJ Open. 2016;1:6.
 196. Kingdon C, Givens JL, O’Donnell E, Turner M. Seeing and holding 
baby: systematic review of clinical management and parental out -
comes after stillbirth. Birth. 2015;42:206.
 197. Erlandsson K, Warland J, Cacciatore J, Rådestad I. Seeing and hold-
ing a stillborn baby: mothers’ feelings in relation to how their babies 
were presented to them after birth- - findings from an online ques -
tionnaire. Midwifery. 2013;29:246–50.
 198. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Good Practice 
Guideline No. 4. Registration of stillbirths and certification for 
pregnancy loss before 24 weeks of gestation. London: RCOG; 2005.
 199. Higgins LE, Heazell AEP, Whitworth MK. Persistent inaccuracies 
in completion of medical certificates of stillbirth: a cross- sectional 
study. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2018;32:474–81.
 200. Siassakos D. INSPIRE, unpublished.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e34 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
 201. Trulsson O, Rådestad I. The silent child – mothers’ experiences be -
fore, during, and after stillbirth. Birth. 2004;31:189–95.
 202. Scottish Government. Cremation statutory forms. Available from: 
https:// www. gov. scot/ publi catio ns/ crema tion- statu tory- forms/ . 
Accessed Feb 2020
 203. Guidance on death, stillbirth and cremation certification. Available 
from: http:// www. ihrdni. org/ 315- 008- 1. pdf . Accessed Feb 2020
 204. Cremation codes of practice guidance recommendations and ad-
vice. Available from: https:// www. crema tion. org. uk/ crema tion- 
codes - of- practice . Accessed Jan 2024
 205. Regan AK, Gissler M, Magnus MC, Håberg SE, Ball S, Malacova 
E, et al. Association between interpregnancy interval and adverse 
birth outcomes in women with a previous stillbirth: an interna -
tional cohort study. Lancet. 2019;393:1527–35.
 206. Conde- Agudelo A, Rosas- Bermúdez A, Kafury- Goeta AC. Birth 
spacing and risk of adverse perinatal outcomes: a meta- analysis. 
JAMA. 2006;295:1809–23.
 207. Wendt A, Gibbs CM, Peters S, Hogue CJ. Impact of increasing inter- 
pregnancy interval on maternal and infant health. Paediatr Perinat 
Epidemiol. 2012;26(Suppl 1):239–58.
 208. Nuzum D, Meaney S, O’Donoghue K. The impact of stillbirth on 
consultant obstetrician gynaecologists: a qualitative study. BJOG. 
2014;121:1020–8.
 209. Gandino G, Bernaudo A, Di Fini G, Vanni I, Veglia F. Healthcare 
professionals’ experiences of perinatal loss: a systematic review. J 
Health Psychol. 2019;24:65–78.
 210. Atkins B, Moatti Z, Siassakos D. Training the carers: an analysis of 
multidisciplinary perinatal bereavement care training in the UK. 
Abstract; International Stillbirth Alliance Conference 2022.
 211. Burden C, Bakhbakhi D, Heazell AE, Lynch M, Timlin L, Bevan C, 
et al. Parents’ Active Role and ENgagement in The review of their 
Stillbirth/perinatal death 2 (PARENTS 2) study: a mixed- methods 
study of implementation. BMJ Open. 2021;11:e044563.
 212. Bakhbakhi D, Siassakos D, Lynch M, Timlin L, Storey C, Heazell 
A, et al. PARENTS 2 Study: consensus report for parental engage -
ment in the perinatal mortality review process. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol. 2019;54:215–24.
 213. PMRT parents engagement materials. Available from: https:// www. 
npeu. ox. ac. uk/ pmrt/ paren t- engag ement - mater ials. Accessed Feb 
2020
 214. Mills TA, Ricklesford C, Heazell AE, Cooke A, Lavender T. 
Marvellous to mediocre: findings of national survey of UK prac-
tice and provision of care in pregnancies after stillbirth or neonatal 
death. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2016;16:101.
 215. Wojcieszek AM, Boyle FM, Belizán JM, Cassidy J, Cassidy P, Erwich 
J, et al. Care in subsequent pregnancies following stillbirth: an inter -
national survey of parents. BJOG. 2018b;125:193–201.
 216. Wojcieszek AM, Shepherd E, Middleton P, Lassi ZS, Wilson T, 
Murphy MM, et  al. Care prior to and during subsequent preg -
nancies following stillbirth for improving outcomes. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2018c;12:CD012203.
 217. Mills TA, Ricklesford C, Cooke A, Heazell AE, Whitworth M, 
Lavender T. Parents’ experiences and expectations of care in preg -
nancy after stillbirth or neonatal death: a metasynthesis. BJOG. 
2014;121:943–50.
 218. Ladhani NNN, Fockler ME, Stephens L, Barrett JFR, Heazell AEP. 
No. 369- Management of pregnancy subsequent to stillbirth. J 
Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2018;40:1669–83.
 219. Meredith P, Wilson T, Branjerdporn G, Strong J, Desha L. “Not 
just a normal mum”: a qualitative investigation of a support service 
for women who are pregnant subsequent to perinatal loss. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. 2017;17:6.
 220. Yerlikaya G, Akolekar R, McPherson K, Syngelaki A, Nicolaides 
KH. Prediction of stillbirth from maternal demographic and preg -
nancy characteristics. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2016;48:607–12.
 221. Jacob L, Kostev K, Kalder M. Risk of stillbirth in pregnant women with 
obesity in the United Kingdom. Obes Res Clin Pract. 2016;10:574–9. 222. Bjørnholt SM, Leite M, Albieri V, Kjaer SK, Jensen A. Maternal 
smoking during pregnancy and risk of stillbirth: results from a na -
tionwide Danish register based cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand. 2016;95:1305–12.
 223. Pineles BL, Hsu S, Park E, Samet JM. Systematic review and meta- 
analyses of perinatal death and maternal exposure to tobacco smoke 
during pregnancy. Am J Epidemiol. 2016;184:87–97.
 224. Lamminpaa R, Vehvilainen- Julkunen K, Gissler M, Selander T, 
Heinonen S. Pregnancy outcomes of overweight and obese women 
aged 35 years or older – a registry- based study in Finland. Obes Res 
Clin Pract. 2016;10:133.
 225. Getahun D, Ananth CV, Kinzler WL. Risk factors for antepartum 
and intrapartum stillbirth: a population- based study. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2007;196:499–507.
 226. Räisänen S, Hogue CJR, Laine K, Kramer MR, Gissler M, Heinonen 
S. A population- based study of the effect of pregnancy history on 
risk of stillbirth. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2018;140:73–80.
 227. Stacey T, Tennant P, McCowan L, Mitchell EA, Budd J, Li M, et al. 
Gestational diabetes and the risk of late stillbirth: a case- control 
study from England, UK. BJOG. 2019;126:973–82.
 228. Bourne I, Sebire N, Kindinger L, Whitten SM, Battaglino C. 
Abnormal placental villous maturity and dysregulated glucose 
metabolism: implications for stillbirth prevention. J Perinat Med. 
2022;1(50):763–8.
 229. Poon LCY, Volpe N, Muto B, Syngelaki A, Nicolaides KH. 
Birthweight with gestation and maternal characteristics in live 
births and stillbirths. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2012;32:156–65.
 230. Poon LCY, Tan MY, Yerlikaya G, Syngelaki A, Nicolaides KH. Birth 
weight in live births and stillbirths. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 
2016;48:602–6.
 231. Malacova E, Regan A, Nassar N, Raynes- Greenow C, Leonard H, 
Srinivasjois R, et  al. Risk of stillbirth, preterm delivery, and fetal 
growth restriction following exposure in a previous birth: system -
atic review and meta- analysis. BJOG. 2018;125:183–92.
 232. Khalil A, Morales- Rosellõ J, Townsend R, Morlando M, 
Papageorghiou A, Bhide A, et  al. Value of third- trimester cere -
broplacental ratio and uterine artery Doppler indices as predic-
tors of stillbirth and perinatal loss. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 
2016;47:74–80.
 233. Kumar M, Singh S, Sharma K, Singh R, Ravi V, Bhattacharya J. 
Adverse fetal outcome: is first trimester ultrasound and Doppler 
better predictor than biomarkers? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 
2017;30:1410–6.
 234. Moraitis AA, Wood AM, Fleming M, Smith GCS. Birth weight 
percentile and the risk of term perinatal death. Obstet Gynecol. 
2014;124:274–83.
 235. García B, Llurba E, Valle L, Gómez- Roig MD, Juan M, Pérez- Matos 
C, et  al. Do knowledge of uterine artery resistance in the second 
trimester and targeted surveillance improve maternal and peri -
natal outcome? UTOPIA study: a randomized controlled trial. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2016;47:680–9.
 236. Allen RE, Morlando M, Thilaganathan B, Zamora J, Khan KS, 
Thangaratinam S, et  al. Predictive accuracy of second- trimester 
uterine artery Doppler indices for stillbirth: a systematic review and 
meta- analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2016;47:22–7.
 237. Bilardo CM, Hecher K, Visser GHA, Papageorghiou AT, Marlow 
N, Thilaganathan B, et  al. Severe fetal growth restriction at 
26–32 weeks: key messages from the TRUFFLE study. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol. 2017;50:285–90.
 238. O’Leary J. The trauma of ultrasound during a pregnancy following 
perinatal loss. J Loss Trauma. 2006;10:183–204.
 239. Grobman WA, Rice MM, Reddy UM, Tita ATN, Silver RM, Mallett 
G, et al. Labor induction versus expectant management in low- risk 
nulliparous women. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:513–23.
 240. Stock SJ, Ferguson E, Duffy A, Ford I, Chalmers J, Norman JE. 
Outcomes of elective induction of labour compared with expectant 
management: population based study. BMJ. 2012;344:e2838.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e35
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
 241. Walker KF, Bugg GJ, Macpherson M, McCormick C, Grace N, 
Wildsmith C, et al. Randomized trial of labor induction in women 
35 years of age or older. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:813–22.
 242. Gebhardt S, Oberholzer L. Elective delivery at term after a previous 
unexplained intra- uterine fetal death: audit of delivery outcome at 
Tygerberg Hospital, South Africa. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0130254.
 243. Crandon AJ, Isherwood DM. Effect of aspirin on incidence of pre- 
eclampsia. Lancet. 1979;1:1356.
 244. Duley L, Henderson- Smart DJ, Meher S, King JF. Antiplatelet agents 
for preventing pre- eclampsia and its complications. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2007;18:CD004659.
 245. Roberge S, Bujold E, Nicolaides KH. Aspirin for the prevention of 
preterm and term preeclampsia: systematic review and metaanaly -
sis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018;218:287–93.
 246. Roberge S, Nicolaides K, Demers S, Hyett J, Chaillet N, Bujold E. 
The role of aspirin dose on the prevention of preeclampsia and fetal 
growth restriction: systematic review and meta- analysis. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2017;216:110–20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2016. 09. 076
 247. Rolnik DL, Wright D, Poon LC, O'Gorman N, Syngelaki A, de Paco 
Matallana C, et  al. Aspirin versus placebo in pregnancies at high 
risk for preterm Preeclampsia. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:613–22. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ NEJMo a1704559
 248. Rolnik DL, Nicolaides KH, Poon LC. Prevention of preeclampsia 
with aspirin. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2022;226:S1108–S1119. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2020. 08. 045
 249. Wright D, Poon LC, Rolnik DL, Syngelaki A, Delgado JL, 
Vojtassakova D, et  al. Aspirin for evidence- based Preeclampsia prevention trial: influence of compliance on beneficial effect of as -
pirin in prevention of preterm Preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2017;217:685. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2017. 08. 110
 250. Saving babies lives version 3. Available from: https:// www. engla nd. 
nhs. uk/ publi cation/ savin g- babie s- lives - versi on- three/ . Accessed 21 
Jun 2023
 251. Rodger M, Gris J, Vries J, Mayhew A. Low–molecular weight hep -
arin and recurrent placenta–mediated pregnancy complications: 
a meta- analysis of individual patient data from randomised con -
trolled trials. Lancet. 2016;16:31139–34.
 252. Safer maternity care. 2016. Available from: https:// www. gov. uk/ 
gover nment/ publi catio ns/ safer - mater nity- care
 253. Bakhbakhi D, Fraser A, Siasakos D, Hinton L, Davies A, Merriel 
A, et al. Protocol for the development of a core outcome set for 
stillbirth care research (iCHOOSE Study). BMJ Open. 2022;12(2): 
e056629.
How to cite this article: Burden C, Merriel A, 
Bakhbakhi D, Heazell A, Siassakos D. Care of late 
intrauterine fetal death and stillbirth. BJOG. 
2025;132(1):e1–e41. https://doi.org/10.1111/1471-
0528.17844
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e36 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
APPENDIX I : Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Classification of evidence levels
1++ High- quality meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a very low risk of 
bias
1+ Well- conducted meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a low risk of 
bias
1– Meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of bias
2++ High- quality systematic reviews of case–control or cohort studies or high- quality
case–control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a
high probability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well- conducted case–control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance
and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a
significant risk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non- analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series
4 Expert opinion
Grades of Recommendation
AAt least one meta- analysis, systematic reviews or RCT rated as 1++, and directly applicable to the target population; or a 
systematic review of RCTs or a body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, directly applicable to the target 
population and demonstrating overall consistency of results
BA body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall 
consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
CA body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall 
consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
DEvidence level 3 or 4; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good Practice Points
/g57/g57Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group.*
*on the occasion when the guideline development group find there is an important practical point that they wish to em -
phasise but for which there is not, nor is there likely to be any research evidence. This will typically be where some aspect 
of treatment is regarded as such sound clinical practice that nobody is likely to question it. These are marked in the guide -
line, and are indicated by ✓ . It must be emphasised that these are NOT an alternative to evidence- based recommendations, 
and should only be used where there is no alternative means of highlighting the issue.
APPENDIX II : Timing of maceration after late IUFD
Maceration timing
0–6 hours Little change, clear corneas
6 hours – 1 day Skin peeling on peripheries, bony prominences.
1–2 days More widespread skin peeling, with bullae (fluid blisters in epidermis), developing discoloration of abdomen.
2–3 days Hemolytic changes in cord, serosanguinous nasal fluid, fluid in body cavities, uniform pink tissues.
4–7 days Skull bone starting to become more separated. Eyes beginning to become sunken. Mandible suture more mobile. 
Periosteum and dura lifts from skull bones.
7 days and OVER Brown discoloration.
10–12 days Increased loss of fluid and eventually after many weeks a fetus papyraceous.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e37
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
APPENDIX III
Stillbirth registration
The current law on stillbirth registration is set out in the 
Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 (amended by 
the Still- Birth (Definition) Act 1992). The legal defini -
tion of stillbirth is “any child expelled or issued forth from 
its mother after the 24th week of pregnancy that did not 
breathe or show any other signs of life” . Legal advisors for 
the Department of Health and Social Care and the Office 
for National Statistics have agreed that a fetus that is ex -
pelled after 24 weeks of pregnancy, provided it was no 
longer alive at the 24th week of pregnancy (this fact being 
either known or provable from the stage of development 
reached by the dead fetus), does not fall within the category 
of births to be registered as a stillbirth under the above 
Acts. This interpretation is also accepted by the General 
Register Office for Scotland and the General Register 
Office for Northern Ireland. When the gestational age is 
not known before the birth, with unbooked pregnancies 
for example, the decision about the status (if defined as 
stillbirth) of the birth should be made on the basis of the 
stage of development of the baby on examination. The doc -
tor or midwife attending the stillbirth is required to issue 
a Medical Certificate of Stillbirth that enables the birth to 
be registered. The cause and sequence of medical events 
leading to the IUFD should be given in as much detail as 
possible. Nonspecific terms such as anoxia, prematurity 
and so on should be avoided. Certification should not be 
delayed for the results of the postmortem.
The mother (or either parent if they are married or in a 
civil partnership at the time of birth) is responsible for reg -
istering the stillbirth, normally within 42 days (21 days in 
Scotland and Northern Ireland 1 year) but with a final limit 
of 3 months for exceptional circumstances. This responsibil -
ity can be delegated to healthcare professionals, including a 
midwife or doctor present at the birth or a bereavement sup -
port officer. The person registering the birth has to be able to 
provide the following:
• the place and date of birth of the baby
• if the parents wish to name the baby, the name and 
surname
• the sex of the baby (but can be registered as indeterminate 
and later changed if tests show a clear result)
• the names, surnames, places of birth and occupations of 
the parents
• the woman's maiden name (if applicable)
• in Scotland, the marriage/registered civil partnership cer -
tificate of the parents is required.
The Registrar of Births will meet with the parents in pri -
vate. The birth is entered onto the Stillbirth Register, which 
is separate from the standard Register of Births. The parents 
are then issued with a Certificate of Stillbirth and the docu -
mentation for burial or cremation. A certificate for crema -
tion cannot be issued before the registration.If the couple were not married or in a civil partnership at 
the time of the birth, the father's details can be added only if 
one of the following is fulfilled:
• the parents go to the register office and sign the stillbirth 
register together or
• where the father is unable to go to the register office with 
the mother, the father may make a statutory declaration 
acknowledging his paternity, which the mother must pro -
duce to the Registrar (this form can be obtained from any 
Registrar of Births) or
• where the mother is unable to go to the register office with 
the father, the mother might make a statutory declaration 
acknowledging the father's paternity, which the father 
must produce to the Registrar (this form can be obtained 
from any Registrar of Births).
If information about the father is not recorded initially, 
it is possible for the birth to be re- registered to include his 
details later. Most local authorities have websites on the reg -
istering of stillbirth. There are no fees for registration, but 
additional certificates do carry a charge. HM Coroner does 
not normally have jurisdiction over stillbirth, even if the 
cause of death is not known, but contact should be made for 
an apparently fresh stillbirth not attended by a healthcare 
professional. HM Coroner also has discretion to be involved 
if the death followed a criminal act such as common assault 
and can then request for any postmortem to be expedited. 
Twenty- one stillbirths were referred to HM Coroner Services 
for England and Wales in 2007 and 13 in 2008. Following 
the RCOG best practice guidance for healthcare profession -
als, there is no legal obligation to contact the police follow -
ing an abortion, pregnancy loss or unattended birth.1
REFERENCES
 1. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, Faculty of 
Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare, British Society of Abortion 
Care Providers and the Faculty of Public Health. Involvement of the 
Police and External Agencies following Abortion, Pregnancy Loss and 
Unexpected Delivery . London: RCOG; 2024 [ www. rcog. org. uk/ media/ 
s3rf2 brq/ liais on- with- polic e- guide line- for- nhs- staff - in- women s- healt 
h- 2. pdf ]. Accessed 23 Apr 2024.
APPENDIX IV: – Perinatal Mortality Review 
Tool (PMRT)
The PMRT has been designed with user and parent in -
volvement to support high quality standardised perinatal 
reviews on the principle of ‘review once, review well’. The 
aim of the PMRT programme [ www. npeu. ox. ac. uk/ pmrt/ 
progr amme ] is to introduce the PMRT to support stand -
ardised perinatal mortality reviews across NHS maternity 
and neonatal units in England, Scotland and Wales. The 
tool supports:
• Systematic, multidisciplinary, high quality reviews of the 
circumstances and care leading up to and surrounding 
each stillbirth and neonatal death, and the deaths of babies 
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e38 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
who die in the post- neonatal period having received neo -
natal care.
• Active communication with parents to ensure they are 
told that a review of their care and that of their baby will 
be carried out and how they can contribute to the process.
• A structured process of review, learning, reporting and 
actions to improve future care.
• Coming to a clear understanding of why each baby died, 
accepting that this may not always be possible even when 
full clinical investigations have been undertaken; this will 
involve a grading of the care provided.
• Production of a report for parents which includes a mean -
ingful, plain English explanation of why their baby died 
and whether, with different actions, the death of their 
baby might have been prevented.
• Other reports from the tool which will enable organi -
sations providing and commissioning care to identify emerging themes across a number of deaths to support 
learning and changes in the delivery and commission -
ing of care to improve future care and prevent avoidable 
future deaths.
• Production of national reports of the themes and trends 
associated with perinatal deaths to enable national 
lessons to be learned from the nationwide system of 
reviews.
Parents whose baby has died have the greatest interest of all 
in the review of their baby's death. Alongside the national an -
nual reports a lay summary of the main technical report will 
be written specifically for families and the wider public. This 
will help local NHS services and baby loss charities to help 
parents engage with the local review process and improve -
ments in care.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e39
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
A PPE N DI X V: Stillbirth Follow- up Consultation Checklist
STILLBIRTH FOLLOW-UP CONSULTATION CHECKLIST 
 
Pa/g415ent N ame and Iden/g415ﬁer: 
Consultant Obst etrician: 
Date of Mee/g415ng: 
Name of the baby (if appropriate – check with parents) : 
Pre-mee/g415ng review: 
Summary of Case: 
Date of diagnosi s: 
Medical history : 
 
BMI at booking: Allerg ies / Asth ma (aspirin contraindica ted?): 
Obstetric History: 
Antenatal Course: 
Tests Taken Result s back 
FBC/Biochemistry/clo/g427n g 
LFTs/TBAs 
TFTs 
HbA1 c 
Thrombophilia screen 
Microbio logy 
Cyto gene/g415cs 
Post mortem 
Parental e ngagement in 
perinatal mort ality review 
process 
Outcome from p erinatal 
mortality review proce ss 
Tests Take n Result s back 
GTT at weeks: Y/N - result BMI at 36 weeks: 
Labour/Birth Summary
Date: 
Birthw eight: 
Postnatal Course (includi ng any postpartum physical complica/g415ons) : 
Current physical we llbeing : 
 
Current menta l and emo/g415onal wel lbeing : 
 
Discussion on coping with grief: 

Discussion on support and rela/g415onshi p with immediate family (including child ren if applicable): 

Counselling, support groups or support informa/g415on sourc es discussed and oﬀered : 

Discussion about planning future pregnancy i ncluding contracep/g415on* i f appropriate: 

GTT, glucose tolerance test; FBC, full blood count; LFTs, liver function tests; TBAs, total bile acids; TFTs, thyroid function 
tests; HbA1c, glycated haemoglobin (A1c).
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e40 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
APPENDIX VI
GLOSSARY
Stillbirth legally defined as ‘a baby delivered with no signs of life known to have died after 24+0 completed 
weeks of pregnancy
Late intrauterine fetal death (IUFD) babies with no signs of life in utero after 24- +0 completed weeks of pregnancy.
Feticide act of killing a fetus or causing a miscarriage
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) a rare but serious condition that causes abnormal blood clotting throughout the body's blood 
vessels
Sudden infant death sudden and unexpected death of a baby less than 1 year old in which the cause was not obvious 
before the investigation
Perinatal mortality stillbirths and death of an infant less than 7 days
Extended perinatal mortality stillbirths and neonatal deaths (a baby born at any time during pregnancy who lives but dies 
within 4 weeks of being born)
Hydrops fetalis a life threatening condition in which abnormal amounts of fluid accumulate in two or more 
body areas of an unborn baby
Perinatal Mortality Review Tool (PMRT) standardised perinatal mortality reviews across NHS maternity and neonatal units in England, 
Scotland and Wales
Small- for- gestational- age (SGA) infant born with a birthweight less than the 10th centile.
The review process will commence in 2027, unless otherwise indicated.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e41
CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
The review process will commence in 2027, unless otherwise 
indicated.This guideline was produced on behalf of the 
Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists by: 
Professor CA Burden MRCOG, Bristol; Professor 
DM Siassakos FRCOG, London; Dr A Merriel 
MRCOG, Bristol; Dr D Bakhbakhi, Bristol and 
Professor A Heazell MRCOG, Manchester.
The following organisations and individuals sub -
mitted comments at peer review:
UK National Screening Committee; Dr UDP 
Ratnasiri FRCOG, Kotte, Sri Lanka; Dr R Sharma 
FRCOG, Dehli, India; Dr MY Lim FRCOG, 
Singapore; Dr JM Allison MRCOG, Edinburgh, 
UK; Dr URam FRCOG, Chennai, India; Sands; 
British Intrapartum Care Society; British Society 
of Gynaecological Imaging; Dr FS Malik MRCOG, 
Southend, UK; FSRH CEU; Professor O Arthurs 
FRCPCH, FRCR, London, UK.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr M Madhra 
MRCOG, Edinburgh;1 Dr MA Ledingham 
MRCOG, Glasgow;2 Dr S Sahota MRCOG, 
Edinburgh;3 and Mr A McKelvey FRCOG, 
Norwich.4
1until June 2022; 2until December 2021; 3until October 
2023; 4from January 2022.
Expert lay reviewer was: Ms C Storey, Bristol.
The chair of the Guidelines Committee was: Dr 
MA Ledingham FRCOG, Glasgow;1 Dr B Magowan 
FRCOG, Melrose;1 Dr AJ Thomson MRCOG, 
Paisleyl;2 Miss N Potdar FRCOG, Leicester;3 and 
Mr A McKelvey MRCOG, Norwich.
1co- chairs from June 2018; 2until May 2018; 3from June 
2021.
The final version is the responsibility of the 
Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educa -
tional aid to good clinical practice. They present 
recognised methods and techniques of clinical 
practice, based on published evidence, for consid -
eration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and 
other relevant health professionals. The ultimate 
judgement regarding a particular clinical proce -
dure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor 
or other attendant in the light of clinical data pre -
sented by the patient and the diagnostic and treat -
ment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike pro -
tocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they 
are not intended to be prescriptive directions de -
fining a single course of management. Departure 
from the local prescriptive protocols or guidelines 
should be fully documented in the patient's case 
notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
 14710528, 2025, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17844 by NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, Wiley Online Library on [23/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License