Management of Gestational Trophoblastic Disease

How do molar pregnancies present to the clinician?
Clinicians should be aware of the symptoms and signs of molar pregnancy. The most common presentation is irregular vaginal bleeding, a positive pregnancy test, and supporting ultrasonographic evidence. Less common presentations include hyperemesis, excessive uterine enlargement, hyperthyroidism, early-onset pre-eclampsia, and abdominal distension due to theca lutein cysts. Very rarely, women can present with haemoptysis or seizures due to metastatic disease affecting the lungs or brain.

How are molar pregnancies diagnosed?
The definitive diagnosis of a molar pregnancy is made by histological examination.

Removal of a molar pregnancy
What is the best method for removal of a molar pregnancy?
Suction curettage is the method of choice for removal of complete molar pregnancies. Ultrasound guidance during removal and curettage may be of use to minimize the chance of perforation and to ensure that as much tissue as possible is removed. Suction curettage is also the method of choice for removal of partial molar pregnancies except when the size of fetal parts deters the use of suction curettage and then medical removal can be used. Anti-D prophylaxis is recommended following removal of a molar pregnancy.

Is it safe to prepare the cervix prior to surgical removal?
Preparation of the cervix immediately prior to uterine removal is safe.

Can oxytocic infusions be used during surgical removal?
Excessive vaginal bleeding can be associated with surgical management of molar pregnancy, and the involvement of an experienced clinician is advised. The use of oxytocic infusion prior to completion of the removal is not recommended. If the woman is experiencing significant hemorrhage prior to or during removal, surgical removal should be expedited, and the need for oxytocin infusion weighed up against the risk of tissue embolization.

In what circumstances should a repeat surgical removal be indicated and what is the timing?
There is almost always a role for urgent surgical management for the woman who is experiencing heavy or persistent vaginal bleeding causing acute hemodynamic compromise, particularly in the presence of retained pregnancy tissue on ultrasound. Outside the context of acute compromise, there should be consultation with the relevant GTD referral center before performing surgical management for the second time in the same pregnancy. 

Histological examination of pregnancy tissue in the diagnosis of GTD
Should pregnancy tissue from all miscarriages be examined histologically?
The histological assessment of material obtained from the medical or surgical management of all miscarriages is recommended to exclude trophoblastic neoplasia if no fetal parts are identified at any stage of the pregnancy. Women who receive care for a miscarriage should be recommended to do a urinary pregnancy test 3 weeks after miscarriage. 

Should pregnancy tissue be sent for examination after abortion?
There is no need to routinely send pregnancy tissue for histological examination following therapeutic abortion, provided that fetal parts have been identified at the time of surgical abortion or on prior ultrasound examination. Women who undergo medical abortion should be recommended to do a urinary pregnancy test 3 weeks after the procedure.

How should women with an elevated human chorionic gonadotrophin after a possible pregnancy event be managed?
Referral to a GTD center should be considered for all women with persistently elevated human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) either after an ectopic pregnancy has been excluded, or after two consecutive treatments with methotrexate for a pregnancy of unknown location.

Which women should be investigated for GTN after a non-molar pregnancy?
Any woman who develops persistent vaginal bleeding after a pregnancy event is at risk of having GTN. A urine hCG test should be performed in all cases of persistent or irregular vaginal bleeding lasting more than 8 weeks after a pregnancy event. Symptoms from metastatic disease, such as dyspnea and hemoptysis, or new onset of seizures or paralysis, can occur very rarely.

Biopsy of secondary deposits in the vagina can cause major hemorrhage and is not recommended.

How should suspected ectopic molar pregnancy in women be managed?
Cases of women with ectopic pregnancy suspected to be molar in nature should be managed as any other case of ectopic pregnancy. If there is a local tissue diagnosis of ectopic molar pregnancy, the tissue should be sent to a center with appropriate expertise for pathological review.

How is twin pregnancy of a viable fetus and presumptive coexistent molar pregnancy managed?
Women diagnosed with a combined molar pregnancy and viable twin, or where there is diagnostic doubt, should be referred to a regional fetal medicine center and GTD center. In the situation of a twin pregnancy where there is one viable fetus and the other pregnancy is molar, the woman should be counseled about the potential increased risk of perinatal morbidity and the outcome for GTN. Prenatal invasive testing for

The incidence of GTD is associated with age at conception, being higher in the extremes of age. GTN may develop after a molar pregnancy, a non-molar pregnancy, or a live birth. Clinicians should be aware of the symptoms and signs of molar pregnancy, which include irregular vaginal bleeding, a positive pregnancy test, and supporting ultrasonographic evidence. The definitive diagnosis of a molar pregnancy is made by histological examination. Suction curettage is the method of choice for removal of complete molar pregnancies. Preparation of the cervix prior to uterine removal is safe. Repeat surgical removal may be indicated in cases of heavy or persistent vaginal bleeding causing acute hemodynamic compromise. The histological assessment of material obtained from the medical or surgical management of all miscarriages is recommended to exclude trophoblastic neoplasia.

- Pregnancy tissue does not need to be routinely sent for histological examination after therapeutic abortion if fetal parts have been identified.
- Women who undergo medical abortion should do a urinary pregnancy test 3 weeks after the procedure.
- Referral to a GTD center should be considered for women with persistently elevated hCG after excluding ectopic pregnancy or after two treatments with methotrexate for a pregnancy of unknown location.
- Persistent vaginal bleeding after a pregnancy event should prompt investigation for GTN.
- Women with suspected ectopic molar pregnancy should be managed like any other case of ectopic pregnancy.
- Women with combined molar pregnancy and viable twin should be referred to a regional fetal medicine center and GTD center.
- Women with PSTT or ETT should be registered and cared for within a GTD center.
- Women with atypical PSN should have their histology reviewed centrally for further management.
- All women diagnosed with GTD should be registered at GTD centers for follow-up.
- Follow-up for GTD should be based on hCG levels and may include chemotherapy.
- Women with GTN may be treated with single-agent or multi-agent chemotherapy based on the FIGO scoring system.
- Surgery may be considered for PSTT and ETT as they are less sensitive to chemotherapy.
- The recommended interval between a complete or partial molar pregnancy and trying for another pregnancy should be followed.

Women following a successful pregnancy after a previous molar pregnancy are advised not to conceive until their follow-up is complete. Chemotherapy recipients are advised to wait 1 year before conceiving. Women who have a pregnancy after a molar pregnancy that did not require treatment for GTN do not need to send a post-pregnancy hCG sample. The risk of another molar pregnancy is low, and women are not at increased risk of maternal complications. However, women exposed to a molar pregnancy prior to the index birth have an increased risk of preterm birth, large-for-gestational-age birth, and stillbirth. The long-term outcome for women treated for GTN is generally excellent, with a high cure rate and successful pregnancies achieved in about 80% of cases. Women should be cautious about premature menopause after treatment with combination agent chemotherapy. It is important to avoid pregnancy until hCG levels return to normal, and contraception guidance can be found through the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Health. Exogenous estrogens and fertility drugs may be used after hCG levels normalize. Hormone replacement therapy is safe to use after GTD. Support is available for women and families affected by GTD. Treatment centres are recommended for GTD care. Further research is needed on predicting molar pregnancy outcomes, refining chemotherapy resistance predictions, and managing multi-relapsed disease. Support groups and useful links are provided for additional information.

13. Routine histopathologic analysis of product of conception following first-trimester spontaneous miscarriages.
14. Sonographic diagnosis of partial versus complete molar pregnancy.
15. New insights in the pathophysiology of complete hydatidiform mole.
16. The accuracy of first trimester ultrasound in the diagnosis of hydatidiform mole.
17. Sonographic diagnosis of partial hydatidiform mole.
18. Sonographic appearance of first trimester complete hydatidiform moles.
19. Ultrasound diagnosis of molar pregnancy.
20. Hyperthyroidism and human chorionic gonadotrophin production in gestational trophoblastic disease.
21. Changes in clinical presentation of postterm choriocarcinoma at the New England Trophoblast Center in recent years.
22. The pathology of gestational trophoblastic disease: recent advances.

Management guidelines should be evaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources, and limitations unique to the institution and local populations. Areas of clinical uncertainty may require further research. The evidence used in this guideline was graded using a standardized scheme. Recommendations were formulated based on the quality of evidence. Good Practice Points and Expert Opinion were also considered in developing the guidelines. It is important to note that these guidelines are educational tools and not prescriptive directions for management. Local deviations from the guidelines should be documented in the patient's case notes.