Prevention of Early-onset Neonatal Group B Streptococcal Disease
All pregnant women should be provided with an appropriate information leaflet. Universal bacteriological screening is not recommended. Clinicians should be aware of the clinical risk factors for GBS disease. IAP should be offered to women with a previous baby affected by GBS disease. Antenatal treatment for GBS carriage is not recommended. Method of induction should not vary based on GBS carrier status. Membrane sweeping is not contraindicated in GBS carriers. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not required for planned caesarean sections without labor. Immediate IAP should be offered to known GBS carriers at term. Pyrexial women in labor should receive broad-spectrum antibiotics. IAP is recommended for confirmed preterm labor. Polymerase chain reaction testing at labor onset is not recommended. Birth in a pool is not contraindicated for known GBS carriers. Postnatal antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended for low-risk term babies. Breastfeeding should be encouraged regardless of GBS status. Parents should seek medical advice if the baby shows abnormal behavior. Term babies of mothers who received IAP do not require special observation. Babies with clinical signs of EOGBS disease should be treated promptly. Evaluation of babies for infection indicators should be done at birth.

There is no clear evidence to show that routine testing for GBS in pregnancy would do more good than harm. Screening is not recommended for all pregnant women due to inaccuracies in testing and potential risks associated with unnecessary treatment. Clinicians should be aware of clinical risk factors for GBS disease, such as previous GBS infection, preterm birth, and prolonged rupture of membranes. Antibiotic prophylaxis should be offered to women with GBS bacteriuria during pregnancy. In cases where GBS is detected incidentally or following intentional testing, intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis should be offered. Women with known GBS carriage should receive immediate antibiotic prophylaxis and induction of labor to reduce the risk of EOGBS disease. In cases of intrapartum pyrexia, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be considered to cover GBS.

IAP is recommended for women in confirmed preterm labor. IAP is not recommended for women not in labor and having a preterm planned caesarean section with intact membranes. The risk of EOGBS disease in infants of women who deliver preterm is higher, justifying the use of IAP in all cases of preterm labor. Polymerase chain reaction testing at the onset of labor is not recommended. Water birth is not contraindicated for GBS-positive women if appropriate IAP is offered. Bacteriological testing for GBS carriage is not recommended for women with preterm rupture of membranes. Swabs for GBS carrier status should be transported to the laboratory in non-nutrient transport medium and processed promptly. Enriched culture medium tests are recommended for testing GBS carriage. Benzylpenicillin is recommended for IAP. Cephalosporin should be used in women with known or suspected penicillin allergy. Women with known GBS colonization who decline IAP should have their baby closely monitored after birth. Adverse effects of IAP should be considered. Vaginal cleansing in labor does not reduce the risk of neonatal GBS disease. Parents and carers should seek urgent medical advice if a newborn shows abnormal behavior or symptoms of infection. Term babies whose mothers received adequate IAP do not require special observation at birth. Well babies at risk of EOGBS disease whose mothers did not receive adequate IAP should be monitored closely for signs of infection. Postnatal antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended for asymptomatic term infants without risk factors.

The incidence of EOGBS disease in asymptomatic term infants without known antenatal risk factors in the UK is estimated at 0.2 cases/1000 births. Routine postnatal antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended. Babies with clinical signs of EOGBS disease should be treated with penicillin and gentamicin within an hour of the decision to treat. Breastfeeding should be encouraged irrespective of GBS status. Babies of mothers who have had a previous baby with GBS disease should be monitored closely for at least 12 hours. There is no evidence to discourage breastfeeding where there are concerns regarding the possible risk of transmission of GBS disease.

Water birth, more than a trendy alternative: a prospective, observational study. Prenatal antibiotic treatment does not decrease group B streptococcus colonization at delivery. Late third-trimester treatment of rectovaginal group B streptococci with benzathine penicillin G. Persistence of penicillin G benzathine in pregnant group B streptococcus carriers. Immediate delivery compared with expectant management after preterm pre-labour rupture of the membranes close to term. Using vaginal Group B Streptococcus colonisation in women with preterm premature rupture of membranes to guide the decision for immediate delivery. Detection of Carriage of Group B Streptococci. Duration of intrapartum prophylaxis and concentration of penicillin G in fetal serum at delivery. The effectiveness of risk-based intrapartum chemoprophylaxis for the prevention of early-onset neonatal group B streptococcal disease. Timing of intrapartum ampicillin and prevention of vertical transmission of group B streptococcus. Effectiveness of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of early-onset group B streptococcal disease. Neonatal Infection (Early Onset): Antibiotics for Prevention and Treatment. Maternal group B Streptococcus and the infant gut microbiota. Evaluation of the effects of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis on newborn intestinal microbiota using a sequencing approach targeted to multi hypervariable 16S rDNA regions. Impact of maternal intrapartum antibiotics, method of birth and breastfeeding on gut microbiota during the first year of life. Inﬂuence of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis for group B streptococcus on gut microbiota in the first month of life. The role of the gut microbiota in food allergy. Modulation of type 1 and type 2 diabetes risk by the intestinal microbiome. Childhood outcomes after prescription of antibiotics to pregnant women with preterm rupture of the membranes. Childhood outcomes after prescription of antibiotics to pregnant women with spontaneous preterm labour. Educational outcomes at 11 years of age following antenatal prescription of erythromycin or co-amoxiclav. Vaginal chlorhexidine during labour to prevent early-onset neonatal group B streptococcal infection. Neonatal sepsis workups in infants >/=2000 grams at birth. Group B streptococcal disease in UK and Irish infants younger than 90 days. Clinical indicators of possible early-onset neonatal infection, including ‘redﬂags’.

RCOG Guidelines are not prescriptive directions and should be considered in the context of the patient's clinical data and available treatment options. Departures from local protocols should be documented in the patient's case notes.