Maternal Collapse in Pregnancy and the
Puerperium
Green-top Guideline No. 56
December 2019
Please cite this paper as: Chu J, Johnston TA, Geoghegan J, on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists. Maternal Collapse in Pregnancy and the Puerperium. BJOG 2020;127:e14 –e52.
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.15995 RCOG Green-top Guidelines
Maternal Collapse in Pregnancy and the Puerperium
J Chu, TA Johnston, J Geoghegan, on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists
Correspondence: Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 10–18 Union Street, London SE1 1SZ.
Email: clinicaleffectiveness@rcog.org.uk
This is the second edition of this guideline. The ﬁrst edition was published in 2011 under the same title.
Executive summary
Clinical issues
Can women at risk of impending collapse be identiﬁed early?
An obstetric modi ﬁed early warning score chart should be used for all women undergoing
observation, to allow early recognition of the woman who is becoming critically ill.D
What are the causes of maternal collapse?
Maternal collapse can result from a number of causes. A systematic approach should be takento identify the cause. [New 2019]B
In cases of collapse assumed to be due to anaphylaxis mast cell tryptase levels can be useful in
conﬁrming the diagnosis.P
What are the physiological and anatomical changes in pregnancy that affect resuscitation?
It is essential that anyone involved in the resuscitation of pregnant women is aware of the
physiological differences. This includes pre-hospital care clinicians, paramedics andemergency medicine department staff.P
Aortocaval compression signi ﬁcantly reduces cardiac output from 20 weeks of gestation
onwards and the ef ﬁcacy of chest compressions during resuscitation. [New 2019]C
Changes in lung function, diaphragmatic splinting and increased oxygen consumption make
pregnant women become hypoxic more readily and make ventilation more dif ﬁcult. [New 2019]C
Difﬁcult intubation is more likely in pregnancy. [New 2019]C
Pregnant women are at an increased risk of aspiration. [New 2019]C
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e15 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
What is the optimal initial management of maternal collapse?
Maternal collapse resuscitation should follow the Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines using the
standard ABCDE approach, with some modi ﬁcations for maternal physiology, in particular relief
of aortocaval compression.D
If maternal cardiac arrest occurs in the community setting, basic life support should beadministered and rapid transfer arranged.P
Manual displacement of the uterus to the left is effective in relieving aortocaval compression inwomen above 20 weeks ’gestation or where the uterus is palpable at or above the level of the
umbilicus. This permits effective chest compressions in the supine position in the event ofcardiac arrest.D
A left lateral tilt of the woman from head to toe at an angle of 15 –30oon a ﬁrm surface will
relieve aortocaval compression in the majority of pregnant women and still allow effectivechest compressions to be performed in the event of cardiac arrest.C
In cases of major trauma, the spine should be protected with a spinal board before any tilt isapplied. In the absence of a spinal board, manual displacement of the uterus should be used.[New 2019]P
Intubation in an unconscious woman with a cuffed endotracheal tube should be performedimmediately by an experienced anaesthetist.P
Supplemental high ﬂow oxygen should be administered as soon as possible to counteract rapid
deoxygenation.P
Bag and mask ventilation or insertion of a simple supraglottic airway should be undertakenuntil intubation can be achieved.P
If the airway is clear and there is no breathing, chest compressions should be commencedimmediately.B
Two wide-bore cannulae (minimum 16 gauge) should be inserted as soon as possible. Ifperipheral venous access is not possible, early consideration of central venous access,intraosseous access or venous cutdown should be considered.P
There should be an aggressive approach to volume replacement, although caution should beexercised in the context of pre-eclampsia or eclampsia.P
Abdominal ultrasound by a skilled operator can assist in the diagnosis of concealedhaemorrhage.C
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e16 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The same de ﬁbrillation energy levels should be used as in a nonpregnant woman.B
There should be no alteration in algorithm drugs or doses used in the Resuscitation Council
(UK) protocols.P
Common, reversible causes of maternal cardiopulmonary arrest should be consideredthroughout the resuscitation process.D
Resuscitation efforts should be continued until a decision is taken by the consultant obstetricianand consultant anaesthetist to discontinue resuscitation efforts. This decision should be made inconsensus with the cardiac arrest team.P
When, where and how should perimortem caesarean section (PMCS) be performed?
In women over 20 weeks of gestation, if there is no response to correctly performed CPRwithin 4 minutes of maternal collapse or if resuscitation is continued beyond this, then PMCSshould be undertaken to assist maternal resuscitation. Ideally, this should be achieved within5 minutes of the collapse. D
PMCS should not be delayed by moving the woman. It should be performed where maternalcollapse has occurred and resuscitation is taking place.P
The operator should use the incision, which will facilitate the most rapid access. This may be amidline vertical incision or a suprapubic transverse incision.P
A scalpel and umbilical cord clamps (or alternative ligatures) should be available on theresuscitation trolley in all areas where maternal collapse may occur, including the accident andemergency department.P
What does the ongoing management consist of?
Senior staff with appropriate experience should be involved at an early stage.P
Transfer should be supervised by an adequately skilled team with appropriate equipment.P
In the case of maternal collapse secondary to antepartum haemorrhage, the fetus and placentashould be delivered promptly to allow control of the haemorrhage.P
In the case of massive placental abruption, caesarean section may occasionally be indicatedeven if the fetus is dead to allow rapid control of the haemorrhage.P
Intravenous tranexamic acid signi ﬁcantly reduces mortality due to postpartum haemorrhage.
[New 2019]A
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e17 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Massive pulmonary embolism should be treated according to RCOG Green-top Guideline No.
37b Acute Management of Thrombosis and Embolism during Pregnancy and the Puerperium .
[New 2019]D
The management of amniotic ﬂuid embolism (AFE) is supportive rather than speci ﬁc, as there is
no proven effective therapy.P
Early involvement of senior experienced staff, including midwives, obstetricians, anaesthetists,haematologists and intensivists, is essential to optimise outcome.P
Coagulopathy needs early, aggressive treatment, including the use of fresh frozen plasma.P
Recombinant factor VII should only be used if coagulopathy cannot be corrected by massiveblood component replacement as it causes poorer outcome in women with AFE. [New 2019]C
After successful resuscitation, cardiac cases should be managed by an expert cardiology team.P
Septic shock should be managed in accordance with the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines.D
The antidote to magnesium toxicity is 10 ml 10% calcium gluconate or 10 ml 10% calcium
chloride given by slow intravenous injection.P
If local anaesthetic toxicity is suspected, stop injecting immediately.P
Lipid rescue should be used in cases of collapse secondary to local anaesthetic toxicity.C
Intralipid/C22620% should be available in all hospitals offering maternity services.P
Manage arrhythmias as usual, recognising that they may be very refractory to treatment.P
All cases of lipid rescue should be reported to NHS Improvement and the Lipid Rescue site.P
Eclampsia should be managed in accordance with the NICE Clinical Guideline 107 Hypertension
in Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management .[New 2019]D
Neuroradiologists and neurosurgeons should be involved in the care of pregnant women with
intracranial haemorrhage at the earliest opportunity. [New 2019]P
In cases of anaphylaxis, all potential causative agents should be removed, and the ABCDE
approach to assessment and resuscitation followed.P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e18 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If the anaphylactic reaction occurs in the community, the woman should have basic life support
and be transferred to a hospital setting as quickly as possible, unless a suitably trainedhealthcare professional is present with appropriate equipment and drugs in which casedeﬁnitive resuscitation and treatment should be commenced.P
The treatment for anaphylaxis is 1:1000 adrenaline 500 micrograms (0.5 ml) intramuscularly.
This dose is for intramuscular use only.P
What are the outcomes for mother and baby after maternal collapse?
Outcomes for mothers and babies depend on the cause of collapse, gestational age and access
to emergency care, with survival rates being poorer if the collapse occurs out of hospital. Inmaternal cardiac arrest maternal survival rates of over 50% have been reported. [New 2019]C
Who should be on the team?
In addition to the general arrest team, there should also be a senior midwife, an obstetrician
and an obstetric anaesthetist included in the team in cases of maternal collapse.P
The most senior obstetrician and senior anaesthetist should be called at the time of acardiopulmonary arrest call.P
The neonatal team should be called early if delivery is likely (antepartum collapse over22
+0weeks of gestation).P
Where the woman survives, a consultant intensivist should be involved as soon as possible.P
Clinical governance
Documentation
Accurate documentation is essential in all cases of maternal collapse, whether or not
resuscitation is successful.P
Incident reporting
All cases of maternal collapse should generate a clinical incident form and the care should bereviewed through the clinical governance process.P
All cases of maternal death should be reported to MBRRACE-UK. [New 2019]D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e19 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Training
All generic life support training should consider the adaptation of CPR in pregnant women.P
All maternity staff should have annual formal multidisciplinary training in generic life support
and the management of maternal collapse.P
Life support training improves resuscitation skills.A
Small group multidisciplinary interactive practical training is recommended to improve themanagement of maternal collapse.C
Debrieﬁng
Debrie ﬁng is recommended for the woman, the family and the staff involved in the event.P
1. Purpose and scope
Maternal collapse is a rare but life-threatening event, with a wide ranging aetiology. The outcome primarily for the
mother, but also the fetus, depends on prompt and effective resuscitation. The purpose of this guideline is to discussthe identiﬁcation of women at an increased risk of maternal collapse and the different causes of maternal collapse, to
delineate the initial and ongoing management of maternal collapse, and review the maternal and neonatal outcomes.
It covers both hospital and community settings, and includes all gestations and the postpartum period. Theresuscitation team and equipment, and training requirements will also be covered.
2. Introduction and background epidemiology
Maternal collapse is deﬁned as an acute event involving the cardiorespiratory systems and/or central nervous systems,resulting in a reduced or absent conscious level (and potentially cardiac arrest and death), at any stage in pregnancyand up to 6 weeks after birth. Importantly, if maternal collapse which is not as the result of cardiac arrest is nottreated effectively, maternal cardiac arrest can then occur. There is a robust and effective system for maternalmortality audit in the UK in the form of the Conﬁdential Enquiry into Maternal Death performed by MBRRACE-UK(Mothers and Babies: Reducing Risk through Audits and Conﬁdential Enquiries across the UK). However, theincidence of maternal collapse or severe maternal morbidity is unknown as morbidity data is not routinely collected.Even when it is, it is not collected in a standardised way to facilitate comparisons.
1The incidence of cardiac arrest in
pregnancy is much rarer than maternal collapse at around 1 in 36 000 maternities2, with a case fatality rate of 42%. In
a UK study, a total of 25% of cardiac arrests in pregnancy were secondary to anaesthesia and all were associated witha 100% survival rate.
2
It is accepted that lessons can be learned from severe morbidity and near misses, and MBRRACE-UK now undertaketargeted maternal morbidity conﬁdential enquiries.
3The UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS), run by the
National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, has made a signiﬁcant contribution towards the study of rare events andmaternal morbidity.
4Severe maternal morbidity data were collected across Scotland for 10 years and published in
2014.5A woman was deﬁned as having had a severe maternal morbidity event if there was a risk of maternal death
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e20 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
without timely intervention. The data showed a severe maternal morbidity rate of 7.3 in 1000 (730 in 100 000)
maternities in 2012, but not all cases of severe maternal morbidity involved maternal collapse (although all cases of
collapse were included in the ﬁgures). A publication from Ireland showed a severe maternal morbidity rate of 6.35 in1000 (635 in 100 000) births in 2015.
6These reports demonstrate that the rate of maternal morbidity has increased
year on year. This is likely to reﬂect the changing demographics of women and better reporting, rather than adecline in care.
7Between 2012 and 2014, the maternal mortality rate was 8.5 in 100 000 in the UK.3However, not
all maternal collapse results in maternal death. Thus, the true rate of maternal collapse is unknown.
Whilst maternal collapse is such an uncommon event, the consequences are potentially devastating, therefore it is
essential that the clinical team are skilled in initial effective resuscitation techniques, and are able to investigate anddiagnose the cause of the collapse to allow appropriate, directed ongoing management. Unfortunately, in reportsregarding morbidity
5,6and the MBRRACE-UK report 2016,3areas of substandard care continue to be identiﬁed,
including poor resuscitation skills. However, it should also be remembered that death and disability may resultdespite excellent care. It should be noted that vasovagal attacks and epileptic seizures
8are the most common causes
of maternal collapse and are not covered by this guideline.
3. Identi ﬁcation and assessment of evidence
This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing Royal College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists (RCOG) Green-top Guidelines. The Cochrane Library (including the Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews and the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects [DARE]), EMBASE, Trip, MEDLINE andPubMed (electronic databases) were searched for relevant randomised controlled trials (RCT), systematic reviewsand meta-analyses. The search was restricted to articles published up to June 2018. The databases were searchedusing the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, including all subheadings, and this was combined with akeyword search. Search words included, ‘ *labor complication’, ‘ *maternal morbidity’, ‘ *maternal mortality’,
‘*pregnancy complication’ and ‘ *heart arrest’. The search was restricted to humans and the English language. The
National Library for Health and the National Guideline Clearinghouse were also searched for relevant guidelines andreviews.
Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. In the absence of published evidence, these have
been annotated as ‘good practice points’. Further information about the assessment of evidence and the grading ofrecommendations may be found in Appendix 1.
4. Clinical issues
4.1. Can women at risk of impending collapse be identiﬁed early?
An obstetric modi ﬁed early warning score chart should be used for all women undergoing
observation, to allow early recognition of the woman who is becoming critically ill.D
In some cases, maternal collapse occurs with no prior warning, although there may be existing risk
factors which make this more likely. Antenatal care for women with signiﬁcant medical conditions at riskof maternal collapse should include multidisciplinary team input with a pregnancy and birth managementplan in place. Often there are clinical signs that precede collapse. In a previous report into maternal Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e21 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
deaths in the UK,9substandard care was often identiﬁed where these signs and symptoms were not
recognised and acted upon. The MBRRACE-UK report published in 2016 recommended a nationalobstetric early warning scoring system should be introduced and used for all obstetric women, includingthose being cared for outside the obstetric setting. It also recommended that clinical judgment mustbe incorporated in that if the woman looks or feels unwell, despite the score, her care should beescalated.
3
The ﬁrst Modiﬁed Early Warning Score (MEWS systems)10were introduced on the basis that a
deterioration in simple physiological vital signs will precede signiﬁcant clinical deterioration and that earlyintervention will reduce morbidity.
11–15They are now extensively used in acute settings and critical
care,16–18although the optimal system has yet to be identiﬁed.19Evidence
level 2 ++
Despite this, the MEWS systems have not been demonstrated to be highly effective, even when their use
has triggered input from a specialised medical emergency team.20Although their use is recommended by
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)21and MBRRACE-UK3this is based on
informal consensus rather than evidence.
The physiological changes of pregnancy may render the existing MEWS systems inappropriate,22and no
validated system for use in pregnant women currently exists. Because of this, many maternity hospitalshave developed their own modiﬁed MEWS system so local training is required, and there is ongoingwork in the UK to try and develop a national obstetrics MEWS system. This, however, should besubjected to rigorous scrutiny to ensure that it is effective before it is universally implemented.
The National Early Warning Score 2 (NEWS2)
23is endorsed by NHS England and NHS Improvement but
is not recommendend for women who are more than 20 weeks pregnant because the physiologicalresponse to acute illness can be modiﬁed in pregnancy. With that in mind, it would seem reasonable toconsider the use of NEWS2 in women who are less than 20 weeks pregnant. The timing of the use ofNEWS2 postpartum is uncertain as the physiological changes of pregnancy are largely returned to pre-pregnancy levels by 48 hours although full return can take up to 6 weeks.Evidence
level 4
It is also important to consider the potential risks associated with the use of different scoring systems in the same
organisation for the same patient depending on their stage of pregnancy.
A scoring system may still miss an unwell patient and a high level of clinical suspicion should be present if a
patient looks unwell, even if her MEWS/Modiﬁed Early Obstetric Warning Score (MEOWS)/NEWS2 score is normal.
4.2. What are the causes of maternal collapse?
Maternal collapse can result from a number of causes. A systematic approach should be taken
to identify the cause.D
Maternal collapse can result from many causes which may or may not be pregnancy related. A systematic
approach to assessment facilitates identiﬁcation of the cause of collapse. If the cause is reversible, thesurvival rates are greater
24and those for which speciﬁc treatment exists must be rapidly considered.
A systematic ABCDE approach should enable the clinical team to identify the most common causes ofcollapse. For ease of memory, these are divided by the Resuscitation Council (UK) in to the ‘4 T’s’ andEvidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e22 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
‘4 H’s’.24In pregnant women, eclampsia and intracranial haemorrhage should be added. Other speciﬁc
obstetric causes could also be present and should be considered systematically (please see Appendix 2).Due to the lack of robust morbidity data regarding collapse, maternal deaths are often used as areference point. The common causes of maternal collapse are discussed below, but this is not anexhaustive list, as this is beyond the scope of this guideline.
Evidence
level 4
4.2.1. Haemorrhage
Major obstetric haemorrhage has an estimated incidence of 6 in 1000 maternities.5This is among the
most common causes of maternal collapse and was responsible for 13 maternal deaths between 2012and 2014.
3Causes of major obstetric haemorrhage include postpartum haemorrhage, major antepartum
haemorrhage from placenta praevia, placental abruption, uterine rupture and ectopic pregnancy. In mostcases of massive haemorrhage leading to collapse, the cause is obvious, but concealed haemorrhageshould not be forgotten, including following caesarean section and ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Otherrarer causes of concealed haemorrhage include splenic artery rupture
25and hepatic rupture. Blood loss
is often difﬁcult to estimate,26,27especially slow, steady bleeding, and ﬁt, healthy women can tolerate
signiﬁcant loss prior to showing signs of decompensation.Evidence
level 2 +
4.2.2. Thromboembolism
In the MBRRACE-UK report 2016,3deaths were the result of thromboembolism, making it the most
common cause of direct maternal death. Appropriate use of thromboprophylaxis has improved maternalmorbidity and mortality, but improvements in clinical risk assessment and prophylaxis are stillrequired.
3,28Evidence
level 2 ++
4.2.3. Amniotic ﬂuid embolism (AFE)
UK data published in 2016 give an incidence of AFE of 1.7 per 100 000 maternities.29Survival rates
seem to have improved signiﬁcantly over time, from 14% in 1979,30to approximately 30% in 200531and
81% by 2014.29However, neurological morbidity in survivors is well recognised.29The perinatal
mortality rate in cases of AFE is 67 per 1000 total births.29It presents as collapse during labour or
birth, or within (usually) 30 minutes of birth, in the form of acute hypotension, respiratory distress andacute hypoxia.
30Seizures and cardiac arrest may occur. There are different phases to the disease
progression,32,33which clearly depend on maternal survival. Initially, pulmonary hypertension may
develop secondary to vascular occlusion either by debris or vasoconstriction. This often resolves andleft ventricular dysfunction or failure develops. Coagulopathy often develops if the mother survives longenough, often giving rise to massive postpartum haemorrhage. If AFE occurs prior to birth, profoundfetal distress develops acutely.
34The underlying pathophysiological process has been compared to
anaphylaxis or severe sepsis, and may be due to complement activation.35,36Diagnosis in nonfatal cases
is clinical, as there is no established accurate diagnostic test premortem, although research continues inthe area.
37Evidence
level 2 ++
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e23 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.2.4. Cardiac disease
Cardiac disease was the most common overall cause of indirect maternal death in the MBRRACE-UK
report 2016,3being responsible for 51 maternal deaths between 2012 and 2014. The majority of deaths
secondary to cardiac causes occur in women with no previous history,2,3and almost one in ﬁve deaths
occurred in an ambulance or accident and emergency department.2,38Therefore, paramedics and accident
and emergency staff must be familiar with the management of maternal collapse. The main cardiac causes ofmaternal death are ischaemia and sudden arrhythmic cardiac death with a structurally normal heart.
3Most
cardiac events have preceding signs and symptoms. Aortic root dissection, although usually associated withan inherited aortopathy e.g. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, can present in otherwise healthy women, and signsand symptoms, such as central chest or interscapular pain, a wide pulse pressure (mainly secondary tosystolic hypertension) and a new cardiac murmur, must prompt appropriate imaging and, if required,referral to a cardiologist. The incidence of congenital and rheumatic heart disease in pregnancy is increasing,secondary to increased survival rates and with improved management of congenital heart disease. Inaddition, women with mechanical prosthetic heart valves are at particularly increased risk of complicationsin pregnancy.
39These women should be cared for by an appropriately skilled and experienced
multidisciplinary team, usually in regional centres.2Other cardiac causes include: cardiomyopathy; dissection
of the coronary artery; acute left ventricular failure; infective endocarditis; and pulmonary oedema.Evidence
level 2 ++
4.2.5. Sepsis
Sepsis has been recognised for centuries as a signiﬁcant cause of maternal morbidity and mortality, and
substandard care continues to feature in the cases that result in death.3Bacteraemia, which can be
present in the absence of pyrexia or a raised white cell count, can progress rapidly to severe sepsis andseptic shock leading to collapse.
40,41The most common organisms implicated in obstetric sepsis are the
streptococcal groups A, B and D, pneumococcus and Escherichia coli .Evidence
level 2 –
4.2.6. Drug toxicity and overdose
Drug toxicity and overdose should be considered in all cases of collapse. Substance misuse should be remembered as
a potential cause of collapse especially outside of hospital. In terms of therapeutic drug toxicity, the commonly useddrugs in obstetric practice are magnesium sulphate in the presence of renal impairment and local anaesthetic agents.
Toxic effects associated with local anaesthetics usually result from excessively high plasma
concentrations. This can be either as a result of inadvertent intravenous injection, or systemicabsorption of toxic amounts administered via appropriate (epidural, local inﬁltration etc.) routes. Onintravenous injection, convulsions and cardiovascular collapse may occur very rapidly. Local anaesthetictoxicity resulting from systemic absorption of the local anaesthetic may occur sometime after the initialinjection. Effects initially include a feeling of inebriation and lightheadedness followed by sedation,circumoral paraesthesia and twitching; convulsions can occur in severe toxicity. Signs of severe toxicityinclude sudden loss of consciousness, with or without tonic-clonic convulsions, and cardiovascularcollapse; sinus bradycardia, conduction blocks, asystole and ventricular tachyarrhythmias can all occur.
42Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e24 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In terms of local anaesthetics, total spinal block or high spinal/epidural block are rare. A high index of suspicion is
needed in cases of maternal collapse following spinal anaesthesia or epidural top up. Appropriate training of medical
and midwifery staff to recognise the signs and symptoms of high block is essential.
4.2.7. EclampsiaEclampsia as the cause of maternal collapse is usually obvious in the inpatient setting. Often the diagnosis of pre-
eclampsia has already been made and the seizure witnessed. In the community setting, ﬁtting after 20 weeks’gestation may be attributable to eclampsia, notably where there is no known history of epilepsy. However, epilepsyshould always be considered in cases of maternal collapse associated with seizure activity.
8
4.2.8. Intracranial haemorrhage
Intracranial haemorrhage is a signiﬁcant complication of uncontrolled, particularly systolic, hypertension, but can also
result from ruptured aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations. The initial presentation may be maternal collapse,but often severe headache precedes this.
4.2.9. Anaphylaxis
In cases of collapse assumed to be due to anaphylaxis mast cell tryptase levels can be useful in
conﬁrming the diagnosis.P
Anaphylaxis is a severe, life-threatening generalised or systemic hypersensitivity reaction,43resulting in respiratory,
cutaneous and circulatory changes, and possibly gastrointestinal disturbance and collapse. There is signiﬁcantintravascular volume redistribution, which can lead to decreased cardiac output. Acute ventricular failure andmyocardial ischaemia may occur. Upper airway occlusion secondary to angioedema, bronchospasm and mucousplugging of smaller airways all contribute to signiﬁcant hypoxia and difﬁculties with ventilation. Common triggers area variety of drugs, latex, animal allergens and foods. The incidence of severe perioperative obstetric anaphylaxis isbetween 1 and 3.5 per 100 000, with a mortality rate of approximately 1%.
44Anaphylaxis is likely when all of the
following three criteria are met:
/C15sudden onset and rapid progression of symptoms
/C15life-threatening airway and/or breathing and/or circulation problems
/C15skin and/or mucosal changes (ﬂushing, urticaria, angioedema).
Exposure to a known allergen for the woman supports the diagnosis, but many cases occur with no
previous history. Mast cell tryptase levels can be useful in conﬁrming the diagnosis. As a minimum, 1sample at 1 –2 hours after the start of symptoms should be taken. Ideally though 3 timed samples should
be taken: as soon as possible after resuscitation has started (without delaying resuscitation); 1 –2 hours
after the start of symptoms; 24 hours later.
44Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e25 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.2.10. Other causes
These include hypoglycaemia, hyponatraemia45and other metabolic and electrolyte disturbances. Other causes of
hypoxia include airway obstruction secondary to aspiration or foreign body, air embolism, tension pneumothorax,cardiac tamponade secondary to trauma or dissection, and hypothermia. From an anaesthetic perspective, the maincauses of collapse would be local anaesthetic toxicity or failed tracheal intubation. There will be other veryunusual and rare causes of maternal collapse, but detailed discussion of all causes is beyond the scope of thisguideline.
4.3. What are the physiological and anatomical changes in pregnancy that affect resuscitation?
It is essential that anyone involved in the resuscitation of pregnant women is aware of the
physiological differences. This includes pre-hospital care clinicians, paramedics and emergencymedicine department staff.P
Pregnant women undergo a variety of physiological changes that can accelerate the development of
hypoxia and acidosis, and make ventilation more difﬁcult.46These changes are listed in Appendix 3,47and
combined with other physical changes, make resuscitation during pregnancy more challenging. It isessential that anyone involved in the resuscitation of a pregnant woman is aware of these differences.This includes paramedics, critical care staff and emergency medicine department staff.Evidence
level 2 +
4.3.1. Aortocaval compression
Aortocaval compression signi ﬁcantly reduces cardiac output from 20 weeks of gestation
onwards and the ef ﬁcacy of chest compressions during resuscitation.C
From around 20 weeks of gestation onwards the gravid uterus reduces venous return in the supine
position. As a consequence, cardiac output is reduced by up to 30 –40%.48Supine hypotension itself can
precipitate maternal collapse, which is usually reversed by turning the woman into the left lateralposition.Evidence
level 2 +
When cardiopulmonary arrest occurs, chest compressions are needed to produce a cardiac output. In
the nonpregnant situation, they achieve around 30% of the normal cardiac output.49–51Aortocaval
compression further reduces cardiac output to approximately 10% of the nonpregnant cardiac output.52
Therefore, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is less likely to be effective in a woman who is at 20 ormore weeks of gestation.Evidence
level 2 +
4.3.2. Respiratory changes
Changes in lung function, diaphragmatic splinting and increased oxygen consumption make
pregnant women become hypoxic more readily and make ventilation more dif ﬁcult.C
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e26 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The increased progesterone level in pregnancy increases the respiratory drive,53,54leading to an increase
in tidal volume and minute ventilation. Splinting of the diaphragm by the enlarged uterus reduces the
functional residual capacity (FRC) and also makes ventilation more difﬁcult. Reduction in FRC along with
the markedly increased oxygen consumption of the fetoplacental unit, means that pregnant womenbecome hypoxic much more rapidly during periods of hypoventilation.Evidence
level 2 +
4.3.3. Intubation
Difﬁcult intubation is more likely in pregnancy.C
Weight gain in pregnancy, large breasts inhibiting the working space and laryngeal oedema can all
contribute to making intubation more difﬁcult.55,56Evidence
level 2 +
4.3.4. Aspiration
Pregnant women are at an increased risk of aspiration.C
Pregnant women are at a signiﬁcantly higher risk of regurgitation and aspiration, secondary to the
progesterone effect relaxing the lower oesophageal sphincter along with the raised intra-abdominalpressure secondary to the gravid uterus. During labour or following maternal opioid administration therecan also be a delay in gastric emptying. Aspiration pneumonitis in pregnant women, known as
Mendelsson’s syndrome,
57can be severe. The risks can be minimised by early intubation with effective
cricoid pressure, and the use of H 2antagonists and antacids prophylactically in all women considered to
be at high risk of obstetric intervention during labour.Evidence
level 2 +
4.3.5. Circulation
The increased cardiac output and hyperdynamic circulation of pregnancy mean that large volumes of
blood can be lost rapidly, especially from the uterus which receives 10% of the cardiac output at term.Otherwise healthy women tolerate blood loss remarkably well and can lose up to 35% of theircirculation before becoming symptomatic, and often maternal tachycardia may be the only sign ofhypovolaemia until very late in the haemorrhage. Blood loss is tolerated less well if there is a pre-existingmaternal anaemia,
58and clotting is less efﬁcient if there is signiﬁcant anaemia. Concealed bleeding and
underestimation of loss means that intervention is often delayed. Where signs of hypovolaemia havebeen subtle, hypovolaemia as the cause of maternal cardiopulmonary arrest may go unrecognised.Evidence
level 4
4.4. What is the optimal initial management of maternal collapse?
4.4.1. Resuscitation in maternal collapse
Maternal collapse resuscitation should follow the Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines using the
standard ABCDE approach, with some modi ﬁcations for maternal physiology, in particular relief
of aortocaval compression.D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e27 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If maternal cardiac arrest occurs in the community setting, basic life support should be
administered and rapid transfer arranged.P
In the UK, resuscitation is conducted according to the guidelines of the Resuscitation Council (UK).
These guidelines include: Adult Basic Life Support; Adult Advanced Life Support; and Automated ExternalDeﬁbrillation algorithms and recommendations.
24These guidelines were updated in 2015 by international
experts under the auspices of the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation59and are used in the
resuscitation of a pregnant woman.Evidence
level 4
Maternal collapse can occur in the community setting, and pre-hospital care of the collapsed pregnant patient should
follow the same guidance from the Resuscitation Council (UK) listed above and will be delivered by ambulanceparamedics and/or pre-hospital care clinicians. The care standards delivered in the pre-hospital setting have been welldocumented in the UK Ambulance Services Clinical Practice Guidelines Pocket Book and Emergency Birth in theCommunity guideline.
60,61
In the event of maternal collapse, signs of life should be sought if the assessor is conﬁdent in this (check forbreathing and carotid pulse). If the assessor is not conﬁdent or there is any doubt in the detection of signs of life,cardiopulmonary resuscitation should be commenced. However, if signs of life are detected, a standard ABCDEapproach should be taken. The woman should be placed in the left lateral position, obstetric review should besought, the need for oxygen therapy should be assessed and adequate vascular access should be gained. An alert,verbal stimulus, pain stimulus, unresponsive (AVPU) assessment should be undertaken as an alteration ofconsciousness can be a sign of critical illness. The cause of the maternal collapse should be rapidly identiﬁed andtreated to prevent potential progression to maternal cardio-respiratory arrest. Ongoing regular ABCDE assessmentshould be performed as the risk of progression to cardiac arrest remains until the cause of the collapse is treated.Assessment of fetal wellbeing should be undertaken after ABCDE assessment (Appendix 4).
If signs of life are not detected in the hospital setting, a cardiac arrest should be declared and the cardiac
arrest team called. An emergency call for the obstetric, obstetric anaesthetic and neonatal (if undeliveredand more than 22
+0weeks of gestation) resuscitation teams should be made. The consultant obstetrician
and consultant anaesthetist should also attend. Standard basic life support should be initiated.62Evidence
level 4
From 20 weeks of gestation, changes in maternal physiology mean that adaptations are made to the resuscitation
process. While Resuscitation Council (UK) algorithms for generic, paediatric and neonatal life support are available instandardised posters, adaptations for maternal resuscitation are addressed but are not available in algorithmic andposter form. For this reason, the Resuscitation Council (UK) algorithm for advanced life support has been modiﬁedby the authors and is included in Appendix 4 of this guideline.
4.4.2. Relieving aorto-caval compression
Manual displacement of the uterus to the left is effective in relieving aortocaval compression in
women above 20 weeks ’gestation or where the uterus is palpable at or above the level of the
umbilicus. This permits effective chest compressions in the supine position in the event ofcardiac arrest.D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e28 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
A left lateral tilt of the woman from head to toe at an angle of 15 –30oon a ﬁrm surface will
relieve aortocaval compression in the majority of pregnant women and still allow effectivechest compressions to be performed in the event of cardiac arrest.C
In cases of major trauma, the spine should be protected with a spinal board before anytilt is applied. In the absence of a spinal board, manual displacement of the uterus should be
used.P
There are essential adaptations to the management of a collapsed pregnant woman because of the physiological and
anatomical changes of pregnancy.
After 20 weeks’ gestation or when the uterus is palpable at or above the level of the umbilicus, manual
uterine displacement is the preferred method to reduce compression of the inferior vena cava and aortaby the gravid uterus if performed correctly. The technique should be performed using an ‘up, off andover’ method.
63,64This is achieved by placing a hand below the uterus on the maternal right and pushing
the uterus slightly upwards and to the left. This maintains the woman in a supine position, allowing forcontinuous effective cardiac compressions if necessary.
65Evidence
level 2 +
A left lateral tilt of the woman from head to toe at an angle of 15 –30oto relieve aortocaval
compression66,67can be achieved on a tilting operating table, with a solid wedge (of an appropriate size)68
and spinal board, and allow for effective chest compressions to be performed67. In the absence of these,
manual displacement of the uterus is preferable. Using soft surfaces, such as a bed, or objects, such aspillows or blankets, are not nearly as effective, compromise effective chest compressions, and should notbe used (a video of the procedure can be found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2VyqGqDNlLc).Evidence
level 2 +
4.4.3. Airway
Intubation in an unconscious woman with a cuffed endotracheal tube should be performed
immediately by an experienced anaesthetist.P
The airway in pregnancy is more vulnerable because of the increased risk of regurgitation and
aspiration.63,69For this reason, it is important to clear and protect the airway as early as possible. Intubation
with a cuffed endotracheal tube should then be performed. This will protect the airway, ensure goodoxygen delivery and facilitate more efﬁcient ventilation. Intubation can be more difﬁcult in pregnancy, so thisshould be undertaken by someone with appropriate skills. Failed intubation is more common in thepregnant than nonpregnant patient and a plan for failed intubation should always be considered. A fulldescription of the failed intubation drill is available from the Difﬁcult Airway Society.
70In brief: Maintain
oxygenation; Call for help; Supraglottic airway device; Front of Neck access. During cardiac arrest in anonpregnant woman it is acceptable to use a supraglottic device, such as a laryngeal mask airway as analternative to the endotracheal tube.
71In pregnant women, physiological changes in the airway, such as
hyperaemia, hypersecretion and oedema lead to increased friability of the airway mucosa causing bleedingand difﬁculties in visualisation for intubation.
69Pregnant women are also more likely to regurgitate and
aspirate in the absence of a secured airway (endotracheal tube) than a nonpregnant woman, and thus, theearly involvement of an appropriately skilled anaesthetist remains best practice.
69Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e29 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Waveform capnography must be used to conﬁrm and continually monitor tracheal tube placement, and may be used
to monitor the quality of CPR and to provide an early indication of return of spontaneous circulation.24
Appendix 5 of this guideline presents suggested equipment that should be available for cases where airway
management may be difﬁcult.
4.4.4. Breathing
Supplemental high ﬂow oxygen should be administered as soon as possible to counteract rapid
deoxygenation.P
Bag and mask ventilation or insertion of a simple supraglottic airway should be undertakenuntil intubation can be achieved.P
Maternal physiological changes lead to increased oxygen requirements. Furthermore, in maternal collapse,
reduced oxygen reserve and a reduced functional residual capacity leads to deoxygenation occurringmore rapidly than in nonpregnant women. Therefore, supplemental oxygen should be added with a gasﬂow of 10 –15 l per minute to whatever method of ventilation is being employed.
62Evidence
level 2 ++
Ventilation, using a face mask, or a supraglottic airway device and self-inﬂating bag, or via a cuffed endotracheal tube,
may be more difﬁcult because of the physiological changes of pregnancy as previously described. It can also bedifﬁcult to see the chest rise.
4.4.5. Circulation
If the airway is clear and there is no breathing, chest compressions should be commenced
immediately.B
Two wide-bore cannulae (minimum 16 gauge) should be inserted as soon as possible. If
peripheral venous access is not possible, early consideration of central venous access,intraosseous access or venous cutdown should be considered.P
There should be an aggressive approach to volume replacement, although caution should beexercised in the context of pre-eclampsia or eclampsia.P
Abdominal ultrasound by a skilled operator can assist in the diagnosis of concealedhaemorrhage.C
The same de ﬁbrillation energy levels should be used as in a nonpregnant woman.B
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e30 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Chest compressions should be commenced immediately in the absence of a cardiac output.72
Compressions may be made difﬁcult because of obesity and if the woman is in the tilted position. Hand
position should be over the centre of the chest and it is important to ensure that the direction of
compression is perpendicular to the chest wall. If a left lateral tilt is employed then the angle of tilt mustbe taken into account when performing chest compressions. Immediate and competent chestcompressions have been found to have a direct impact on maternal outcome.
72Evidence
level 2 ++
In total, 30 chest compressions (at a rate of 100 –120 per minute) should be performed for every two
ventilation breaths initially. If there are two rescuers, one should be responsible for chest compressionsand ventilation breaths, whilst the other should ensure aortocaval decompression with manual uterinedisplacement. Once intubation is performed, the ratio of chest compressions to ventilation breathsshould be desynchronised. Ventilation should be at a rate of 10 breaths per minute with continuouschest compressions at 100 –120 per minute. Because chest compressions are not as effective after
20 weeks of gestation, there should be early recourse to delivery of the fetus and placenta if CPR is noteffective.
24In woman with a very high BMI chest compressions can be performed over the head of the
woman if there is sub-optimal rescuer positioning.73Evidence
level 2 ++
Ideally, early vascular access will be obtained with wide-bore intravenous cannulae inserted above the level of the
diaphragm. This allows the administration of ﬂuids to not be affected by aortocaval compression. If peripheral venousaccess is difﬁcult, there should be early consideration of central venous access, intraosseous access
74or venous
cutdown to aid volume replacement.
Haemorrhage is the most common cause of maternal collapse, and is a consequence of other causes of collapse.
There must be a high index of suspicion for bleeding and awareness of the limitations of maternal clinical signs.Caution must be exercised in the clinical context of severe pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, where ﬂuid overload cancontribute to poor outcome. In the case where signiﬁcant haemorrhage, and pre-eclampsia or eclampsia exist,careful ﬂuid management is essential.
Very occasionally, ultrasound by a skilled operator can assist in the diagnosis of free ﬂuid associated with
intra-abdominal bleeding, although laparotomy should not be delayed if the ﬁndings are negative and/orthe index of suspicion is high.
75–78This, however, should not interfere with the resuscitation process.Evidence
level 2 +
If deﬁbrillation is required, the same settings should be used as in the nonpregnant adult, as there is no
change in thoracic impedance.79Adhesive deﬁbrillator pads are preferable to deﬁbrillator paddles, and
the left deﬁbrillation pad should be applied lateral to the left breast. If the woman’s breasts are large orengorged, deﬁbrillator pads may need to be placed on the anterior and posterior precordium to optimisedeﬁbrillation energy transfer.
72The energy from the deﬁbrillation shock is directed across the heart and
there is no evidence that shocks from a direct current deﬁbrillator have an adverse effect on the fetus.Uterine monitors should be removed before shock delivery.Evidence
level 2 ++
4.4.6. Drugs
There should be no alteration in algorithm drugs or doses used in the Resuscitation Council
(UK) protocols.P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e31 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.4.7. Other considerations
Common, reversible causes of maternal cardiopulmonary arrest should be considered
throughout the resuscitation process.D
Resuscitation efforts should be continued until a decision is taken by the consultant obstetricianand consultant anaesthetist to discontinue resuscitation efforts. This decision should be made inconsensus with the cardiac arrest team.P
Throughout the resuscitation process, consideration should be given to the cause of the collapse, so that
ongoing therapy can be directed towards the speciﬁc cause to optimise outcome.24Evidence
level 4
4.5. When, where and how should perimortem caesarean section (PMCS) be performed?
In women over 20 weeks of gestation, if there is no response to correctly performed CPR
within 4 minutes of maternal collapse or if resuscitation is continued beyond this, then PMCSshould be undertaken to assist maternal resuscitation. Ideally, this should be achieved within5 minutes of the collapse.D
PMCS should not be delayed by moving the woman. It should be performed where maternalcollapse has occurred and resuscitation is taking place.P
The operator should use the incision, which will facilitate the most rapid access. This may be amidline vertical incision or a suprapubic transverse incision.P
A scalpel and umbilical cord clamps (or alternative ligatures) should be available on theresuscitation trolley in all areas where maternal collapse may occur, including the accident andemergency department.P
The concept of PMCS was introduced by Katz et al.80in 1986. This research group initially focused on infant
survival and found that 69% of infants survived when PMCS was performed within 5 minutes. However,when Katz et al. explored maternal outcomes, they found that hypoxic brain injury only occurred if PMCSwas performed after 6 minutes. Although the research basis for this recommendation is scarce, therationale for this timescale is that pregnant women become hypoxic more quickly than nonpregnantwomen, and irreversible brain damage can ensue within 4 –6 minutes. The term ‘resuscitative
hysterotomy’
81has been introduced by non-obstetric clinicians (for example, emergency medicine clinicians
and paramedics) in the trauma and emergency department environments, as the procedure is primarily usedto assist maternal resuscitation rather than to save the fetus. Obstetricians should be aware of thisterminology to ensure effective communication.
82The gravid uterus impairs venous return and thus reduces
cardiac output by approximately 60% secondary to aortocaval compression.83Delivery of the fetus and
placenta reduces oxygen consumption, improves venous return and cardiac output, facilitates chestcompressions and makes ventilation easier. It also allows for internal chest compressions by inserting the handthrough the open abdomen up to the diaphragm and compressing the posterior aspect of the heart against theEvidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e32 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
chest wall. This improves cardiac output beyond that achieved in closed chest compressions.84At less than
20 weeks of gestation there is no proven beneﬁt from delivery of the fetus and placenta. PMCS should beconsidered a resuscitative procedure, to be performed primarily in the interests of maternal survival.Evidence
level 4
Delivery within 5 minutes of maternal collapse improves the chances of survival for the baby. If maternal
resuscitation is continuing beyond 4 minutes of the collapse, delivery of the fetus and placenta should beperformed as soon as possible to aid this, even if the fetus is already dead. Case series have shown thatswift delivery of the baby improves maternal outcome even after 5 minutes have elapsed from maternalcollapse.
85There is, of course, the possibility that the outcome could be that the surviving child has
sustained damage in an attempt to preserve the life of the mother.Evidence
level 2 +
Time should not be wasted by moving the woman to an operating theatre; a PMCS can be performed
anywhere, with a scalpel being the only essential equipment required.86,87With no circulation, blood loss
is minimal, and no anaesthetic is required. If resuscitation is successful following birth, there should beprompt transfer to an appropriate environment at that point, as well as anaesthesia and sedation, tocontrol ensuing haemorrhage and complete the operation. The doctrine of ‘best interests of the patient’would apply to conduct of this procedure being carried out without consent.Evidence
level 4
In terms of the best incision to use, a midline abdominal incision and a classical uterine incision will give
the most rapid access. However, many will be unfamiliar with this approach and as delivery can beachieved rapidly with a transverse approach, the operator should use the approach they are mostcomfortable with.
86Manual uterine displacement can be stopped immediately prior to incision. If
resuscitation is successful, the uterus and abdomen should be closed in the usual way to control bloodloss and minimise the risk of infection. Where the resuscitation is not successful, the case should bediscussed with the coroner or procurator ﬁscal to determine whether a postmortem is required beforeany medical devices, such as lines and endotracheal tube are removed, as per the Royal College ofPathologists recommendations.
88Evidence
level 2 ++
To ensure there are no delays in executing a PMCS when indicated, the equipment necessary should be immediately
available on the resuscitation trolley. All that is required is a ﬁxed blade scalpel and two clamps for the umbilicalcord. In the absence of a speciﬁc tray, a scalpel alone will enable delivery of the fetus and placenta, and cutting of theumbilical cord, which can then be manually compressed until a clamp is found if the baby is alive.
4.6. What does the ongoing management consist of?
Senior staff with appropriate experience should be involved at an early stage.P
Transfer should be supervised by an adequately skilled team with appropriate equipment.P
Ongoing management depends on the underlying cause of the collapse and appropriate senior staff must be involved
early. It is essential the woman is transferred to an appropriate environment to ensure optimal ongoing care. Thiswould usually mean transfer to a high dependency or critical care area with appropriate staff and monitoringfacilities.
68Please see Appendix 6 for more information on post collapse management.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e33 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.6.1. Haemorrhage
In the case of maternal collapse secondary to antepartum haemorrhage, the fetus and placenta
should be delivered promptly to allow control of the haemorrhage.P
In the case of massive placental abruption, caesarean section may occasionally be indicatedeven if the fetus is dead to allow rapid control of the haemorrhage.P
Intravenous tranexamic acid signi ﬁcantly reduces mortality due to postpartum haemorrhage.A
The ongoing management of major antepartum haemorrhage is comprehensively covered in the RCOG
Green-top Guideline No. 63 Antepartum Haemorrhage .89
Management of collapse secondary to massive haemorrhage as a result of placenta praevia should be
managed in accordance with the RCOG Green-top Guideline Nos. 27a and 27b Placenta Praevia and
Placenta Praevia Accreta: Diagnosis and Management and Vasa Praevia: Diagnosis and Management .90,91
The ongoing management of major postpartum haemorrhage is comprehensively covered in the RCOG
Green-top Guideline No. 52 Postpartum Haemorrhage: Prevention and Management .92Evidence
level 4
A large randomised controlled study93including more than 20 000 women comparing 1 g intravenous
tranexamic acid with placebo in cases of postpartum haemorrhage demonstrated a signiﬁcant reductionin death from haemorrhage, particularly if given within 3 hours.Evidence
level 1 ++
4.6.2. Venous thromboembolism
Massive pulmonary embolism should be treated according to RCOG Green-top Guideline No.
37b Acute Management of Thrombosis and Embolism during Pregnancy and the Puerperium .D
The speciﬁc management of massive pulmonary embolism is covered in the RCOG Green-top Guideline
No. 37b Acute Management of Thrombosis and Embolism during Pregnancy and the Puerperium .94This
includes the use of thrombolysis.Evidence
level 4
4.6.3. Amniotic ﬂuid embolism (AFE)
The management of AFE is supportive rather than speci ﬁc, as there is no proven effective
therapy.P
Early involvement of senior experienced staff, including obstetricians, anaesthetists,haematologists and intensivists, is essential to optimise outcome.P
Coagulopathy needs early, aggressive treatment, including the use of fresh frozen plasma.P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e34 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Recombinant factor VII should only be used if coagulopathy cannot be corrected by massive
blood component replacement as it has been associated with poorer outcome in women withAFE.C
There is no proven effective therapy for the management of AFE. It is therefore supportive rather than
speciﬁc.3,95Evidence
level 2 ++
In addition to resuscitation and supportive measures, arrhythmias may develop and will require standard treatment.
Inotropic support is likely to be needed and measurement of cardiac output may help direct therapy and avoid ﬂuidoverload; ﬂuid overload will exacerbate pulmonary oedema and increase the risk of acute respiratory distresssyndrome. High ﬁlling pressures are indicative of a failing left ventricle.
In women with AFE, those treated with recombinant factor VII were found to have worse outcomes than in
those not treated with recombinant factor VII. Therefore, recombinant factor VII should only be used inpatients with AFE when haemorrhage cannot be stopped by massive blood component replacement.
29,96
If undelivered, delivery of the fetus and placenta should be performed as soon as possible. The incidence ofuterine atony is increased in this condition and contributes to the postpartum haemorrhage. This should bemanaged as described in the RCOG Green-top Guideline on postpartum haemorrhage.
92
Various other therapies have been tried, including steroids, heparin, plasmapheresis and haemoﬁltration,usually in single cases. As such, there is no robust evidence to support their use.
29Evidence
level 2 +
4.6.4. Cardiac disease
After successful resuscitation, cardiac cases should be managed by an expert cardiology team.P
After initial resuscitation, the ongoing management of cardiac disease is similar to that in the
nonpregnant state, although in many cases, delivery will be necessary to facilitate this.
Although thrombolysis can be associated with signiﬁcant bleeding from the placental site, it should be given
to women with acute coronary insufﬁciency, although caution should be exercised in the perioperativeperiod.
97If available, percutaneous angioplasty allows accurate diagnosis and deﬁnitive therapy.Evidence
level 4
4.6.5. Sepsis
Septic shock should be managed in accordance with the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines.D
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign has updated the management of sepsis and septic shock.98The speed and
appropriateness of therapy administered in the initial hours after severe sepsis develops are likely to inﬂuenceoutcome with early resuscitation improving survival rates. A multidisciplinary team approach is required, includingmidwives, consultant obstetricians, anaesthetists, haematologists, intensivists and microbiologists. The following ‘Care
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e35 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Bundle’ should be applied immediately or within 6 hours, and has been shown to signiﬁcantly improve survival
rates:99,100
1. Measure serum lactate.
2. Obtain blood cultures and culture swabs prior to antibiotic administration.3. Administer broad spectrum antibiotic(s) within the ﬁrst hour of recognition of severe sepsis and septic shock
according to local protocol.
4. In the event of hypotension and/or lactate more than 4 mmol/l:
a.Begin rapid administration of an initial minimum of 30 ml/kg of crystalloid to be completed within 3 hours ofdiagnosis.
b.once adequate volume replacement has been achieved, a vasopressor (noradrenaline, with vasopressin oradrenaline in addition, if required) and/or an inotrope (for example, dobutamine) may be used to maintainmean arterial pressure more than 65 mmHg.
Further management consists of:
5. In the event of hypotension despite ﬂuid resuscitation (septic shock) and/or lactate more than 4 mmol/l:
a.dynamic variables of ﬂuid status such as transoesophageal Doppler and lithium dilution cardiac output
(LiDCO) are preferred to static variables like central venous pressure or pulmonary artery occlusionpressure and the use of central venous pressure alone to guide ﬂuid resuscitation can no longer be justiﬁed
b.consider steroids if unresponsive to adequate ﬂuid resuscitation and vasopressor therapy.
c. Maintain oxygen saturation at more than 94% (88% –92% in women at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure)
with facial oxygen.94Consider transfusion if haemoglobin less than 70 g/l.
Ongoing management involves continued supportive therapy, removing the septic focus, administration of
blood products if required, and thromboprophylaxis.99Evidence
level 1 +
4.6.6. Drug overdose and toxicity
Many drug overdoses have treatments speciﬁc to the drug in question and appropriate help should be sought in the
management of such cases, including liaising with Toxbase and speaking to GP/local pharmacist. In obstetric practice,the two main drugs that can give rise to overdose or toxic problems are magnesium sulphate and local anaestheticagents.
4.6.6.1. Magnesium sulphate
The antidote to magnesium toxicity is 10 ml 10% calcium gluconate or 10 ml 10% calcium
chloride given by slow intravenous injection.P
Magnesium sulphate toxicity should be managed by slow intravenous injection of 10 ml 10% calcium gluconate or
10 ml 10% calcium chloride.101
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e36 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.6.6.2. Local anaesthetic agents
If local anaesthetic toxicity is suspected, stop injecting immediately.P
Lipid rescue should be used in cases of collapse secondary to local anaesthetic toxicity.C
Intralipid/C22620% should be available in all hospitals offering maternity services.P
Manage arrhythmias as usual, recognising that they may be very refractory to treatment.P
All cases of lipid rescue should be reported to NHS Improvement and the Lipid Rescue site.P
The mechanism by which lipids reverse local anesthetic cardiotoxicity may be increasing clearance from cardiac
tissue. This nonspeciﬁc, observed extraction of local anesthetics from aqueous plasma or cardiac tissues is termed a‘lipid sink.’ Another proposed mechanism is that lipids counteract local anesthetic inhibition of myocardial fatty acidoxidation, thereby enabling energy production and reversing cardiac depression.
Treatment of cardiac arrest with lipid emulsion
42,102consists of an intravenous bolus injection of
Intralipid/C226(Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Deerﬁeld, Illinois, USA) 20% 1.5 ml/kg over 1 min (100 ml
for a woman weighing 70 kg) followed by an intravenous infusion of Intralipid/C22620% 15 ml/kg/h
(1000 ml.h/C01for a woman weighing 70 kg). The bolus injection can be repeated twice at 5-minute
intervals if an adequate circulation has not been restored (a further two 100 ml boluses at 5-minuteintervals for a woman weighing 70 kg). After another 5 minutes, the infusion rate should be increased to30 ml/kg/hr if an adequate circulation has not been restored. Do not exceed a maximum cumulative doseof 12 ml/kg (840 ml for a woman weighing 70 kg). CPR should be continued throughout this processuntil an adequate circulation has been restored. This may take over 1 hour.
103Evidence
level 2 +
Prolonged resuscitation may be necessary, and it may be appropriate to consider other options. The ﬁrst-line
treatment should be lipid emulsion, but if the facilities are available, some may consider the use of cardiopulmonarybypass.
All cases of lipid rescue should be reported to NHS Improvement (www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk) and to the Lipid Rescue
site (www.lipidrescue.org). The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland provides guidance on themanagement of severe local anaesthetic toxicity, which can be used locally.
103
4.6.7. Eclampsia
Eclampsia should be managed in accordance with the NICE Clinical Guideline 107 Hypertension
in Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management .D
Guidance regarding the management of eclampsia can be found in the NICE guideline on hypertension in
pregnancy.104
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e37 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.6.8. Intracranial haemorrhage
Neuroradiologists and neurosurgeons should be involved in the care of pregnant women with
intracranial haemorrhage at the earliest opportunity.P
Expert neuroradiology is required to establish an accurate diagnosis, and management is the same as in
nonpregnant women, although delivery may be necessary to facilitate this.105Evidence
level 4
4.6.9. Anaphylaxis
In cases of anaphylaxis, all potential causative agents should be removed, and the ABCDE
approach to assessment and resuscitation followed.P
If the anaphylactic reaction occurs in the community, the woman should have basic life supportand be transferred to a hospital setting as quickly as possible, unless a suitably trainedhealthcare professional is present with appropriate equipment and drugs in which casedeﬁnitive resuscitation and treatment should be commenced. P
The treatment for anaphylaxis is 1:1000 adrenaline 500 micrograms (0.5 ml) intramuscularly.
This dose is for intramuscular use only.P
In cases of anaphylaxis, all potential causative agents should be removed, and the ABCDE approach
followed.44,106Evidence
level 4
Adrenaline treatment can be repeated after 5 minutes if there is no effect.44,106In experienced hands, 50
microgram bolus (0.5 ml of 1:10 000 solution) can be titrated intravenously. Adjuvant therapy consists ofchlorphenamine 10 mg and hydrocortisone 200 mg. Both are given intramuscularly or by slowintravenous injection.
44,106Evidence
level 4
4.7. What are the outcomes for mother and baby?
Outcomes for mothers and babies depend on the cause of collapse, gestational age and access
to emergency care, with survival rates being poorer if the collapse occurs out of hospital. Inmaternal cardiac arrest maternal survival rates of over 50% have been reported.C
Due to the lack of robust population data, it is not possible to be accurate regarding maternal and neonatal
outcomes of maternal collapse. There remains a signiﬁcant reporter bias in publications relating to the topic.The MBRRACE-UK Saving Lives and Improving Mothers’ Care report and UK Obstetric Surveillance Systemstudies provide robust data for maternal survival for individual conditions, such as AFE and sepsis. Thegeneral trend of reducing numbers of maternal deaths despite a plateau in the number of maternitiesdemonstrated by MBRRACE-UK suggests that survival from maternal collapse is improving.
2,3
A UKOSS prospective cohort study identiﬁed 66 cardiac arrests between July 2011 and June 2014 resultingin an incidence of 2.78 per 100 000 maternities.
39In all, 28 women died (case fatality rate 42%). Basic andEvidence
level 2 +
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e38 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
advanced life support were quickly delivered. Women who collapsed at home were more likely to die.
PMCS was performed on 49 women (11 of these performed in the emergency department). Time intervalsbetween collapse and PMCS was signiﬁcantly shorter in women who survived compared with those whodied (median interval, 3 minutes versus 12 minutes; P=0.001).
The latest systematic review to study the efﬁcacy of PMCS was published in 2012 by Einav et al.
87This
review identiﬁed a total of 80 relevant publications that reported the outcome of 94 women. In 31.7% ofidentiﬁed cases of PMCS, the procedure was found to be of beneﬁt for maternal or fetal survival. Noharm was found in any of the 94 women who underwent PMCS. When analysing maternal outcome,54.3% of women survived until hospital discharge and 42.6% of women survived with good to moderatelyimpaired neurological outcome. Although the study was unable to validate the need to deliver by5 minutes duration, it was able to demonstrate that maternal outcomes were more favourable ifperformed within 10 minutes of maternal cardiac arrest (OR 7.42; P<0.05). Neonatal survival was also
associated with a shorter mean cardiac arrest to delivery time (14[ /C611] minutes versus 22[ /C613] minutes).
Neonatal survival was only found in women who suffered cardiac arrest in hospital and there werereports of neonatal survival where delivery was performed 30 minutes after maternal cardiac arrest.
The MBRRACE-UK report 2016 described the neonatal outcomes of the 32 babies born by PMCS.
3Of
these babies, 19 were delivered by caesarean section after 32 weeks of gestation; nine of the 19 babiessurvived. Of the 13 babies born by PMCS at 32 weeks of gestation or less, only three survived.Therefore, the overall neonatal survival of babies delivered by PMCS was 38%. Survival was directlyassociated with advanced gestation and delivery within a suitable birthing or critical care setting.Evidence
level 2 +
There have been successful cases of somatic support after maternal brain death to facilitate neonatal
outcome.107The longest being from 15 weeks of gestation to birth at 32 weeks of gestation.108This
process is not without difﬁculties, both in medical terms and ethically,109and what is not known is how
many such cases have not been successful. In view of the complex nature of such cases, amultidisciplinary discussion including the family should be conducted in each case.Evidence
level 2 –
4.8. Who should be on the team?
In addition to the general arrest team, there should also be a senior midwife, an obstetrician
and an obstetric anaesthetist included in the team in cases of maternal collapse.P
The most senior obstetrician and senior anaesthetist should be called at the time of acardiopulmonary arrest call.P
The neonatal team should be called early if delivery is likely (antepartum collapse over22
+0weeks of gestation).P
Where the woman survives, a consultant intensivist should be involved as soon as possible.P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e39 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If the maternity unit is an integral part of a general hospital, the maternal CPR team should be the hospital
cardiopulmonary arrest team with the addition of:
/C15senior midwife
/C15most senior resident obstetrician (usually ST 3 –7)
/C15resident anaesthetist who has recognised skills in obstetric anaesthesia (usually ST 3 –7).
This will mean that the request needs to be speciﬁc with common terminology, so that the switchboard operators
know exactly who to call. While managing the arrest, there must be dialogue between the team leader, theobstetrician and the obstetric anaesthetist as to how best to manage the pregnant woman.
In stand-alone consultant-led maternity units or those that are geographically distant from the main general hospital,
the entire arrest team is often made up of staff from within the maternity unit. In this case, the team is usually madeup of senior midwifery staff, operating department practitioners, resident obstetric staff and the resident obstetricanaesthetist.
If a maternal collapse occurs in a stand-alone midwifery unit or homebirth environment, the midwifery staff should
provide life support and call a 999 ambulance to transfer the woman to the nearest appropriate environment.Maternity services that include a stand-alone midwifery unit should ensure that there is a written agreement with theambulance service conﬁrming the emergency status of a 999 call from the midwifery unit.
5. Clinical governance
5.1. Documentation
Accurate documentation is essential in all cases of maternal collapse, whether or not
resuscitation is successful.P
Poor documentation remains a problem in all aspects of medicine and can have potential clinical and
medicolegal consequences.110Contemporaneous note keeping is difﬁcult in a resuscitation situation,
unless someone is scribing. Those involved should then write full notes as soon as possible after theevent.Evidence
level 4
5.2. Incident reporting
All cases of maternal collapse should generate a clinical incident form and the care should be
reviewed through the clinical governance process.P
All cases of maternal death should be reported to MBRRACE-UK.D
Maternal collapse is a rare and potentially devastating event, and substandard care continues to be
highlighted.2–5In all cases of maternal collapse, care should be reviewed to ensure individual and
organisational learning. Staff and the family should be reassured when care has been optimal.Evidence
level 2 +
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e40 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In view of the signiﬁcant reduction in maternal mortality over the years, robust population-based data regarding maternal
collapse through a national reporting system would render valuable information about management and outcomes.
National reporting and scrutiny of maternal deaths continue to provide valuable information and learning,
as do conﬁdential enquiries into severe morbidity.2Evidence
level 2 +
5.3. Training
All generic life support training should consider the adaptation of CPR in pregnant women.P
All maternity staff should have annual formal multidisciplinary training in generic life support
and the management of maternal collapse.P
Life support training improves resuscitation skills.A
Small group multidisciplinary interactive practical training is recommended to improve themanagement of maternal collapse.C
All front-line staff must be aware of the adaptations for CPR in pregnancy. This includes paramedics who will deal
with collapse in the community setting and accident and emergency department personnel, as well as staff within a
maternity unit.
The RCOG, the Royal College of Midwives and MBRRACE-UK3recommend that all staff undergo annual
training in obstetric emergencies.Evidence
level 4
Multidisciplinary team training in small groups has been shown to improve outcomes in all medical
emergencies and there continues to be a wealth of data to demonstrate that this is particularly the case inobstetric emergencies.
111Interactive training has been shown to improve teamwork, communication and the
conﬁdence of individual clinicians to manage obstetric emergencies and increase the incidence of PMCS.112,113Evidence
level 1 +
The best method of training remains unclear, although there is evidence to support small group
interactive training.111Various courses exist73,114,115and have been evaluated well by those undertaking
them with individuals reporting an improved knowledge and conﬁdence after course attendance.116The
ideal frequency of training is not clear, but this should occur at least annually for all staff.117Evidence
level 2 –
5.4. Debrieﬁng
Debrie ﬁng is recommended for the woman, the family and the staff involved in the event.P
Maternal collapse can be associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (for the woman, her family and for
staff involved), postnatal depression and tocophobia. Debrieﬁng is an important part of holistic maternity careand should be offered by a competent professional to support the ongoing mental health of all concerned.
115Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e41 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
6. Recommendations for future research
/C15Investigate the effectiveness of CPR with manual uterine displacement versus maternal tilt.
/C15Determine the effectiveness of human factors and emergency simulation training for maternal collapse clinical
scenarios.
/C15Investigate the best diagnostic and management strategies for AFE.
7. Auditable topics
/C15Proportion of staff undergoing regular training in life support (100%).
/C15Proportion of staff undergoing regular training in maternal collapse (100%).
/C15Audit of the management of maternal collapse (100%).
/C15Compliance with incident reporting (100%).
/C15Achievement of PMCS within 5 minutes of collapse on hospital premises, where there is no response toresuscitation (100% in pregnancies over 20 weeks of gestation).
/C15Presence of a scalpel on resuscitation trolleys (100%).
8. Useful links and support groups
/C15UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS) [https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/ukoss].
/C15MBRRACE-UK: Mothers and Babies: Reducing Risk through Audits and Conﬁdential Enquiries across the UK[https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/mbrrace-uk].
/C15Advance Life Support in Obstetrics (ALSO) [http://www.also-uk.com/].
/C15Practical Obstetric Multi-Professional Training (PROMPT) [http://www.promptmaternity.org/].
/C15Managing Medical and Obstetric Emergencies and Trauma (mMOET), Advanced Life Support Group (ALSG)[http://www.alsg.org/home/].
/C15The Birth Trauma Association [http://www.birthtraumaassociation.org.uk/].
Disclosures of interest
JC, TAJ and JG have declared no conﬂicts of interest. Full disclosures of interest for the developers, GuidelinesCommittee and peer reviewers are available to view online as supporting information.
Funding
All those involved in the development of the Green-top Guidelines, including the Guidelines Committee, GuidelinesCommittee co-chairs, guideline developers, peer reviewers and other reviewers, are unpaid volunteers and receiveno direct funding for their involvement in producing the guideline. The only exception to this are the GuidelinesCommittee members who receive reimbursement for the expenses for attending the Guidelines Committeemeetings fro standard RCOG activities; this is standard as per RCOG rules.
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article.
Appendix S1. Maternal Collapse literature search strategy
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e42 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
References
1. Tunc /C223alp O, Hindin MJ, Souza JP, Chou D, Say L. The prevalence of
maternal near miss: a systematic review. BJOG 2012;119:653 –61.
2. Beckett VA, Knight M, Sharpe P. The CAPS Study: incidence,
management and outcomes of cardiac arrest in pregnancy in
the UK: a prospective, descriptive study. BJOG 2017;124:1374 –81.
3. Knight M, Nair M, Tuffnell D, Kenyon S, Shakespeare J,
Brocklehurst P, et al. editors. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers’ Care
–Surveillance of Maternal Deaths in the UK 2012 –14 and Lessons
Learned to Inform Maternity Care from the UK and Ireland Conﬁdential
Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009 –14. Oxford:
National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford; 2016.
4. Knight M, Kurinczuk JJ, Tufnell D, Brocklehurst P. The UK
Obstetric Surveillance System for rare disorders of pregnancy.
BJOG 2005;112:263 –5.
5. Healthcare Improvement Scotland. Scottish Conﬁdential Audit of
Severe Maternal Morbidity: reducing avoidable harm. 10thAnnual
Report Edinburgh: HIS 2014.
6. Manning E, O’Farrell IB, Corcoran P, de Foubert P, Drummond L,
McKernan J, et al. Severe Maternal Morbidity in Ireland Annual Report
2015 . Cork: National Perinatal Epidemiology Centre; 2017.
7. Kayem G, Kurinczuk J, Lewis G, Golightly S, Brocklehurst P, Knight
M. Risk factors for progression from severe maternal morbidity todeath: a national cohort study. PLoS ONE 2011;6:e29077.
8. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Epilepsy in
Pregnancy. Green-top Guideline No.68 . London: RCOG; 2016.
9. Conﬁdential Enquiry into Maternal and Child Health. Saving
Mothers’ Lives: Reviewing Maternal Deaths to Make Motherhood Safer
–2003 –2005. The Seventh Report of the Conﬁdential Enquiries into
Maternal Deaths in the United Kingdom . London: CEMACH; 2007.
10. Knaus WA, Zimmerman JE, Wagner DP, Draper EA,
Lawrence DE. APACHE-acute physiology and chronic health
evaluation: a physiologically based classiﬁcation system. Crit Care
Med 1981;9:591 –7.
11. Lee A, Bishop G, Hillman KM, Daffurn K. The medical
emergency team. Anaesth Intensive Care 1995;23:183 –6.
12. Morgan RJM, Williams F, Wright MM. An early warning scoring
system for detecting developing critical illness. Clin Int Care
1997;8:100 –1.
13. Kause J, Smith G, Prytherch D, Parr M, Flabouris A, Hillmak K;
Intensive Care Society (UK); Australian and New ZealandIntensive Care Society Clinical Trials Group. A comparison of
antecedents to cardiac arrests, deaths and emergency intensive
care admissions in Australia and New Zealand, and the UnitedKingdom –the ACADEMIA study. Resuscitation 2004;62:275 –82.
14. Watkinson PJ, Barber VS, Price JD, Hann A, Taressenko L,
Young JD. A randomised controlled trial of the effect of
continuous electronic physiological monitoring on the adverseevent rate in high risk medical and surgical patients. Anaesthesia
2006;61:1031 –9.
15. Jacques T, Harrison GA, McLaws ML, Kilborn G. Signs of critical
conditions and emergency responses (SOCCER): a model forpredicting adverse events in the inpatient setting. Resuscitation
2006;69:175 –83.
16. Stenhouse C, Coates S, Tivey M, Allsop P, Parker T. Prospective
evaluation of a modiﬁed early warning score to aid earlierdetection of patients developing critical illness on a general
surgical ward. Br J Anaesth 2000;84:663.
17. Goldhill DR, McNarry AF, Mandersloot G, McGinley A.
A physiologically-based early warning score for ward patients:the association between score and outcome. Anaesthesia
2005;60:547 –53.18. Subbe CP, Slater A, Menon D, Gemmell L. ASSIST: a screening
tool for critically ill patients on general medical wards. Intensive
Care Med 2002;28:S21.
19. Gao H, McDonnell A, Harrison DA, Moore T, Adam S, Daly K,
et al. Systematic review and evaluation of physiological track and
trigger warning systems for identifying at-risk patients on theward. Intensive Care Med 2007;33:667 –79.
20. Hillman K, Chen J, Cretikos M, Bellomo R, Brown D, Doig G,
et al. MERIT study investigators. Introduction of the medical
emergency team (MET) system: a cluster-randomised controlledtrial. Lancet 2005;365:2091 –7.
21. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Acutely Ill
Patients in Hospital: Recognition of and Response to Acute Illness in
Adults in Hospital
. Clinical Guideline No. 50. London: NICE; 2007.
22. Gopalan PD, Muckhart DJ. The critically ill obstetric patient:
what’s the score? Int J Obstet Anesth 2004;13:144 –5.
23. Royal College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score
(NEWS) 2. Standardising the Assessment of Acute-illness Severity in
the NHS . Updated report of a working party. London: RCP; 2017.
24. Resuscitation Council (UK). Adult advanced life support. [https://
www.resus.org.uk/resuscitation-guidelines/adult-advanced-life-support/#reversible]. Accessed 13 January 2019.
25. Selo-Ojeme DO, Welch CC. Review: spontaneous rupture of
splenic artery aneurysm in pregnancy. Eur J Obs Gyne Reprod Biol
2003;109:124 –7.
26. Glover P. Blood losses at delivery: how accurate is your
estimation? Aust J Midwifery 2003;16:21 –4.
27. Toledo P, McCarthy RJ, Hewlett BJ, Fitzgerald PC, Wong CA.
The accuracy of blood loss estimation after simulated vaginaldelivery. Anaesth Analg 2007;105:1736 –40.
28. Knight M, UKOSS. Antenatal pulmonary embolism: risk factors,
management and outcomes. BJOG 2008;115:453 –61.
29. Fitzpatrick KE, Tuffnell D, Kurinczuk JJ, Knight M. Incidence, risk
factors, management and outcomes of amniotic-ﬂuid embolism: a
population-based cohort and nested case-control study. BJOG
2016;123:100 –9.
30. Morgan M. Amniotic ﬂuid embolism. Anaesthesia 1979;4:20 –32.
31. Tufnell DJ. United Kingdom amniotic ﬂuid embolism register.
BJOG 2005;112:1625 –9.
32. Clark SL, Hankins GD, Dudley DA, Dildy GA, Porter TF.
Amniotic ﬂuid embolism: analysis of the national registry. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1158 –67.
33. Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R. Amniotic ﬂuid embolism: an
evidence-based review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2009;201:445.e1–e13.
34. Gei AF, Vadhera RB, Hankins GD. Embolism during pregnancy:
thrombus, air and amniotic ﬂuid. Anaesthiol Clin North Am
2003;21:165 –82.
35. Kobayashi H. Amniotic ﬂuid embolism: anaphylactic reactions
with idiosyncratic adverse response. Obstet Gynecol Surv
2015;70:511 –7.
36. Houze dlA, Petit S, Devisme L, Deruelle P. Can the presence of
amniotic emboli in the myometrial vasculature be interpreted as asign of amniotic ﬂuid embolism? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2012:206:S54.
37. Legrand M, Rossignol M, Dreux S, Luton D, Ventr /C19e C, Barranger
E, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of insulin-like growth factor bindingprotein-1 for amniotic ﬂuid embolism. Crit Care Med
2012;40:2059 –63.
38. Malhotra S, Yentis SM. Reports on Conﬁdential Enquiries into
Maternal Deaths: management strategies based on trends inmaternal cardiac deaths over 30 years. Int J Obstet Anesth
2006;15:223 –6.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e43 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
39. Vause S, Clarke B, Tower CL, Hay C, Knight M. Pregnancy
outcomes in women with mechanical prosthetic heart valves: a
prospective descriptive population based study using the UnitedKingdom Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS) data collectionsystem. BJOG 2017;124:1411 –9.
40. Levy MM, Fink MP, Marshall JC, Abraham E, Angus D, Cook D, et al.
2001 SCCM/ESICM/ACCP/ATS/SIS international sepsis deﬁnitionsconference. Intensive Care Med 2003;29:530 –8.
41. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Bacterial Sepsis
in Pregnancy. Green-top Guideline No.64a . London: RCOG; 2012.
42. Foxall G, McCahon R, Lamb J, Hardman JG, Bedforth NM.
Levobupivacaine-induced seizures and cardiovascular collapse
treated with Intralipid
/C226.Anaesthesia 2007;62:516 –8.
43. Johansson SGO, Bieber T, Dahl R, Friedmjann PS, Lanier BQ,
Lockey RF, et al. Revised nomenclature for allergy for global use:Report of the Nomenclature Review Committee of the World
Allergy Organisation. J Allerg Clin Immunol 2004;113:832 –6.
44. Royal College of Anaesthetists. Anaesthesia, surgery and
life-threatening allergic reactions. 6
thNational Audit Project:
Perioperative Anaphylaxis. May 2018. [www.nationalauditprojec
ts.org.uk/NAP6home]
45. The Regulation and Quality Improvement Authority. Guideline
for the prevention, diagnosis and management of hyponatraemia
in labour and the immediate postpartum period. Guidelines and
audit implementation network. 2017
46. Liberatore H, Pistelli R, Patalano F, Moneta E, Incalzi RA,
Ciappi G. Respiratory function during pregnancy. Respiration
1984;46:145 –50.
47. Whitty JE. Maternal cardiac arrest in pregnancy. Clin Obstet
Gynecol 2002;45:377 –92.
48. Chesnutt AN. Physiology of normal pregnancy. Crit Care Clin
2004;20:609 –15.
49. Sanders AB, Meislin HW, Ewy GA. The physiology of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. JAMA 1984;252:3283 –6.
50. Guidelines 2000 for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and
Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Part 3: adult basic life support.Circulation 2000;102 (Suppl 1);22 –59.
51. Donegan JH. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation . Springﬁeld, IL: Charles
C Thomas Ltd.; 1982.
52. Kerr MG. The mechanical effects of the gravid uterus in late
pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 1965;2:513 –29.
53. Prowse CM, Gaensler EA. Respiratory and acid-base changes
during pregnancy. Anesthesiology 1965;26:381 –92.
54. Skatrud JB, Dempsey JA, Kaiser DG. Ventilatory response to
medroxyprogesterone acetate in normal subjects: time course
and mechanism. J Appl Physiol 1978;44:393 –4.
55. Mushambi MC, Kinsella SM, Popat M, Swales H, Ramaswamy KK,
Winton AL, et al. Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association andDifﬁcult Airway Society guidelines for the management of difﬁcult
and failed tracheal intubation in obstetrics. Anaesthesia
2015;70:1286 –306.
56. Kinsella SM, Winton AL, Mushambi MC, Ramaswamy K, Swales H,
Quinn AC, et al. Failed tracheal intubation during obstetric general
anaesthesia: a literature review. Int J Obstet Anesth 2015;24:
356–74.
57. Mendelsson CL. The aspiration of stomach contents into the
lungs during obstetric anaesthesia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1946;52:191 –205.
58. Kavle JA, Stoltzfus RJ, Witter F, Tielsch JM, Khalfan SS,
Caulﬁeld LE. Association between anaemia during pregnancy and
blood loss at and after delivery among women with vaginal births
in Pemba Island, Zanzibar, Tanzania. J Health Popul Nutr
2008;26:232 –40.59. Monsieurs KG, Nolan JP, Bossaert LL, Greif R, Maconochie IK,
Nikolaou NI, et al. European Resuscitation Council Guidelines for
Resuscitation 2015: Section 1. Executive summary. Resuscitation
2015;95:1 –80.
60. Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. Clinical
Practice Guidelines 2017 Pocket Book . London, UK: Association of
Ambulance Chief Executives and Joint Royal Colleges AmbulanceLiaison Committee. 2017.
61. Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. Emergency
Birth in the Community. Association of Ambulance Chief Executives and
Joint. London, UK: Association of Ambulance Chief Executives and
Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee; 2018.
62. Jeejeebhoy FM, Morrison LJ. Maternal cardiac arrest: a
practical and comprehensive review. Emerg Med Int 2013;
2013:274814.
63. Neumar RW, Shuster M, Callaway CW, Gent LM, Atkins DL,
Bhanji F, et al. Cardiac arrest in special situations: 2015
American Heart Association Guidelines for CardiopulmonaryResuscitation and Emergency 3 Cardiovascular Care. Circulation
2015;132(18 Suppl 2):S315 –67.
64. Kundra P, Khanna S, Habeebullah S, Ravishankar M. Manual
displacement of the uterus during Caesarean section. Anaesthesia
2007;62:460 –5.
65. Jeejeebhoy FM, Zelop CM, Windrim R, Carvalho JCA, Dorian P,
Morrison LJ. Management of cardiac arrest in pregnancy: asystematic review. Resuscitation 2011;82:801 –9.
66. Kinsella SM. Lateral tilt for pregnant women: why 15 degrees?
Anaesthesia 2003;58:835 –6.
67. Kim S, You JS, Lee HS, Lee JH, Park YS, Chung SP, et al. Quality
of chest compressions performed by inexperienced rescuers in
simulated cardiac arrest associated with pregnancy. Resuscitation
2013;84:98 –102.
68. Rees GA, Willis BA. Resuscitation in late pregnancy. Anaesthesia
1988;43:347 –9.
69. Mhyre JM, Healy D. The unanticipated difﬁcult intubation in
obstetrics. Aneth Analg 2011;112:648 –52.
70. Obstetric Anaesthetists Association. OAA DAS Obstetric Airway
Guidelines 2015: PDF of 2015 Guideline Algorithms . London:OAA; 2015.
71. Nolan JP, Soar J, Zideman DA, Biarent D, Bossaert LL, Deakin C,
et al. European Resuscitation Council Guidelines for Resuscitation2010 Section 1. Executive summary. Resuscitation 2010;81:1219 –76.
72. Paterson-Brown S, Howell C. The MOET Course Manual:
Managing Obstetric Emergencies and Trauma , 2nd ed. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 2014.
73. Nightingale C, Cousins J, Fox W, Gabbott D, Grifﬁths R,
Kennedy N, et al. Guidelines on Managing the Obese Surgical Patient .
London, UK: Joint document from AAGBI and SOBA 2015.
74. Luck RP, Haines C, Mull CC. Intraosseous access. J Emerg Med
2010;39:468 –75.
75. Brown MA, Sirlin CB, Farahmand N, Hoyt DB, Casola G.
Screening sonography in pregnant patients with blunt abdominaltrauma. J Ultrasound Med 2005;24: 175 –81; quiz 183 –4.
76. Richards JR, Ormsby EL, Romo MV, Gillen MA, McGahan JP.
Bluntabdominal injury in the pregnant patient: detection with US.
Radiology 2004;233:463 –70.
77. Goodwin H, Holmes JF, Wisner DH. Abdominal ultrasound
examination in pregnant blunt trauma patients. J Trauma
2001;50:689 –93.
78. Lazebnik N, Lazebnik RS. The role of ultrasound in pregnancy
related emergencies. Radiol Clin North Am 2004;42:315 –
27.
79. Nanson J, Elcock D, Williams M, Deakin CD. Do physiological
changes in pregnancy change deﬁbrillation energy requirements?Br J Anaesth 2001;87:327 –9.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e44 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
80. Katz VL, Dotters DJ, Droegemueller W. Perimortem cesarean
delivery. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:571 –6.
81. Lipman SS, Cohen S, Mhyre J, Carvalho B, Einav S, Arafeh J, et al.
Challenging the 4- to 5-minute rule: from perimortem cesarean toresuscitative hysterotomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2016 Jul;215:
129–31.
82. Chu J, Hinshaw K, Paterson-Brown S, Johnston T, Matthews M,
Webb J, et al. Perimortem caesarean section –why, when and
how. Obstet Gynaecol 2018 Jul;20(3):151 –8.
83. Awe RJ, Nicotra MNT, Viles R. Arterial oxygenation and
alveolar-arterial gradients in term pregnancy. Obs Gynecol
1979;53:182 –6.
84. Bozcar ME, Howard MA, Rivers EP, Martin GB, Horst HM,
Lewandowski C, et al. A technique revisited: hemodynamiccomparison of closed- and open -chest cardiac massage during
human cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Crit Care Med 1995;23:
498–505.
85. Katz V, Balderston K, DeFreest M. Perimortem cesarean
delivery: Were our assumptions correct? Am J Obstet Gynecol
2005;192:1916 –21.
86. Drukker L, Hants Y, Sharon E, Sela HY, Grisaru-Granovsky S.
Perimortem cesarean section for maternal and fetal salvage: concisereview and protocol. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2014;93:965 –72.
87. Einav S, Kaufman N, Sela HY. Maternal cardiac arrest and
perimortem caesarean delivery: evidence or expert-based?Resuscitation 2012;83:1191 –2000.
88. Royal College of Pathologists. Guidelines on Autopsy Practice. Scenario
5: Maternal Death . London: Royal College of Pathologists; 2010.
89. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Antepartum
Haemorrhage, Prevention and Management. Green-top Guideline No.
63. London: RCOG; 2011.
90. Jauniaux ERM, Alﬁrevic Z, Bhide AG, Belfort MA, Burton GJ,
Collins SL, et al. Placenta praevia and placenta accreta: diagnosisand management. Green-top Guideline No. 27a. BJOG 2019;126:
e1–48.
91. Jauniaux ERM, Alﬁrevic Z, Bh ide AG, Belfort MA, Burton GJ,
Collins SL, et al. Placenta praevia a nd placenta accreta: diagnosis and
management. Green-top Guideline No. 27a. BJOG 2019;126:e49 –61.
92. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Postpartum
Haemorrhage, Prevention and Management. Green-top GuidelineNo.52 . London: RCOG; 2016.
93. WOMAN Trial Collaborators. Effect of early tranexamic acid
administration on mortality, hysterectomy, and other morbidities
in women with post-partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): aninternational, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet 2017;389:2105 –16.
94. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Thrombosis and
Embolism during Pregnancy and the Puerperium, the AcuteManagement of Green-top Guideline No. 37b . London: RCOG 2015.
95. Pacheco LD, Saade G, Hankins GD, Clark, SL. Amniotic ﬂuid
embolism: diagnosis and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2016;215:B16 –24.
96. Leighton BL, Wall MH, Lockhart EM, Phillips LE, Zatta AJ. Use of
recombinant factor VIIa in patients with amniotic ﬂuid embolism:a systematic review of case reports. Anesthesiology 2011;115:1201 –8.
97. Steer PJ, Gatzoulis MA, Baker P editors. Heart Disease and
Pregnancy . London: Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists Press; 2006.
98. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, Levy MM, Antonelli M,
Ferrer R, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: international guidelines
for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care
Med 2017;43:304.99. Levy MM, Dellinger RP, Townsend SR, Lind-Zwirble WT,
Marshall JC, Bion J, et al. The Surviving Sepsis Campaign: results
of an international guideline based performance improvementprogram targeting severe sepsis. Crit Care Med 2010;38:1 –8.
100. Gao F, Melody T, Daniels R, Giles S, Fox S. The impact of
compliance with 6 –hour and 24 –hour sepsis bundles on hospital
mortality in patients with severe sepsis: a prospectiveobservational study. Crit Care 2005;9:764 –70.
101. Omu AE, Al-Harmi J, Vedi HL, Mlechkova L, Sayed AF, Al-Ragum NS.
Magnesium sulphate therapy in women with pre-eclampsia andeclampsia in Kuwait. Med Princ Pract 2008;17:227 –32.
102. Patient N. Safety Agency. Safer Practice with Epidural Injections and
Infusions. Patient Safety Alert 21 . London: National Patient Safety
Agency 2007.
103. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland.
Management of Severe Local Anaesthetic Toxicity. Safety Guideline .
London: AAGBI; 2010. [https://www.aagbi.org/sites/default/ﬁles/
la_toxicity_2010_0.pdf]. Accessed 13 January 2019.
104. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Hypertension in
Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management . NICE Clinical Guideline
133. Manchester: NICE; 2019.
105. Feske SK, Singhal AB. Cerebrovascular disorders complicating
pregnancy. Continuum (Minneap Minn) 2014;20:80 –99.
106. Harper NJ, Dixon T, Dugu /C19e P, Edgar DM, Fay A, Gooi HC, et al.
Working Party of the Association of Anaesthetists of GreatBritain and Ireland. Suspected anaphylactic reactions associatedwith anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 2009;64:199 –211.
107. Powner DJ, Bernstein IM. Extended somatic support for pregnant
women after brain death. Crit Care Med 2003;31:1241 –9.
108. Bernstein IM, Watson M, Simmons GM, Catalano PM, Davis G,
Collins R. Maternal brain death and prolonged fetal survival.
Obstet Gynecol 1989;74:434 –7.
109. Mallampalli A, Guy E. Cardiac arrest in pregnancy and somatic
support after brain death. Crit Care Med 2005;33(Suppl):
S325 –31.
110. Penney G, Brace V. Near miss audit in obstetrics. Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol 2007;19:145 –50.
111. Meri /C19en AE, van de Ven J, Mol BW, Houterman S, Oei SG.
Multidisciplinary team training in a simulation setting for acute
obstetric emergencies: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 2010
May;115:1021 –31.
112. Shoushtarian M, Barnett M, McMahon F, Ferris J. Impact of
introducing practical obstetric multi-professional training
(PROMPT) into maternity units in Victoria, Australia. BJOG
2014;121:1710 –8.
113. Dijkman A, Huisman CMA, Smit M, Schutte JM, Zwart JJ,
van Roosmalen JJ, et al. Cardiac arrest in pregnancy: increasinguse of perimortem caesarean section due to emergency skillstraining ? BJOG 2010;117:282 –7.
114. American Academy of Family. Advanced Life Support in
Obstetrics (ALSO
/C226). [http://www.aafp.org/cme/programs/also.
html]. Accessed 13 January 2019.
115. PROMPT Maternity Foundation. Practical obstetric multiprofessional
training. [www.promptmaternity. org]. Accessed 13 January 2019.
116. Reynolds A, Ayres-de-Campos D, Lobo M. Self-perceived impact
of simulation-based training on the management of real-life
obstetrical emergencies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
2011;159:72 –6.
117. Calvert KL, McGurgan PM, Debenham EM, Gratwick FJ,
Maouris P. Emergency obstetric simulation training: how do we
know where we are going, if we don’t know where we have
been? Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2013;53:509 –16.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e45 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix 1: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in making decisions
about appropriate treatment for speciﬁc conditions’. Each guideline is systematically developed using a standardised
methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical Governance Advice No.1 Development of RCOG
Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development). These
recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must beevaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variationsin local populations. It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines intoroutine practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations formulated in asimilar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
Classi ﬁcation of evidence levels Grades of Recommendation
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trials orrandomised controlled trials with a very lowrisk of bias
AAt least one meta-analysis, systematic reviewsor RCT rated as 1 ++, and directly applicable
to the target population; or a systematicreview of RCTs or a body of evidenceconsisting principally of studies rated as 1 +,
directly applicable to the target populationand demonstrating overall consistency of
results1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trials orrandomised controlled trials with a low risk ofbias
BA body of evidence including studies rated as2++directly applicable to the target
population, and demonstrating overall
consistency of results; orExtrapolated evidence
from studies rated as 1 ++or 1 +1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of
randomised controlled trials or randomisedcontrolled trials with a high risk of bias
CA body of evidence including studies rated as2+directly applicable to the target population,
and demonstrating overall consistency ofresults; orExtrapolated evidence from studies
rated as 2 ++2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case –
control or cohort studies or high-qualitycase –
control or cohort studies with a very low riskof confounding, bias or chance and ahighprobability that the relationship is causal
DEvidence level 3 or 4; orExtrapolated evidencefrom studies rated as 2 +2+ Well-conducted case –control or cohort
studies with a low risk of confounding, biasor chanceand a moderate probability that therelationship is causalGood Practice Points
PRecommended best practice based on the
clinical experience of the guidelinedevelopment group2– Case –control or cohort studies with a high
risk of confounding, bias or chance and
asigni ﬁcant risk that the relationship is not
causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case
series
4 Expert opinion
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e46 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix 2: Causes of maternal collapse
Reversible cause Cause in pregnancy
4H’s Hypovolaemia Bleeding (obstetric/other; may be concealed) or relative hypovolaemia of
dense spinal block, septic or neurogenic block
Hypoxia Pregnant women can become hypoxic more quickly.
Cardiac events –peripartum cardiomyopathy, myocardial infarction, aortic
dissection, large vessel aneurysms
Hypo/hyperkalaemia andHyponatraemiaHypo and hyperkalaemia are no more likely. Hyponatraemia may be caused
by oxytocin use
Hypothermia No more likely
4T’s Thromboembolism Amniotic ﬂuid embolus, pulmonary embolus, air embolus, myocardial
infarction
Toxicity Local anaesthetic, magnesium, otherTension pneumothorax Following trauma/suicide attempts
Tamponade Following trauma/suicide attempts
Eclampsia and pre-eclampsia Includes intracranial haemorrhage
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e47 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix 3: Physiological and physical changes in pregnancy
System Changes in pregnancy Impact on resuscitation
Cardiovascular system
Plasma Volume Increased by up to 50% Dilutional anaemia
Reduced oxygen carrying capacity
Heart rate Increased by 15 –20 bpm Increased CPR circulation demands
Cardiac output Increased by 40% Increased CPR circulation demands
Signiﬁcantly reduced by pressure
of gravid uterus on IVC
Uterine bloodﬂow10% of cardiac output at term Potential for rapid massive haemorrhage
Systemic
vascularresistanceDecreased Sequesters blood during CPR
Arterial blood
pressureDecreased by 10 –15 mmHg Decreased reserve
Venous return Decreased by pressure of gravid
uterus on IVCIncreased CPR circulation demands
Decreased reserve
Respiratory systemRespiratory rate Increased Decreased buffering capacity, acidosis more likelyOxygenconsumptionIncreased by 20% Hypoxia develops more quickly
Residual
capacityDecreased by 25% Hypoxia develops more quickly when apnoeic
Arterial pCO
2 Decreased Decreased buffering capacity, acidosis more likely
LaryngealoedemaIncreased Difﬁcult intubation
Other changes
Gastric motility Decreased Increased risk of aspirationLoweroesophagealsphincterRelaxed Increased risk of aspiration
Uterus Enlarged Diaphragmatic splinting reduces residual capacity and makes
ventilation more difﬁcultAortocaval compression causes supine hypotension,reduces venous return and signiﬁcantly impairs CPR
Weight Increases Large breasts may interfere with intubation, makes
ventilation more difﬁcult
CPR cardiopulmonary resuscitation; IVC inferior venous cava.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e48 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix 4: Maternal collapse algorithm
Safe environment
S/g415mulate and assess responseEnsure manual uterine displa cement or le/g332 lateral /g415lt
Call for help
Assess breathing, pulse, BP, fetal heart rateRegularly assess using MEWS
Iden/g415fy cause of collapse and direct treatment
Shout for help or call resuscita/g415on team
Open airway
Assess for breathing for up to 10 seconds
If not breathing, start CPR
CPR
30 chest compressions – rate 100/minute, 
depress 5-6cm at centre of chest
2 ven/g415la/g415ons
Un/g415l deﬁbrillator/monitor a/g425ached
A/g425ach deﬁbrillator. Assess rhythm*Check for obstruc/g415on 
Head /g415lt Chin li/g332
Look for chest movements 
Listen for breath sounds
Feel for air
Mouth to mouth only if no 
airway adjuncts available. 
2 a/g425empts at ven/g415la/g415on to 
minimise interrup/g415on to 
chest compressions
VF/Pulseless VT 
1 shock
200 J biphasic
360 J monophasic
CPR 30:2 for 2 minutesAsystole and PEA
Immediate CPR 30:2 for 2 minutes
During CPR 
-establish IV access
-high ﬂow oxygen-intubate and then give con/g415nuous chest 
compressions
-correct reversible causes
-given adrenaline every 3-5 minutes
-consider amiodarone, atropine, magnesium
4 Ts
Thromboembolism (pulmonary and amnio/g415c ﬂuid
Toxic and therapeu/g415c (local anaesthe/g415c)
Cardiac tamponade
Tension pneumothoraxCorrect reversible causes (THE)
4 Hs
Hypoxia
Hypovolaemia
Hyper/hypokalaemia (metabolic)
HypothermiaE
EclampsiaYES
NO
Breathing normally:Turn into recover posi/g415on
Check help is on the way
Assess breathing, pulse, BP, fetal heart rate
Regularly assess using MEWS
Iden/g415fy cause of collapse and direct treatment
Ensure manual uterine displacement or le/g332 lateral /g415lt
*Could be with automate d external deﬁbrillator
Manual uterine displacement (or le/g332 lateral /g415lt)
Empty the uterus if approx. 20 weeks onwards. Aim for uterine 
evacua/g415on within 5 minutes
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e49 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix 5: Recommended airway equipment
Taken from the Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association and Difﬁcult Airway Society [http://www.oaa-anaes.ac.uk/assets/
_managed/cms/ﬁles/03102015_Equipment_List%20final.docx].Routine airway equipment 
Face masks 
Oropharyngeal airways size 2, 3 and 4 
Endotracheal tubes in a range of sizes Laryngoscopes – Macintosh blades (sizes 3 and 4) 
two working short handles 
McCoy laryngoscopes (si zes 3 and 4 blades) 
videolaryngoscopes (at least one type) 
Tracheal tube introducer – such as a bougie 
Malleable stylet 
Magill forceps 
Nasal cannula and oxygen tubing 
Equipment for ramping/pillows 
Monitoring equipment includin g capnography (s ee AAGBI guidelines- Recommendations for 
standards of monitoring during anaesthesia and recovery. 4
th edition, 2007)
Recommended equipment for the management of unanticipated difficult intubation 
Endotracheal tubes – range of reinforced tubes, microlaryngeal tubes sizes 5.0 and 6.0 mm, LMA-
Fastrach™ tracheal tubes 
Supraglottic airway devices (SAD) to include cLMA, and a second generation SAD (e.g. LMA 
Proseal™, LMA Supreme™ or I-gel®) - sizes 3, 4 and 5 
LMA cuff pressure manometer 
Fibreoptic scope, camera and monitor 
Aintree® intubating catheter 
Surgical cricothyroidotomy equipment for the ‘can’t intubate can’t oxygenate’ situation: 
Scalpel with No. 10 blade 
Bougie 
Size 6.0 endotracheal tube 
Tracheal hook 
Forceps or tracheal dilator 
Equipment for awake fibreoptic intubation: 
Equipment to deliver topical atomised local an aesthetic to the upper airway such as the 
Mucosal Atomization Device (MAD®) or Mackenzie technique set 
Berman airway 
Epidural catheter 
Local anesthetic for topical anaest hesia (4% lidocaine, Instillagel®) 
Vasoconstrictors for the nose – phenylephrine/lidocaine (Co-phenylcaine®) or Xylometazoline 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e50 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix 6: Post collapse management
Pa/g415ent alive?YES NO
Con/g415nue treatment of 
underlying cause of collapse
Transfer to appropriate 
clinical care se/g427ng (high 
dependency or cri/g415cal care 
unit)Inform coroner/procurator 
ﬁscal
Inform MBRRACE
Ensure accurate 
documenta/g415on
Review case 
through clinical 
governance 
processOﬀer staﬀ 
support and 
debrieﬁngDebrief pa/g415ent 
(if alive) and 
rela/g415ves
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e51 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by: Dr J Chu PhD
MRCOG, Birmingham; Dr TA Johnston MD FRCOG, Birmingham Women’s and Children’s NHS
Foundation Trust; Dr J Geoghegan FRCA, Department of Anaesthetics, Queen Elizabeth Hospital,
Birmingham
and peer reviewed by: Royal College of Anaesthetists, London; RCOG Women’s Network, London; Ms N Lucas, London;
Ms C Bagness, London; Ms A Mansﬁeld, London; Dr DA Gabbott, Gloucester; Mr P Steer FRCOG, London; Ms K Fitzpatrick,London; Ms L Vincent, Oxford; Mr D Fraser FRCOG, Norwich; Ms M Jokinen, London; Mr D Tuffnell FRCOG, Bradford;
Mrs K Dent FRCOG, Derby; Dr K Calvert, Perth and Dr VA Beckett FRCOG, Bradford.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr B Kumar FRCOG, Chester and Dr A Macleod FRCOG, Edinburgh
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr MA Ledingham MRCOG, Glasgow
1; Dr B Magowan FRCOG, Melrose1;
and Dr AJ Thomson MRCOG, Paisley2.
1co-chairs from June 20182until May 2018.
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conﬂicts of interest. A statement summarising
any conﬂicts of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-
services/guidelines/gtg56.
The ﬁnal version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.
The guideline will be considered for update 3 years after publication, with an intermediate
assessment of the need to update 2 years after publication.
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice.
They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration byobstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular
clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented
by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to be
prescriptive directions deﬁning a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols orguidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 56 e52 of e52 ª2019 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2020, 5, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.15995 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License