Antenatal corticosteroids given within seven days prior to preterm birth reduce perinatal and neonatal death and respiratory distress syndrome. For women undergoing planned caesarean birth between 37+0 and 38+6 weeks, an informed discussion should take place about the potential risks and benefits of corticosteroids. Corticosteroids should be offered to women between 24+0 and 34+6 weeks' gestation in whom imminent preterm birth is anticipated. Women with twins and triplets should also be offered corticosteroids. Birth should not be delayed for corticosteroids if it impacts the health of the woman or baby. Antenatal corticosteroids should be offered to women with preterm prelabour rupture of membranes. Corticosteroids reduce neonatal death when given within 48 hours prior to birth, and benefits are still seen if given within 24 hours of birth.

Antenatal corticosteroids should be considered for women at risk of preterm birth between 35+0 to 36+6 weeks gestation. Steroids have short-term respiratory benefits for the neonate but may increase the risk of neonatal hypoglycemia. The use of corticosteroids in late preterm birth should be carefully weighed for its risks and benefits. In multiple pregnancies, targeted corticosteroids for early birth should be considered, as there is little evidence of benefit in twins compared to singletons. Women with diabetes should not be excluded from receiving corticosteroids, but additional insulin and close monitoring are recommended. Antenatal corticosteroids should not delay birth if it is necessary for the health of the woman or baby. In pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restriction, pre-eclampsia, or antepartum hemorrhage, corticosteroids may be considered if imminent preterm birth is likely. Women should be informed about the lack of evidence for the use of corticosteroids in small-for-gestational-age babies.

Antenatal corticosteroids should be offered to women with PPROM who are at increased risk of preterm birth. There is limited evidence to recommend repeat courses of antenatal corticosteroids if a woman remains at imminent risk of preterm birth seven days after administration. The optimum dose and route of administration for a course of antenatal corticosteroids recommend 24mg dexamethasone phosphate or 24 mg betamethasone sodium phosphate/acetate mix given intramuscularly. Antenatal corticosteroids are most effective when given within 48 hours prior to birth, with benefits seen within 24 hours of birth. They are most effective in reducing RDS in pregnancies that birth between 24 hours and 7 days of administration of the second dose.

Antenatal corticosteroids have shown significant reductions in cases of RDS and cerebroventricular hemorrhage among infants born within specific time frames after administration. There is a reduction in fetal and neonatal death for births within 24 hours to seven days after administration. However, caution is advised in interpreting the data due to limitations in subgroup analyses. Population-based cohort studies support the early effects of antenatal corticosteroids, with the largest effect seen 24 hours to seven days after the first injection. Concerns about potential risks to both women and babies include effects on maternal blood glucose levels, fetal growth, neonatal hypoglycemia, long-term metabolic and neurological consequences, and potential impacts on brain development. WHO recommends offering antenatal corticosteroids only when minimum standards of maternal and neonatal hospital services are available.

Antenatal corticosteroids should not be delayed in serious maternal or fetal conditions. In the presence of systemic infection, the use of corticosteroids should be carefully balanced due to the risk of exacerbating the infection. Repeat courses of corticosteroids may not reduce serious morbidity but can lead to smaller babies. The maximum number of corticosteroid courses in pregnancy should not exceed three. Research is needed to determine the effectiveness of corticosteroids in various conditions and to investigate potential off-target effects. Recommendations for future research include determining the effectiveness of corticosteroids in reducing neonatal morbidity in elective caesarean births at term and investigating the safety and effectiveness of steroids in multiple pregnancies and women with diabetes. Auditable topics include discussions about corticosteroids in planned caesarean births and the proportion of women offered corticosteroids for preterm birth. Support groups and useful links are provided for further information.

Antenatal corticosteroids for reducing adverse maternal and child outcomes in special populations of women at risk of imminent preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Managing hyperglycaemia during antenatal steroid administration, labour, and birth in pregnant women with diabetes. Should antenatal corticosteroids be considered in women with gestational diabetes before planned late gestation caesarean section. Effects of antenatal corticosteroid administration on mortality and long-term morbidity in early preterm, growth-restricted infants. Antenatal corticosteroids in preterm small-for-gestational age infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Use of antenatal corticosteroids in special circumstances: a comprehensive review. Single versus weekly courses of antenatal corticosteroids in preterm premature rupture of membranes. Multiple courses of antenatal corticosteroid therapy in patients with preterm premature rupture of membranes. Neonatal sepsis after betamethasone administration to patients with preterm premature rupture of membranes. Length of latency with preterm premature rupture of membranes before 32 weeks' gestation. Duration of the latency period in preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Length of latency with preterm premature rupture of membranes. Association of fetal growth restriction with neurocognitive function after repeated antenatal betamethasone treatment vs placebo. Antenatal corticosteroids for preterm premature rupture of membranes: single or repeat course. The clinical use of corticosteroids in pregnancy. Antenatal corticosteroids: an assessment of anticipated benefits and potential risks. Antenatal corticosteroids for accelerating fetal lung maturation for women at risk of preterm birth. Maternal intramuscular dexamethasone versus betamethasone before preterm birth. Transplacental versus direct fetal corticosteroid treatment for accelerating fetal lung maturation where there is a risk of preterm birth. Antenatal dexamethasone for early preterm birth in low-resource countries. Antenatal corticosteroid therapy for prevention of respiratory distress syndrome in severe preeclampsia. Antenatal corticosteroid therapy and blood pressure at 14 years of age in preterm children. Neurodevelopmental disorders among term infants exposed to antenatal corticosteroids during pregnancy. Impact of antenatal synthetic glucocorticoid exposure on endocrine stress reactivity in term-born children. Persistent effects of antenatal synthetic glucocorticoids on endocrine stress reactivity from childhood to adolescence. Long-term impacts of prenatal synthetic glucocorticoids exposure on functional brain correlates of cognitive monitoring in adolescence. Prenatal betamethasone exposure and psychopathology risk in extremely low birth weight survivors in the third and fourth decades of life. A population-based, multifaceted strategy to implement antenatal corticosteroid treatment versus standard care for the reduction of neonatal mortality due to preterm birth in low-income and middle-income countries.