Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy
Transvaginal ultrasound is the diagnostic tool of choice for tubal ectopic pregnancy.
Tubal ectopic pregnancies should be positively identified by visualizing an adnexal mass.
A serum beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (b-hCG) level is useful for planning management.
Ultrasound is the primary diagnostic modality for caesarean scar pregnancy.
Defined criteria exist for diagnosing various types of ectopic pregnancies.
Surgical, pharmacological, and conservative treatment options are available for different types of ectopic pregnancies.
Women with ectopic pregnancies should be offered anti-D immunoglobulin.
Long-term fertility prospects following an ectopic pregnancy should be discussed with patients.
Women should be offered support and counseling during treatment for ectopic pregnancy.
Providers of early pregnancy care should have access to appropriate management options.
Clinicians managing ectopic pregnancies must have received appropriate training.

Clinicians must have appropriate training for ultrasound-guided needle techniques in medical management. If unable to perform full surgical procedures for ectopic pregnancy, support must be available. Virtual reality simulators can aid in training for salpingectomy. Ectopic pregnancies include various types, but not pregnancy of unknown location. Incidence is around 11/1000 pregnancies in the UK, with risk factors such as tubal damage and smoking. Ultrasound is the primary tool for diagnosing tubal ectopic pregnancy, with specific criteria for identification. Serum beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin levels are useful for management planning. Cervical and caesarean scar pregnancies have defined ultrasound criteria for diagnosis. Interstitial pregnancy occurs in the fallopian tube and has specific ultrasound criteria for diagnosis.

A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. At presentation, based on clinical symptoms and ultrasound scan, if there is suspicion of interstitial pregnancy, a single serum b-hCG should be carried out. The following ultrasound scan criteria may be used for the diagnosis of cornual pregnancy: visualization of a single interstitial portion of fallopian tube in the main uterine body, gestational sac/products of conception seen mobile and separate from the uterus and completely surrounded by myometrium, and a vascular pedicle adjoining the gestational sac to the unicornuate uterus. A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. Ovarian ectopic pregnancy can be difficult to diagnose with certainty preoperatively, so the diagnosis should be considered whenever ultrasound findings are suspicious. A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. A heterotopic pregnancy is diagnosed when the ultrasound findings demonstrate an intrauterine pregnancy and a coexisting ectopic pregnancy. Heterotopic pregnancy should be considered in all women presenting after assisted reproductive technologies, in women with an intrauterine pregnancy complaining of persistent pelvic pain, and in those women with a persistently raised b-hCG level following miscarriage or termination of pregnancy.

CG levels greater than 5000 iu/l are significant predictors of failure in ectopic pregnancies. Methotrexate treatment success is higher with smaller increases in b-hCG levels prior to administration. A decrease in b-hCG levels from day 1 to day 4 after methotrexate administration is associated with higher success rates. Methotrexate should be the first-line management for women with specific criteria. Expectant management is a reasonable option for selected women with minimal pain and low b-hCG levels. Success rates for expectant management are dependent on case selection and lower initial b-hCG levels are associated with higher success rates. Management options for cervical and caesarean scar pregnancies should be tailored based on individual factors and gestational age. Surgical, pharmacological, and conservative treatment options are available for different types of ectopic pregnancies.

Inic acid rescue regimen was successful with a 91% success rate. Various methods for treatment include transvaginal ultrasound-guided aspiration followed by methotrexate injection, endoscopic approaches, and hysteroscopic resection. Selective UAE with methotrexate has been used for reducing hemorrhage. Laparoscopic removal is recommended for cornual pregnancies. Definitive surgical treatment is preferred for ovarian pregnancies. Laparoscopic removal is an option for early abdominal pregnancy, while advanced cases require laparotomy. Management of heterotopic pregnancies should consider the prognosis of the intrauterine pregnancy. Anti-D prophylaxis is recommended for RhD-negative women undergoing surgical removal of an ectopic pregnancy. Long-term fertility prospects following an ectopic pregnancy show no difference in fertility rates between management methods. Support and counseling should be offered to women undergoing treatment, including access to patient support groups and local bereavement counseling services. Muscle relaxation training may be beneficial for women undergoing treatment with methotrexate. It is recommended to wait at least 3 months before trying to conceive again after methotrexate treatment. Plans for follow-up should be clearly recorded, and written information on treatment options and support services should be provided.

The manufacturers of methotrexate recommend a 3-month window after use before conception due to the length of time that it may remain present in some organs and because of concern for subsequent pregnancy and fetal development. A small cohort study showed a higher than expected major malformation rate in women who conceived within 3 months of methotrexate exposure. However, conception within 3 months of methotrexate should not be considered an indication for termination. Providers of early pregnancy care should offer a 7-day early pregnancy assessment service with direct access for women referred by general practitioners and accident and emergency departments. Women with suspected ectopic pregnancy should be managed in dedicated early pregnancy clinics with access to all appropriate management options. Laparoscopic salpingotomy is not part of the core training of gynaecologists, and appropriate support from senior staff trained in all surgical techniques should be available. Clinicians managing women with ectopic pregnancy must have received appropriate training in surgical, ultrasound, and medical management techniques. Virtual reality simulators can be used as a training tool for surgical procedures. The need for anti-D in women with nontubal ectopic pregnancies, methotrexate for the treatment of ovarian ectopic pregnancy, long-term fertility following management of nontubal ectopic pregnancies, and other research topics are recommended for future studies. Auditable topics include the proportion of women offered all relevant management options for ectopic pregnancy and the percentage of women provided with information containing support group details. Useful links and support groups are listed for further information and guidance.

First-trimester diagnosis and management of pregnancies implanted into the lower uterine segment Cesarean section scar. Ultrasound diagnosis of a pregnancy in a Cesarean section scar. Cesarean scar pregnancy: sonographic and magnetic resonance imaging findings, complications, and treatment. Comparative efficacy and safety of local and systemic methotrexate injection in cesarean scar pregnancy. Surgical management of ectopic pregnancy. Diagnostic clues to ectopic pregnancy. Sonographic finding in interstitial (cornual) ectopic pregnancy. Three-dimensional transvaginal sonographic diagnosis of early and asymptomatic interstitial pregnancy. Interstitial ectopic pregnancy: A rare and difficult clinicosonographic diagnosis. Role of MRI in interstitial pregnancy. MR features of ectopic pregnancy. Laparoscopic management of 53 cases of cornual ectopic pregnancy. Conservative medical and surgical management of interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Term angular pregnancy: successful expectant management. Rudimentary uterine horn pregnancy. Ultrasound diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy in the non-communicating horn of a unicornuate uterus. The ultrasonographic appearance of ovarian ectopic pregnancies. Primary ovarian pregnancy. Intrafollicular ovarian pregnancy after ovulation induction/intrauterine insemination. Early ultrasonographic diagnosis and laparoscopic treatment of abdominal pregnancy. Advanced extrauterine pregnancy: diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. A multicentre study of advanced abdominal pregnancy: a review of six cases in low resource settings. Early abdominal ectopic pregnancies: a systematic review of the literature. Value of transvaginal sonography in diagnosing heterotopic pregnancy after in-vitro fertilization with embryo transfer. Heterotopic pregnancies after in-vitro fertilization and embryo transfer. Management of unruptured ectopic gestation by linear salpingostomy. Laparoscopic surgery in ectopic pregnancy. A cost-effectiveness study of a randomised trial of laparoscopy versus laparotomy for ectopic pregnancy. Salpingotomy versus salpingectomy in women with tubal pregnancy. Optimal treatment for patients with ectopic pregnancies and a history of fertility-reducing factors. Delayed hemorrhage in conservative surgery for ectopic pregnancy. Current status of surgical and nonsurgical management of ectopic pregnancy. The non-surgical management of ectopic pregnancy. Yolk sac on transvaginal ultrasound as a prognostic indicator in the treatment of ectopic pregnancy with single-dose methotrexate. Ectopic pregnancy: using the b-hCG ratio to select women for expectant or medical management. Characterizing ectopic pregnancies that rupture despite treatment with methotrexate. Prognostic factors for successful expectant management of ectopic pregnancy. Predictors of success of methotrexate treatment in women with tubal ectopic pregnancies. Presence of a yolk sac on transvaginal sonography is the most reliable predictor of single-dose methotrexate treatment failure in ectopic pregnancy. Increment in b-hCG in the 48-h period prior to treatment: a new variable predictive of therapeutic success in the treatment of ectopic pregnancy with methotrexate. Are early human chorionic gonadotropin levels after methotrexate therapy a predictor of response in ectopic pregnancy? Decline in hCG levels between days 0 and 4 after a single dose of methotrexate for ectopic pregnancy predicts treatment success. Medical management of ectopic pregnancy. Diagnostic criteria for nonviable pregnancy early in the first trimester. NICE guidance on ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage restricts access and choice and may be clinically unsafe. Expectant management of ectopic pregnancy. Expectant management of tubal ectopic pregnancy: prediction of successful outcome. Spontaneous resolution of ectopic tubal pregnancy: natural history. Expectant management of ectopic pregnancy. Methotrexate or expectant management in women with an ectopic pregnancy or pregnancy of unknown location and low serum hCG concentrations. Conservative treatment of cervical pregnancy by curettage and local prostaglandin injection.

The use of methotrexate and arterial embolization to avoid surgery in cervical pregnancy. Strategies for conservative treatment of cervical ectopic pregnancy. Efficacy of methotrexate treatment in cervical pregnancies. Uterine artery embolization in the management of vaginal bleeding from cervical pregnancy. Treatment of cervical pregnancy with cerclage, curettage, and balloon tamponade. Cervical pregnancy treated by uterine artery embolization combined with office hysteroscopy. Experience with cesarean scar pregnancies. Outcomes of primary surgical evacuation during the first trimester in women with cesarean scar pregnancy. Outcome of cesarean scar pregnancies diagnosed sonographically in the first trimester. Natural history of early first-trimester pregnancies implanted in Cesarean scars. Management options for cesarean scar pregnancies. Diagnosis, management, and follow-up of cesarean scar pregnancy. A systematic review of treatment studies for cesarean scar pregnancy. Magnetic resonance imaging as an adjunct to ultrasound in evaluating cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. Hysteroscopic surgery of ectopic pregnancy in the cesarean section scar. Uterine-preserving emergency surgery for cesarean scar pregnancies. Laparoscopic management or laparoscopy combined with transvaginal management of type II cesarean scar pregnancy. Transvaginal removal of ectopic pregnancy tissue and repair of uterine defect for cesarean scar pregnancy. Transvaginal surgical treatment of cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. Efficacy of Shirodkar cervical suture in securing hemostasis following surgical evacuation of Cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. Treatment of cesarean scar pregnancy with uterine artery chemoembolization combined with dilation and curettage. Surgical treatment of cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy: efficacy and safety of ultrasound-guided suction curettage. Sonographic diagnosis of cesarean scar pregnancy at 16 weeks. Cesarean scar pregnancy as a precursor of morbidly adherent placenta. Factors influencing the success of conservative treatment of interstitial pregnancy. Feasibility of expectant management of interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Conservative management of interstitial pregnancy. Medical management of interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Laparoscopic management of interstitial pregnancy. Laparoscopic management of rudimentary uterine horn pregnancy. Laparoscopic management of ovarian ectopic pregnancy. Management of primary abdominal pregnancy. Management of advanced abdominal pregnancy. Management of heterotopic pregnancy. Laparoscopic surgery in patients with an elevated shock index due to ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Management of cervical heterotopic pregnancy. Laparoscopic loop ligature for selective therapy in heterotopic interstitial and intrauterine pregnancy following in-vitro fertilization and embryo transfer. The role of laparoscopy in the diagnosis and management of heterotopic pregnancies. Laparoscopic treatment of heterotopic pregnancies. Nonsurgical treatment of heterotopic pregnancy. Use of Rh immune globulin for the prevention of hemolytic disease. Guideline for the use of anti-D immunoglobulin for the prevention of hemolytic disease.

tic
disease of the fetus and newborn. Transfus Med 2014;24:8 –20.
Salpingotomy versus salpingectomy in
women with tubal ectopic pregnancy, a randomised controlledtrial. Hum Reprod 2012;27 Suppl 2:ii73 –4.
Fertility outcomes following expectant managementof tubal ectopic pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2007;30:988 –93.
Tubal patency following
surgical and clinical treatment of ectopic pregnancy. Sao Paulo
Med J 2006;124:264 –6.
Fertility after tubal ectopic
pregnancy: results of a population-based study. Fertil Steril
2012;98:1271 –6.e1–3.
Fertility after ectopic pregnancy: the DEMETERrandomized trial. Hum Reprod 2013;28:1247 –53.
Systemic methotrexate to treat ectopic
pregnancy does not affect ovarian reserve. Fertil Steril
2008;90:1579 –82.
Does methotrexate
administration for ectopic pregnancy after in vitro fertilization
impact ovarian reserve or ovarian responsiveness? Fertil Steril
2013;100:1590 –3.
Anti mullerian hormone serum levels and reproductiveoutcome are not affected by neither methotrexate norlaparoscopic salpingectomy for the treatment of ectopic
pregnancy in IVF patients. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2011;18
Suppl 1:S46.
Effect of methotrexate exposure on subsequent
fertility in women undergoing controlled ovarian stimulation.Fertil Steril 2009;92:515 –9.
Outcome, complications and future fertility in women treated with
uterine artery embolization and methotrexate for non-tubalectopic pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2014;182:172 –6.
Laparoscopic
conservative treatment of ovarian pregnancy and subsequentfertility outcome. J Gynecol Surg 2014;30:12 –14.
Recommendations arising from the
33rd RCOG Study Group: Problems in Early Pregnancy –Advances
in Diagnosis and Management. In: Grudzinskas JG, O’Brien PM,editors. Problems in Early Pregnancy: Advances in Diagnosis and
Management . London: RCOG Press; 1997. p. 327 –31.
Posttraumatic stress
disorder after pregnancy loss. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2001;23:62 –6.
Factors that determine patient
satisfaction after surgical treatment of ectopic pregnancy:
improving the patient journey !Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
2014;178:60 –5.
Grieving after early pregnancy loss - a common reality. Ir Med J
2012;105:326 –8.
The impact of previous perinatal loss on subsequent
pregnancy and parenting. J Perinat Educ 2002;11:33 –40.
Effects of progressive muscle relaxation
training on anxiety and quality of life of inpatients with ectopicpregnancy receiving methotrexate treatment. Res Nurs Health
2012;35:376 –82.
Progressive relaxation training: A
Manual for the Helping Profession . Champaign, IL: Research Press,
1973.

[27/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License.