Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are prenatal diagnostic tests offered to pregnant women for various reasons. The additional risk of miscarriage following these tests is below 0.5%. Amniocentesis should not be performed before 15 weeks of gestation, while CVS should not be performed before 10 weeks. Women with multiple pregnancies have a slightly higher risk of miscarriage. Screening for blood-borne viruses should be reviewed before an invasive test. Care for women undergoing these procedures should be organized according to guidance. It is important to provide information on aftercare and options for continuing or terminating the pregnancy based on test results. Additional risks associated with these tests include infection, failed procedures, and fetal injury. Training and maintaining good practice for these procedures are essential for reducing risks.

Maintain competency with Maternal Fetal Medicine subspecialty training, fetal medicine Advanced Skills TrainingModules or equivalent international qualification. Seek support from a more experienced operator if anticipated/encountered difficulties. Review practice where an operator’s annual loss rate of normal babies exceeds 3% for either amniocentesis or CVS. Severe maternal sepsis is a very rare complication. Infection may arise from organisms present on the skin, ultrasound probe, gel, or via needle puncture of the bowel. Perform amniocentesis after 15+0 weeks’ gestation. CVS should not be performed before 10+0 weeks’ gestation. CVS should be performed from 11+0 weeks’ gestation to reduce the risk of technical challenges. Women considering amniocentesis or CVS in multiple pregnancies should receive detailed counseling and pregnancy mapping. Third-trimester amniocentesis may be offered for newly identified fetal structural anomalies, suspected fetal infection, and fetal growth restriction. Review screening results for bloodborne viruses when considering invasive testing. Optimize antiretroviral treatment to aim for an undetectable viral load prior to amniocentesis or CVS. The risk of mother to child transmission of HIV is very low for women on highly active antiretroviral therapy with undetectable viral loads. The risk of mother to child transmission of Hepatitis B is low with a viral load less than 6.99 log copies/ml but increases with higher viral loads. There is no evidence of the risk of mother to child transmission of Hepatitis C based on limited data available.

Amniocentesis has shown a significant increase in mother-to-child transmission of HBV when HBV DNA is over 500 copies/ml. There is currently no evidence of risk of mother-to-child transmission following amniocentesis for Hepatitis C.

Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling in HIV-infected pregnant women: a multicentre case series. Amniocentesis in HIV pregnant women: 16 years of experience. Absence of mother-to-child viral transmission in a series of selected patients. Amniocentesis and women with hepatitis B, hepatitis C, or human immunodeficiency virus. Risk of vertical transmission of hepatitis B after amniocentesis in HBs antigen-positive mothers. Detection of hepatitis C virus RNA (HCV RNA) in amniotic fluid: a prospective study.