Assisted Vaginal Birth Guideline Overview: Evidence-based guidance on forceps and vacuum extraction for rotational and non-rotational assisted vaginal births, with guidance on instrument use and procedure abandonment. Indications for fetal and maternal/birthing parent factors, contraindications, and instrument choice. Timing considerations for intervention in the second stage of labor.

Operators should choose the most appropriate instrument for facilitating successful birth with the first attempt. Forceps and vacuum extraction have different benefits and risks. Vacuum extraction is more likely to fail to achieve vaginal birth, associated with cephalohematoma, retinal hemorrhage, and concerns regarding the baby. However, it is less likely to cause maternal and birthing parent trauma compared to forceps. Vacuum extraction is not more likely to result in a cesarean birth, low 5-minute Apgar scores, or the need for phototherapy.

Factors associated with higher rates of failure of assisted birth include mid-cavity or rotational birth, maternal obesity, estimated fetal weight over 4000g, occipito-posterior position, short maternal stature, and fetal head circumference above the 95th centile.

Ultrasound assessment of the fetal head position is recommended before assisted vaginal birth if uncertainty exists. Antibiotics should be given to reduce infection risk following birth. Care following assisted vaginal birth should include monitoring for complications, documentation, postnatal planning, and follow-up discussions. Bladder care, thromboprophylaxis, and analgesia should also be addressed post-birth to ensure the well-being of the woman or birthing person.

Offer referral to in-house midwife counselor for advice and support to parents who have had a traumatic birth. Do not offer single session, high-intensity psychological interventions with an explicit focus on 'reliving' the trauma. Maternity units should provide a safe and supportive framework to support women, their families, and staff when serious adverse events occur. All staff should adhere to duty of candour. Clinical incident reporting form must be completed in specific circumstances. Monitoring of auditable standards as recommended by RCOG guideline is necessary.