The purpose of this guideline is to provide evidence-based guidance on the management of postpartum haemorrhage. It covers primary and secondary PPH, with definitions for different volumes of blood loss. Prevention strategies include identifying risk factors, offering prophylactic uterotonics, and considering the use of tranexamic acid. The guideline emphasizes the importance of early intervention and a team approach to care for women experiencing PPH. Communication with the multidisciplinary team and emergency calls for PPH are outlined, along with assessment and resuscitation measures. Surgical interventions, such as examination under anaesthesia and hysterectomy, are also discussed. The guideline includes recommendations for managing minor PPH at home births and aftercare for women affected by PPH. Staff training, risk management, and audit and quality monitoring are highlighted as essential components of PPH management.

Carbotocin is a long acting oxytocin derivative, licensed for the prevention of PPH at caesarean. It reduces the need for further uterotonics, but there are no statistically significant differences between carbotocin and oxytocin in prevention of PPH.

Tranexamic Acid reduces the risk of PPH greater than 1000mls in women/people having CS but not vaginal birth. The role of tranexamic acid in active bleeding is clear, but has not yet been established in prevention of bleeding.

Clinicians should be prepared to use a combination of pharmacological, mechanical and surgical methods to stop bleeding in PPH. These methods should be based upon the causative factor(s).

Clear communication with the woman/person and their birthing partner is important, and clear information of what is happening should be given from the outset. It is important to be aware that PPH can easily progress to MOH and this is sometimes unrecognised, therefore early intervention and involvement of senior staff is essential. 

Emergency calls for PPH/MOH should be made based on the severity of the situation, with specific protocols outlined for each level of emergency. 

Shock is a late sign in PPH. Mechanical and pharmacological measures should be instituted/administered in turn to stop bleeding, considering factors such as tone, tissue, trauma, and thrombin.

Communication with the blood transfusion service should be early and clear, with specific guidelines for requesting blood products and managing different scenarios related to blood transfusion. Repeated measurements of serum lactate and base deficit together with hematocrit and Hb are recommended during hemorrhage and resuscitation.

The blood transfusion technician can release blood products at the request of the consultant obstetrician or anaesthetist. Recommendations include using fresh frozen plasma (FFP) in cases of ongoing bleeding, maintaining plasma fibrinogen levels, transfusing platelets when necessary, considering Tranexamic Acid for significant blood loss, and avoiding the use of Factor VIIa in acute management. Intraoperative cell salvage is recommended for cases of Obstetric Haemorrhage with anticipated significant blood loss. Surgical measures, such as examination under anesthesia, intrauterine balloon tamponade, and haemostatic brace suturing, may be attempted if pharmacological measures fail. Other interventions include aortic compression, stepwise uterine devascularization, internal iliac (hypogastric) arteries, selective arterial embolization, and hysterectomy if necessary. Aftercare should include accurate documentation and follow-up appointments. Staff training in managing obstetric emergencies, including PPH, is essential for all maternity care providers. Audit and quality monitoring should assess screening and management practices for PPH.

Prevention and management of post-partum haemorrhage. Appendix 1 PPH: Causes and risk factors. The four T’s Risk factors/notes. Tone: abnormalities of uterine contraction. Uterine atonia, Overdistention of the uterus, Intra-amniotic infection, Functional/anatomical distortion of the uterus. Tissue: retained products of conception. Retained cotyledon or succenturiate lobe, Retained blood clots, Placenta accreta or percreta. Trauma: genital tract injury. Lacerations of the cervix, vagina or perineum, Extensions, lacerations at caesarean section, Uterine rupture, Uterine inversion. Thrombin: abnormalities of coagulation. Pre-existing states, Acquired in pregnancy.