This guideline provides guidance for Anaesthetic, Midwifery, and Obstetric staff caring for pregnant women and birthing people using PCEA in labor. PCEA allows the woman or birthing person to control their analgesia directly, leading to benefits such as reduced total dose of local anesthetic, reduced motor block, and greater satisfaction. Newer studies suggest a mandatory epidural bolus once an hour may enhance PCEA. Dilute mixtures of levobupivacaine and fentanyl are preferred for "mobile epidurals" in labor. Key points include the availability of epidural pain relief, caution with epidural opioids after parenteral opioids, and the need for 1:1 midwife care for women receiving epidural analgesia. Initial dose, monitoring of maternal and fetal conditions, and subsequent management are outlined in the guideline. Regular assessment and documentation are essential for safe and effective PCEA use.

No woman or birthing person should lie flat on their back at any time; even for a vaginal examination (a wedge should be used). Using a PCEA does not need to confine the woman or birthing person to bed or the semi-recumbent position. Women and birthing people should be supported when standing, as some impairment of movement control and sensation may occur. Midwives can consider the use of a peanut ball as a safe and low-cost intervention that shortens the length of labor and may reduce the chance of unplanned cesarean birth. Women and birthing people with regional analgesia are at an increased risk of pressure area damage and should be monitored accordingly. Upon confirmation of full cervical dilatation, pushing should be delayed for at least 1 hour. Reasons to call an anaesthetist include dissatisfaction with analgesia, loss of sensation, unexpected weakness, hypotension, severe headache, or severe itching. Postpartum management includes the removal of the epidural catheter and monitoring for any complications. If experiencing symptoms such as headache, backache, or changes in lower body sensations, the woman or birthing person should be referred back to the maternity unit for review.

Change Log - CG14009 Labour Patient Controlled  
 Version   Date   Author   Status   Comment   
1.0  November 
2013   Consultant Obstetric 
Anaesthetists   Archived   New Trust wide Maternity 
Guideline   
2.0  June 2017   Consultant Obstetric 
Anaesthetists   Archived   3 yearly review and update   
3.0  November 
2021   Keri Ashpole, 
Consultant Obstetric 
Anaesthetists   Archived   Fit for purpose review – no 
guidance changes required that 
present a risk. Awaiting new UH 
Sussex guideline currently being 
created. Extended for 1 year.   
4.0  January 2024   O. Sherwood, 
Consultant Obstetric 
Anaesthetist  
G. Allan,  Consultant 
Obstetric Anaesthetist  LIVE   3 year review   
• Patient information sheets 
updated ( See appendices ).  
• Yellow band with time of last 
dose and straight leg raise 
added.   
• Postnatal surveillance of 
epidural concerns added.   
• Clorhexidine x2 applications 
prior to skin puncture for 
epidural.   
• Pressure area care section 
added.