CLINICAL PROTOCOL  
CG20003  First Trimester US Screening:  Dating Scan,  
Combined Test & Declined Combined Test Ultrasound  v4.0  
 
OVERVIEW  
The purpose of this protocol is to enable sonographers to safely complete the first trimester scan with or without screening.  
This protocol applies to sonographers carrying out first trimester scanning.  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1.0  Introduction  
2.0 Definitions and abbreviations used in this document  
3.0 Duties and Responsibilities  
4.0 Information for pregnant women and birthing people prior to scan  
5.0 FASP: Screening Programme  
5.1 Trust notes  
5.2 Images to be recorded  
5.3 FASP recommended assessment for the CRL for pregnancy dating and combined screening  
5.4 FASP: Recommended criteria for measurement of NT for combined screening  
5.5 Diagram 2: Where to place callipers for the NT measurement  
5.6 Measuring the CRL & NT to one decimal point  
5.7 Unable to obtain NT  
5.8 Increased Nuchal Translucency (NT)  
5.9 Multiple Pregnancy

The test of choice for twin pregnancies is the combined test. Every effort must be made to offer and complete this test. The larger of the 2 CRL measurements should be used in the chance result calculation. Measure the NT for each of the fetuses. Identification of Twin 1/A should be made as the fetus closest to the maternal cervix. For screening using the combined test, where a dichorionic twin pregnancy is identified the chance result will be reported for each fetus. In a monochorionic twin pregnancy both fetuses are either affected or unaffected, so the chance result will be the same. 

For the small number of pregnant women and birthing people who have a twin pregnancy and miss the opportunity of having first trimester screening they can be offered the choice of a second trimester quadruple test for Down’s syndrome only. This means the decision-making process is more difficult for pregnant women and birthing people as this test is less sensitive than first trimester screening and any subsequent decisions about invasive diagnostic testing and selective reduction will have to be made later in the pregnancy. 

The quadruple test is offered to pregnant women and birthing people with a twin pregnancy to screen for T21 only when one or both of the NT measurements cannot be obtained. CRL measurements are greater than 84.0mm. The larger of the 2 HC measurements should be used in the chance result calculation. 

The definition of a vanished twin is when one fetus in a twin pregnancy is non-viable. It may be partially or completely reabsorbed. An ultrasound scan for the combined or quadruple test may show either an empty second pregnancy sac or a second pregnancy sac containing a non-viable fetus.