Maternity Pressure Area Care Guideline: This guideline provides clear guidance for staff caring for intrapartum and postnatal women to maintain skin integrity and minimize pressure area damage. Risk assessment, care planning, surface pressure-reducing equipment, skin assessment, and documentation are key components. Women at highest risk of pressure ulcers include those with limited mobility, activity, history of pressure ulcers, diabetes, poor circulation, and medical devices. Nutritional monitoring is important for prevention and treatment.

Patient Advice and Information: Women should be directed to 'Family Assist' during pregnancy and while inpatient. Routine advice on pressure area care should be provided on admission to maternity wards.

Optimal Intrapartum Pressure Area Care: Regularly change incontinence pads, use cleansing foam, apply barrier cream, encourage mobilization, and monitor nutrition.

Elective Caesarean Section Pressure Area Care: Assess skin and apply barrier cream before and after surgery, follow care for women at risk of pressure area damage, and consider hydration for prolonged fasting periods.

Optimal Post-delivery Pressure Area Care: Use cleansing foam, assess skin, monitor blood sugars for diabetic mothers, encourage hygiene, and advise on pressure area care.

Pressure Ulcer vs Moisture Lesion: Moisture lesions develop from prolonged exposure to moisture, with specific symptoms.

Diagnosis and Management of Pressure Ulcers: Categorize pressure ulcers, assess, report, and care for women with pressure ulcers, involving tissue viability team as needed.

Audit/Monitoring: Annual audit based on NICE Clinical Guideline CG179, with reports to the Women & Children’s Division Integrated Governance and Performance Board.

Appendix 13: Maternity Pressure Area Care Audit Tool  
Name:  Date of delivery:  
Hospital Number:  Site:      St. Richard’s         Worthing  
Datix Number:  Place of birth:  
Name of auditor:  Date audit tool completed:  
Type of delivery:  Time of birth:  
BMI:  Age:  
Date pressure ulcer located:  Pressure ulcer at discharge to GP care?    
Yes / No  
Pressure score on admission:  
  Green                   Amber               Red  Time pressure score became amber (if 
applicable):  
Any labour/birth complications?  Period pressure ulcer located:   
Antenatal         Intrapartum        Postnatal  
  
Risks factors for pressure ulcers (tick all th ose that apply)  
 Regional analgesia   Limited bladder or bowel control  
 General analgesia   Poor circulation  
 Lack of mobility (for other reasons)   Poor nutrition/hydration  
 Lack of activity (e.g. on CTG)   Smoker  
 Diabetes   Medical device in situ (e.g. catheter)  
 Other long -term medical issue   Previous pressure ulcer  
 Pressure ulcer on admission   Excessive moisture – e.g. SROM/ARM  
Surface  Prevention  Treatment  
1. Is the rationale for the choice of support surface 
documented (if required)?    
2. Is the prescribed equ ipment being utilised?    
Compliance  / 2 / 2 
   
Skin/Wound Management    
1. Is there evidence of a skin inspection upon 
admission?   N/A 
2. Is there a care plan documented in the notes?    
3. Is the care plan in line with the Trust guideline?    
4. Is there evidenc e skin assessments were performed 
in line with Trust guidance?   
  
5. Is there evidence the care/ treatment plan has been 
reviewed when necessary?    Compliance  Non-
Compliance  
  
Tissue Viability referral (if required): Yes / No  
Type of pressure ulcer:  
Moisture Lesion  Combined lesion    
Category 1  Category 2  Category 3  Category 4  
Unstageable  Deep Tissue Injury    
 6. Is there evidence of recording the size of the wound 
as per Trust guidance?  N/A  
7. Has the wound(s) been pho tographed as per Trust 
guidance?  N/A  
8. If the patient is in pain, is there evidence of a pain 
scale being utilized?  N/A  
9. Has a TVN been to review (category 2 pressure 
ulcers and above only)?  N/A  
Compliance  / 5 / 8 
   
Keep Moving    
1. Is there a requirem ent for repositioning identified in 
the notes?    
2. Is there evidence of repositioning as per Trust 
guidance?    
3. Has the plan been reviewed as the patient’s 
condition has altered?    
4. Is there evidence of patient information regarding the 
importance of repos itioning?    
5. Does the patient/carer understand the information? 
(E.g. any language difficulties but no translation 
used?)    
Compliance  / 5 / 5 
   
Incontinence/ Moisture    
1. Is there a clear plan for the care of skin documented?    
2. Is the plan in line wi th the Trust guideline?    
3. Is there evidence of care as per Trust guidance?    
4. Is there evidence a barrier cream has been used (if 
required)?    
Compliance  / 4 / 4 
   
Nutrition/Hydration    
1. Is there evidence the patient`s nutrition and hydration 
status h as been assessed?    
2. If required, is there a care plan in place?    
3. Is the care plan in line with the Trust guideline?    
4. Is there evidence this care plan was implemented?    
5. Is there evidence of patient/carer education 
regarding the importance of nutritio n/hydration?    
Compliance  / 5 / 5