This SOP supports maternity professionals in care planning for pregnant women and people deviating from guidance. It involves the Consultant Midwife Clinic for additional support. Referrals should be made for those choosing non-standard care, such as twin births or VBACs. Routine referrals should be made before 36 weeks. Late referrals may be needed for postdates pregnancies or unexpected complications. Contact the Consultant Midwife for appointments or advice.

9.2 Urgent referrals may be required for pregnant women or people who are postdates and declining induction or they are in labour with an unexpected complication such as undiagnosed breech presentation. The Consultant Midwife can be contacted directly via telephone. If the referral is after 36/40 or urgent and the Consultant Midwife is not available then the labour ward lead or co-ordinator should be contacted for immediate advice and support.

10.0 Consultations and care planning include discussions with the Consultant Midwife Clinic across all four UH Sussex sites. Referrals should still be made for 'info only' to the Consultant Midwife. For 'Amber' and 'Red' level clients, referrals should be made to the Consultant Midwife and Consultant Obstetrician for review.

10.2 Late gestations and urgent referrals will be discussed directly with the referring clinician via telephone or email. Pregnant women & people will be seen in the clinical setting or contacted directly via telephone. An agreed plan of care will be made together and all discussions will be clearly documented on Badgernet (Brighton and Hayward Heath) or in their hand held notes if available and the hospital maternity notes and MIS (Worthing and Chichester).

If Boxes 1, 2 and 3 have been completed in the ‘Referral details’ section, these boxes do not need to be filled in again. Click in the ‘Reason for Referral’ box or click the downward arrow. A new pop up will appear. Select ‘Consultant Midwife input needed’ and then click the ‘Accept and close’ button to save the answer. This question is mandatory. Complete the box named ‘Additional notes’, with free text and add as much information as possible. This allows Consultant Midwife to know the reason for the referral. When form is complete click ‘Save and Close’. The referral is not yet sent. The next pop up box enables you to preview the referral prior to sending. When the box pops up select ‘Yes’ to view it now. Check over the referral information. When happy click button in top right of the box ‘Confirm and Send’. Addition comments can be added that will be added to the text of the email but this box does not necessarily need to be filled in. To add digital signature, click ‘Authorise’ and enter Badgernet Login and password. Click ‘Save and Close’. The referral has now been sent. Referral to Consultant Midwife clinic identified for various reasons. Urgent Referrals can be made by telephone. Referrals are triaged within one working week. Risk assessment begins in the antenatal period at the booking visit. Every further contact with a woman or person is an opportunity to reassess and identify any individual factors during the antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal period. All midwives are expected to identify deviations from the norm in a timely fashion and act on these findings appropriately, ensuring effective communication with the woman or person, their birthing partners and the multidisciplinary team (MDT). Choices surrounding place of birth are offered with personalized care and choice. If a woman or person would like to explore a place of birth that is not consistent with the recommendations, they should be referred to the Consultant Midwife or Consultant Obstetrician to fully discuss birth preferences. If a midwife feels uncertain about their scope of professional practice, they should refer to the Consultant Midwife and/or Consultant Obstetrician.