The European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) developed a clinical practice guideline for endometriosis to improve healthcare delivery. Endometriosis is a chronic inflammatory disease affecting women of reproductive age. Symptoms include pain and infertility, impacting quality of life. Diagnosis can take years, and treatment options include hormone therapy and surgery. The guideline provides evidence-based recommendations for diagnosis and treatment.

Treatment of endometriosis-associated pain includes offering NSAIDs or other analgesics, hormone treatments, combined hormonal contraceptives, progestogens, GnRH agonists, GnRH antagonists, and aromatase inhibitors. Surgical options such as excision of endometriosis lesions or cystectomy for ovarian endometrioma are also recommended. Referral to a center of expertise is advised for women with deep endometriosis. Hysterectomy may be considered for women who no longer wish to conceive and have not responded to other treatments.

33 When deciding whether to remove the ovaries, consider the long-term consequences of early menopause and the possible need for hormone replacement therapy. 
34 Total hysterectomy is preferred when performing hysterectomy. 
35 Preoperative hormone treatment is not recommended to improve the immediate outcome of surgery for pain in women with endometriosis. 
36 Postoperative hormone treatment may be offered to improve the immediate outcome of surgery for pain in women with endometriosis if not desiring immediate pregnancy. 
37 Consider individual preferences, side effects, efficacy, costs, and availability when choosing between hormone treatments and surgical treatments for endometriosis-associated pain. 
39 Do not prescribe ovarian suppression treatment to improve fertility in infertile women with endometriosis. 
40 Postoperative hormone suppression should not be prescribed solely to enhance future pregnancy rates in women seeking pregnancy. 
41 Hormone therapy may be offered to women who cannot or decide not to conceive immediately after surgery as it does not negatively impact fertility and improves the immediate outcome of surgery for pain. 
42 Avoid prescribing pentoxifylline, other anti-inflammatory drugs, or letrozole outside ovulation induction to improve natural pregnancy rates in infertile women with endometriosis. 
43 Consider operative laparoscopy as a treatment option for endometriosis-associated infertility in rASRM stage I/II endometriosis as it improves the rate of ongoing pregnancy. 
44 Consider operative laparoscopy for the treatment of endometrioma-associated infertility to increase the chance of natural pregnancy. 
45 Operative laparoscopy may represent a treatment option in symptomatic patients wishing to conceive, although evidence is limited. 
46 The decision to perform surgery should be guided by pain symptoms, patient age and preferences, history of previous surgery, presence of other infertility factors, ovarian reserve, and estimated Endometriosis Fertility Index (EFI). 
47 In infertile women with rASRM stage I/II endometriosis, intrauterine insemination (IUI) with ovarian stimulation may increase pregnancy rates. 
48 Consider the use of IUI with ovarian stimulation in infertile women with rASRM stage III/IV endometriosis with tubal patency. 
49 ART can be performed for infertility associated with endometriosis, especially if tubal function is compromised, there is male factor infertility, low EFI, or if other treatments have failed. 
50 Offer both GnRH antagonist and agonist protocols for ART based on patients' and physicians' preferences as no difference in pregnancy or live birth rate has been demonstrated. 
51 Reassure women with endometriosis regarding the safety of ART as recurrence rates are not increased compared to those not undergoing ART. 
52 Consider antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of oocyte retrieval in women with endometrioma. 
53 Extended administration of GnRH agonist prior to ART treatment is not recommended to improve live birth rate in infertile women with endometriosis. 
54 Prolonged administration of COC/progestogens as a pre-treatment to ART to increase live birth rates is not recommended. 
55 Avoid routinely performing surgery prior to ART to improve live birth rates in women with rASRM stage I/II endometriosis. 
56 Avoid routinely performing surgery for ovarian endometrioma prior to ART to improve live birth rates as evidence shows no benefit and surgery may impact ovarian reserve. 
57 Surgery for endometrioma prior to ART can be considered to improve endometriosis-associated pain or accessibility of follicles. 
58 Surgical excision of deep endometriosis lesions prior to ART should be guided mainly by pain symptoms and patient preference as its effectiveness on reproductive outcome is uncertain. 
59 Discuss the pros and cons of fertility preservation with women with extensive ovarian endometriosis. 
60 Do not advise patients to become pregnant solely to treat endometriosis as pregnancy does not always lead to symptom improvement or disease progression reduction. 
61 Refer patients with atypical endometrioma during pregnancy to a centre with appropriate expertise. 
62 Be aware of the increased risk of first-trimester miscarriage and ectopic pregnancy in women with endometriosis. 
63 Be aware of endometriosis-associated complications in pregnancy, although rare, and interpret findings with caution. 
64 Perform ovarian cystectomy instead of drainage and electrocoagulation for the secondary prevention of endometriosis-associated symptoms. 
65 Consider postoperative use of a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system or combined hormonal contraceptive for the secondary prevention of endometriosis-associated symptoms. 
66 Offer long-term hormone treatment for the secondary prevention of endometrioma and endometriosis-associated symptom recurrence after surgical management of ovarian endometrioma. 
67 Consider long-term administration of postoperative hormone treatment for the prevention of recurrence of deep endometri

Clinicians should continue to treat women with a history of endometriosis after surgical menopause with combined estrogen-progestogen until natural menopause. Women with endometriosis who have undergone early bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy have an increased risk of bone density loss, dementia, and cardiovascular disease. Extrapelvic endometriosis may present with symptoms such as cyclical shoulder pain or cough, and surgical removal is preferred for abdominal cases. Clinicians should inform and counsel women about incidental findings of endometriosis but should not perform surgical excision or prescribe medical treatment for asymptomatic cases. Routine ultrasound monitoring can be considered for asymptomatic endometriosis. Women with endometriosis have a slightly higher risk of certain cancers, but the absolute risk increase is low. Clinicians should reassure women about their cancer risk and recommend general cancer prevention measures.

Women with symptoms such as dysmenorrhea, deep dyspareunia, dysuria, dyschezia, painful rectal bleeding, haematuria, shoulder tip pain, catamenial pneumothorax, cyclical cough, haemoptysis, chest pain, cyclical scar swelling and pain, fatigue, and infertility should be considered for endometriosis diagnosis. Symptoms like abdominopelvic pain, heavy menstrual bleeding, and a history of certain conditions increase the likelihood of endometriosis. Severe dysmenorrhea may also indicate the presence of endometriosis. Clinical examination, including vaginal examination, can help identify deep nodules or endometriomas in suspected cases, but further diagnostic steps should be considered even if the examination is normal.

The guideline recommends clinical examination for the diagnosis of endometriosis and further diagnostic steps using medical technologies. Vaginal and rectovaginal examinations may be inappropriate in certain situations and painful for some women. Biomarkers are not reliable for diagnosing endometriosis. Imaging techniques such as ultrasound and MRI are recommended for diagnosis, but a negative finding does not exclude endometriosis. Laparoscopy may be considered if imaging results are negative or treatment is unsuccessful. Laparoscopic identification of lesions should be confirmed by histology.

The guideline recommends using imaging in the diagnostic work-up for endometriosis, with laparoscopy or empirical treatment as options. Long-term monitoring may not be beneficial for preventing adverse outcomes, but follow-up and psychological support are recommended. Research is needed to develop consensus criteria for diagnosis and investigate long-term management approaches for endometriosis.

Endometriosis can have a detrimental effect on the lives of affected women, partners, and families. An early diagnosis, ideally followed by early, adequate treatment, may reduce pain, reduce the risk of infertility, and provide an explanation for symptoms. Although no studies exist to support the benefits of early versus late diagnosis, women may experience relief, legitimation, and empowerment from the diagnosis. The impact of endometriosis on quality of life should be assessed using validated tools. In symptomatic women, attempts should be made to relieve symptoms, either by empirical treatment or after a diagnosis of endometriosis. Large longitudinal studies are recommended to investigate the effect of early diagnosis on the quality of life of women with endometriosis.

Based on clinical trials, continuous use of combined oral contraceptive pills (OCP) is recommended for treating endometriosis-associated pain. Continuous OCP use has shown to be more effective in reducing dysmenorrhea recurrence compared to cyclic use. Safety profiles of continuous and cyclic OCP use are similar. Different modes of administration, such as vaginal ring and transdermal patch, have been studied, with varying results in terms of effectiveness. Progestogens and anti-progestogens have also been found to be effective in treating endometriosis-associated pain, with different side effect profiles to consider. The use of levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system and etonogestrel-releasing subdermal implant is recommended for reducing endometriosis-associated pain. Danazol is not recommended due to severe side effects. GnRH agonists have shown effectiveness in relieving endometriosis-associated pain, but may not be as effective as other treatments such as levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system or oral danazol.

There was no significant difference between treatments after resumption of menstruation. Safety concerns for GnRH agonists include vaginal dryness, hot flushes, headaches, weight gain, and acne. Add-back therapy can prevent bone loss when used with GnRH agonists. Aromatase inhibitors can reduce endometriosis-associated pain but have side effects like vaginal dryness, hot flushes, and diminished bone mineral density. It is recommended to prescribe GnRH agonists as a second-line treatment and consider add-back therapy to prevent bone loss. GnRH antagonists can also be considered as a second-line treatment for endometriosis-associated pain. Aromatase inhibitors may be prescribed in combination with other medications for treatment.

Surgical treatment is recommended for reducing endometriosis-associated pain. Laparoscopy is preferred over open surgery for its benefits. Excision is superior to ablation in reducing symptoms. Research is needed to determine the effectiveness of surgery for superficial peritoneal endometriosis.

Surgical intervention for endometriosis, such as pelvic nerve pathway interruption and cystectomy for ovarian endometrioma, has been shown to be effective in reducing symptoms and recurrence. However, these procedures come with risks and require careful consideration. For deep endometriosis involving the bowel, various surgical techniques have been used with promising results in improving quality of life and reducing symptoms. Standardization of reporting and further research is needed to guide treatment decisions.

Multiple studies have shown that surgical removal of deep endometriosis can significantly improve pain and quality of life in women. The largest prospective case series reported reductions in pelvic pain, improved quality of life, and decreased analgesia use post-surgery. It is recommended that women with deep endometriosis are referred to a center of expertise and informed about potential risks and benefits of surgery. Different surgical approaches, such as discoid excision and segmental resection, have shown positive outcomes in improving pain and quality of life. It is important to consider the type of study, surgical technique, and outcome measurement when interpreting the literature on deep endometriosis surgery. Surgery for deep endometriosis should be performed in a center of expertise to minimize complications and maximize outcomes.

The reported recurrence rates following surgery for colorectal endometriosis were 5-25%. Surgery for posterior compartment endometriosis showed improvements in pain scores and symptoms. Surgical treatment of bladder endometriosis and ureteral lesions was associated with significant improvement of pain symptoms. Nerve-sparing laparoscopy showed a reduction in urinary retention. Hysterectomy for endometriosis-associated pain may reduce the need for re-operation. Patient selection for surgery should consider prognostic markers for pain symptom improvement. Further research is needed in this area.

Endometriosis surgical outcomes and quality of life improvements are studied in various research articles. Studies have looked at different surgical techniques and their impact on symptoms and quality of life for patients with endometriosis. Some research has focused on specific procedures, such as laparoscopic excision or ablation, while others have examined the long-term effects of surgery on pain, fertility, and recurrence rates. Overall, surgical management of endometriosis has been shown to improve symptoms and quality of life for many patients.

Surgical treatment of endometriosis: correlation between histological pattern and clinical outcomes. Various studies on surgical management of endometriosis and its impact on pain relief and quality of life. Recommendations for surgical treatment of endometriosis.

II.4. Medical therapies adjunct to surgery  
The effectiveness of medical therapies as an adjunct to surgical therapy for endometriosis is discussed. The recommendation is to clearly distinguish between short-term and long-term hormone treatment after surgery. Preoperative hormone treatment is not recommended to improve the immediate outcome of surgery for pain. Postoperative hormone treatment may be offered to improve the immediate outcome of surgery for pain if pregnancy is not desired. Further research is recommended to compare the risks and outcomes of laparoscopy and empirical treatment.

II.5. Medical versus surgical treatment for endometriosis  
The effectiveness of surgical versus medical treatments for endometriosis-associated pain is discussed. There is no conclusive evidence to recommend one over the other, and a shared decision-making approach is recommended considering individual preferences, side effects, efficacy, costs, and availability. Research is recommended for randomized clinical trials to directly compare laparoscopy and empirical treatment.

II.6. Non-medical management strategies  
Non-medical management strategies, such as complementary and alternative medicine, self-management strategies, and self-help groups, are explored for women with endometriosis. The limited research supports the use of these strategies, and more studies are needed to evaluate their efficacy and safety. Acupuncture is discussed as a complementary treatment, but there is insufficient high-quality evidence to recommend it for endometriosis patients. Additional research is recommended for non-medical management strategies for endometriosis-associated pain and quality of life.

One RCT showed significant improvements in pain and quality of life with verum acupuncture compared to 'sham' acupuncture in women with endometriosis. Japanese acupuncture was also found to be effective. Overall, acupuncture was safe and could be used as an adjunct therapy for pain relief in women with endometriosis.

Physiotherapy interventions for endometriosis lack significant literature, but pelvic floor exercises have shown effectiveness for urinary incontinence. Massage and trigger point release therapy have mixed results and may not be recommended for chronic pain.

Exercise, while beneficial for overall health, has not been well studied for endometriosis-related pain relief. While some studies show potential benefits, more research is needed to make firm recommendations.

Electrotherapy studies have shown improvements in pain and quality of life, but caution is advised due to study design limitations and small sample sizes.

Psychological interventions, such as psychotherapy and mindfulness-based programmes, have shown promise in reducing pain and improving quality of life in women with endometriosis. However, more research is needed to make conclusive recommendations.

Participants included up to 5 years after laparoscopic diagnosis, limiting the significance of found efficacy. No recommendations on psychological approaches for endometriosis pain and quality of life. Limited evidence on the impact of psychological interventions for endometriosis symptoms. Nutrition may affect symptoms, with limited studies on dietary interventions. Some studies suggest omega-3 fatty acids and vitamin D may help with pain. Antioxidants, gluten, and soy not well studied. Dietary changes may improve symptoms. Traditional Chinese Medicine studies are generally poorly constructed. No specific recommendations for nutrition or Chinese Medicine for endometriosis. Clinicians should discuss non-medical strategies for quality of life and psychological well-being in women with endometriosis. Further research is needed on non-medical interventions for endometriosis.

Women with endometriosis are confronted with endometriosis-associated pain, infertility, or both. The use of ovarian suppression therapy to improve fertility in women with endometriosis is ineffective and should not be prescribed. However, postsurgical medical therapy may increase pregnancy rates compared to surgery alone, but the evidence should be interpreted with caution. Other medical treatments such as anti-inflammatory drugs and aromatase inhibitors have uncertain effects on pregnancy rates in women with endometriosis.

In infertile women with endometriosis, clinicians should not prescribe pentoxifylline, other anti-inflammatory drugs, or letrozole outside ovulation-induction to improve natural pregnancy rates. Studies show no benefit of these interventions to improve pregnancy rates in women with endometriosis. Operative laparoscopy could be offered as a treatment option for endometriosis-associated infertility in rASRM stage I/II endometriosis as it improves the rate of ongoing pregnancy. Clinicians may consider operative laparoscopy for the treatment of endometrioma-associated infertility as it may increase their chance of natural pregnancy. Although no compelling evidence exists that operative laparoscopy for deep endometriosis improves fertility, it may represent a treatment option in symptomatic patients wishing to conceive. The decision to perform surgery should be guided by various factors such as pain symptoms, patient age, history of previous surgery, and ovarian reserve. Research is needed to evaluate the value of surgery for ovarian and deep endometriosis in improving natural pregnancy rates. Before and after surgery for endometriosis, individuals who wish to become pregnant should be counseled objectively on their chances of achieving a pregnancy. The Endometriosis Fertility Index (EFI) can be used to predict non-ART pregnancy rates after surgery.

The Endometriosis Fertility Index (EFI) is a validated tool that can be used to counsel patients on their reproductive options post-surgery. It has been shown to reduce healthcare costs through optimal patient selection. The EFI can also be used to guide decision-making between surgery, assisted reproductive technology (ART), or other fertility management options. It is recommended to use IUI with ovarian stimulation in women with stage I/II endometriosis to increase pregnancy rates. The efficacy of ART in women with endometriosis is uncertain, with some studies showing lower outcomes compared to women without endometriosis. Studies are needed to clarify the relevance of IUI with or without ovarian stimulation in women with endometriosis and to investigate the value of EFI in predicting the success of IUI.

be recommended. Similarly, there is insufficient evidence to support the use of continuous combined oral contraceptive/progestogens as a pre-treatment to ART to increase live birth rates. Further research is needed to determine the effectiveness of these medical therapies in improving outcomes for women with endometriosis undergoing ART.

Surgery prior to ART for endometriosis-associated infertility may improve reproductive outcomes, but the evidence is limited and more data is needed. Clinicians are not recommended to routinely perform surgery for endometriosis prior to ART to improve live birth rates, as the potential benefits are unclear. Surgery for endometrioma prior to ART is not recommended to improve live birth rates, as it may have a negative impact on ovarian reserve. Surgery for deep endometriosis prior to ART should be guided mainly by pain symptoms and patient preference, as its effectiveness on reproductive outcomes is uncertain.

Symptomatic infertile women with previous failed ART and deep endometriosis may consider surgical removal of lesions. Surgery for pain in women with deep endometriosis is discussed in detail. Non-medical interventions for infertility in endometriosis have unclear benefits. Fertility preservation in women with endometriosis should be discussed, but the true benefit remains unknown. The impact of endometriosis on pregnancy and obstetric outcomes is not well understood.

Endometriotic lesions in pregnancy can show a range of changes, including decidual reaction and atrophy. Management may involve monitoring and expectant management or surgery if malignancy is suspected. Pregnancy may not always benefit women with endometriosis, so continued evaluation and treatment postpartum is recommended. 

Endometriomas may change in appearance during pregnancy, and if atypical findings are seen on ultrasound, referral to a specialized center is advised. Complications from pre-existing endometriosis lesions during pregnancy are rare but may require surgical intervention. 

Women with endometriosis may have an increased risk of miscarriage and ectopic pregnancy in the first trimester. Clinicians should be vigilant for symptoms and consider closer monitoring. 

Studies have shown conflicting results regarding the impact of endometriosis on pregnancy outcomes in the second and third trimesters. Associations have been reported with gestational diabetes, preterm birth, premature rupture of membranes, and placenta previa. 

Overall, complications related to pre-existing endometriosis lesions during pregnancy are rare but may require surgical management. Further research is needed to assess the impact of surgery on pregnancy outcomes in women with endometriosis.

Women with endometriosis may have a higher risk of stillbirth, caesarean section, and small for gestational age babies. Endometriosis does not seem to increase the risk of obstetric hemorrhages or postpartum hemorrhage. Clinicians should be aware of these potential risks in pregnancy, but current evidence does not warrant increased monitoring or discourage pregnancy. Research is needed to better understand obstetric risks in women with endometriosis. Surgical techniques, such as ovarian cystectomy, may be beneficial in preventing recurrence of symptoms associated with endometriosis.

Cystectomy is superior to drainage and coagulation for ovarian endometrioma in women, with a strong recommendation in favor of cystectomy. Hormone treatment post-surgery can prevent recurrence of endometriosis-associated symptoms. Levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system or combined hormonal contraceptives are recommended for at least 18-24 months post-surgery. ART in women with deep endometriosis does not increase recurrence. Consider long-term hormone treatment for prevention of deep endometriosis recurrence and associated symptoms. The choice of treatment should consider patient preferences, costs, availability, risks, and side effects. Further information is available in Annex 7 and Annex 8.

IV.2 Treatment of recurrent endometriosis: 
Medical treatment options for recurrent endometriosis after surgery include dienogest, depot leuprolide acetate, desogestrel, OCP, cyproterone acetate, and nafarelin. These treatments have shown efficacy in reducing symptoms such as pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, and endometrioma size. Surgical treatment for recurrent endometriosis is less studied, but one small study reported recurrence of symptoms in a percentage of women after surgery. It is important to consider all available hormone and surgical treatment options for managing recurring pain symptoms in women with endometriosis. 

V. Endometriosis and adolescence: 
Diagnosing endometriosis in adolescents can be challenging due to a lack of awareness among medical professionals and caregivers. Risk factors for adolescent endometriosis include a positive family history, genital malformations, early menarche, and short menstrual cycles. Clinicians should take a careful history to identify possible risk factors and consider endometriosis in young women presenting with symptoms such as cyclical absent.

In adolescents, a careful history should be taken to consider symptoms suggestive of endometriosis, such as chronic pelvic pain, nausea, dysmenorrhea, and other associated symptoms. Diagnosis in adolescents may differ from adults, with a more varied clinical presentation. Imaging with transvaginal ultrasound can be effective, and diagnostic laparoscopy may be considered if other treatments are unsuccessful. Histological confirmation through biopsies during laparoscopy is recommended to confirm the diagnosis, although negative histology does not rule out the disease entirely.

In adolescents with endometriosis, hormonal contraceptives or progestogens are recommended as first-line treatment for pain relief. NSAIDs can be considered as an additional option. GnRH agonists may be used as a second-line treatment if initial hormone therapy fails, but careful consideration of potential side effects is necessary. Surgical removal of endometriosis lesions may be considered for symptom management, but recurrence rates should be taken into account. Laparoscopic surgery is recommended by experienced surgeons. Combination therapy with GnRH agonists and OCP after conservative surgery may also be effective in reducing recurrence.

Endometriosis symptoms may persist after menopause, with a prevalence estimated at 2-5%. Hormone therapy may stimulate endometriosis growth, but it can also occur in women not using hormone therapy. Clinicians should be aware that endometriosis can still be active after menopause. Surgical treatment is recommended as first-line for postmenopausal women with endometriosis.

In postmenopausal women with endometriosis, surgical treatment has been shown to alleviate pain and improve symptoms. Consideration of malignancy is important, with some studies showing a risk of malignancy in postmenopausal women with endometriosis. Aromatase inhibitors may be a medical alternative to surgery for treating endometriosis in postmenopausal women. More research is needed on the efficacy and safety of aromatase inhibitors in this population. Hormone replacement therapy for menopausal symptoms in women with a history of endometriosis is not well studied, but may be effective in reducing symptoms. The risk of recurrence of endometriosis with hormone therapy is small but present, and continuous combined estrogen-progestogen therapy may be preferred to limit proliferation of endometriosis tissue. Tibolone could be a safe alternative for combined hormone therapy.

Abdominal wall endometriosis is associated with gynecologic procedures and can be diagnosed using transabdominal ultrasonography, CT, and MRI. Diagnosis of thoracic endometriosis syndrome is based on clinical symptoms with a cyclical pattern.

Catamenial pneumothorax is defined by at least two episodes of pneumothorax occurring during this time interval. In a review of 490 cases, pneumothorax was mainly present in the right lung. Diaphragmatic endometriosis and/or nodules were observed in 89% of cases. Thoracic endometriosis syndrome involves catamenial thoracic pain with the right hemithorax being involved in more than 90% of cases. MRI is recommended for diagnosis. Clinicians should be aware of symptoms of extrapelvic endometriosis and discuss diagnosis and management in a multidisciplinary team. Surgical removal is the preferred treatment for abdominal extrapelvic endometriosis when possible. Hormone treatment can be offered for thoracic endometriosis. In cases of catamenial pneumothorax, a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy may be considered.

Women with incidental finding of asymptomatic endometriosis do not require treatment, as there is low risk of progression to symptomatic disease. Surgical treatment is not recommended due to associated risks, and medical treatment is not advised without evidence of disease progression. Clinicians should inform and counsel women about the incidental finding, but surgical excision or ablation is not recommended. Monitoring of asymptomatic endometriosis can be considered, but the benefits are uncertain. Primary prevention of endometriosis can involve aiming for a healthy lifestyle and diet, with reduced alcohol intake and regular physical activity, but the usefulness of hormonal contraceptives for prevention is uncertain. Genetic testing for endometriosis risk should only be done in a research setting.

Endometriosis shares features with cancer but is not significantly associated with increased overall cancer risk. Specific risks include higher risk of ovarian, breast, and thyroid cancer, but the absolute increase in risk is low. Clinicians should reassure patients about their cancer risk and recommend general cancer prevention measures. Hormone treatments for endometriosis may have varying effects on cancer risk, with OCP potentially reducing ovarian and endometrial cancer risk but increasing breast and cervical cancer risk. More research is needed on the impact of hormone treatments on cancer risk.

Among women with endometriosis, hormonal treatments have no appreciable impact on ovarian cancer risk. Clinicians should reassure women with endometriosis about the risk of malignancy associated with the use of hormonal contraceptives. Monitoring for ovarian malignancy could be performed but has shown no benefit in early detection or mortality reduction. Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is not recommended for women with endometriosis without further risk factors for ovarian cancer. Clinicians should not systematically perform cancer screening beyond existing guidelines but can consider it in individual patients with additional risk factors. More data are needed on the malignant transformation of endometrioma and endometriosis to guide monitoring needs.

Some authors suggest earlier and more meticulous surgical intervention for complete removal of endometriosis to reduce the future risk of ovarian cancer. A study in Sweden found that women who had undergone surgery for endometriosis had a reduced risk of ovarian cancer, especially those who had unilateral oophorectomy. Surgical treatment like tubal ligation or hysterectomy was not significantly associated with the risk of ovarian cancer. Clinicians should consider the potential benefits of complete excision of visible endometriosis to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer, weighing them against the risks of surgery.

Prevention of endometriosis  
Endometriosis and cancer  
Declarations of interest  
Conflicts of Interest  
Abbreviations  
Key Questions  
Methodology

In the justification section, more data are provided on the interpretation of the supporting evidence and how other factors were considered. Costs and resource impact were only discussed where relevant. All evidence and recommendations were combined in the ESHRE guideline "Endometriosis." Good practice points are mainly based on the expertise and opinion of the guideline group members. The guideline was open for review between 24 June and 15 August 2021. The standard dissemination procedure for all ESHRE guidelines comprises publishing and announcement. Patient versions of the guideline will be developed by a subgroup of the GDG together with patient representatives. The current guideline will be considered for revision in 2025. Corrections will be published in the web version of this document. For more details on the methodology of ESHRE guidelines, visit www.eshre.eu/guidelines. Consider Endometriosis when the woman reports one or more symptoms. Negative imaging result does not rule out Endometriosis. Offer NSAIDs/Analgesics, Hormone Treatment, and Surgery as options for pain management. Apply shared decision-making for different treatment options for Endometriosis. Pregnancy may not always lead to improvement of symptoms or reduction of disease progression. Clinicians should have a higher vigilance in case of suggestive symptoms during pregnancy. Possible increased risk of first-trimester miscarriage and ectopic pregnancy.