Recurrent Pregnancy Loss Guideline - November 2017

The guideline aims to provide evidence-based recommendations for the investigation and treatment of women with recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL), defined as the loss of two or more pregnancies. It emphasizes the importance of considering the psychosocial needs of couples facing RPL and provides recommendations on risk factors and health behavior modifications. 

Recommendations include informing women about the impact of age, stress, smoking, obesity, alcohol consumption, and other lifestyle factors on pregnancy loss. The guideline also suggests tailoring diagnostic investigations based on medical and family history, genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue, thrombophilia screening, and other relevant factors. 

Overall, the guideline is intended for healthcare providers involved in the care of couples with RPL, emphasizing the importance of personalized care and shared decision-making.

6 18 Cytokine testing should not be used in women with RPL in clinical practice. Cytokine testing is not recommended as it is not shown to be causative and is associated with technical challenges. 

6 20 Cytokine polymorphisms should not be tested in women with RPL. 

6 21 Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) testing could be considered for explanatory purposes. Measurement of ANA in women with RPL can be considered as the majority of case-control studies document an association to RPL and there is some evidence that ANA presence affects the prognosis negatively. 

6 22 There is insufficient evidence to recommend Natural Killer (NK) cell testing in women with RPL. 

6 23 Testing anti-Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) antibodies in women with RPL is not recommended. 

7 24 Thyroid screening is recommended in women with RPL due to the high prevalence of thyroid issues. 

7 25 Abnormal Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and Thyroid peroxidase (TPO)-antibody levels should be followed up by Thyroxine (T4) testing in women with RPL. 

7 26 Assessment of Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), fasting insulin, and fasting glucose is not recommended in women with RPL. 

7 27 Prolactin testing is not recommended in women with RPL in the absence of clinical symptoms of hyperprolactinemia. 

7 28 Ovarian reserve testing is not routinely recommended in women with RPL. 

7 29 Luteal phase insufficiency testing is not recommended in women with RPL. 

7 30 Androgen testing is not recommended in women with RPL. 

7 31 Luteinizing Hormone (LH) testing is not routinely recommended in women with RPL. 

7 32 Measurement of homocysteine plasma levels is not routinely recommended in women with RPL. 

8 33 All women with RPL should have an assessment of the uterine anatomy. 

8 34 The preferred technique to evaluate the uterus is transvaginal 3D ultrasound (US). 

8 35 Sonohysterography (SHG) is more accurate than hysterosalpingography (HSG) in diagnosing uterine malformations. 

8 36 If a Müllerian uterine malformation is diagnosed, further investigation should be considered. 

8 37 MRI is not recommended as a first-line option for the assessment of uterine malformations in women with RPL. 

9 38 It is suggested to assess lifestyle factors in the male partner of couples with RPL. 

9 39 Assessing sperm DNA fragmentation in couples with RPL can be considered for explanatory purposes. 

10 10 The guideline recommends basing prognosis on the number of preceding pregnancy losses and female age in couples with RPL. 

10 40 Prognostic tools can be used to provide an estimate of subsequent chance of live birth in couples with unexplained RPL. 

11 41 All couples with abnormal genetic results should receive genetic counseling. 

11 42 All couples with abnormal genetic results may be informed about possible treatment options. 

12 43 For women with hereditary thrombophilia and a history of RPL, antithrombotic prophylaxis is not recommended unless indicated for venous thromboembolism prevention. 

12 44 For women with APS and a history of three or more pregnancy losses, administration with low-dose aspirin and heparin is suggested. 

12 45 Anticoagulant treatment may be offered for women with two pregnancy losses and APS in the context of clinical research. 

14 46 Overt hypothyroidism should be treated with levothyroxine in women with RPL. 

14 47 Treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism may reduce the risk of miscarriage, but the potential benefit should be balanced against the risks. 

14 48 Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels should be checked in early gestation for women with subclinical hypothyroidism and RPL. 

14 49 Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels should be checked in early gestation for women with thyroid autoimmunity and RPL. 

14 50 Treatment with levothyroxine is not recommended in euthyroid women with thyroid antibodies and RPL outside a clinical trial. 

14 51 Progesterone is not recommended to improve live birth rate in women with RPL and luteal phase insufficiency. 

14 52 Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) is not recommended to improve live birth rate in women with RPL and luteal phase insufficiency. 

14 53 Metformin supplementation in

Men with unexplained RPL or RPL with selected immunological biomarkers may benefit from prednisolone treatment. Glucocorticoids are not recommended for RPL. Heparin or low dose aspirin do not improve live birth rates in women with unexplained RPL. Low dose folic acid is not recommended to prevent pregnancy loss in women with RPL. Vaginal progesterone does not improve live birth rates in women with unexplained RPL. Intralipid therapy and G-CSF are not recommended for improving live birth rates in women with unexplained RPL. Endometrial scratching is not recommended for women with unexplained RPL. Multivitamin supplements are not recommended as treatment for RPL. 

Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL) is defined as the loss of two or more pregnancies. Investigations should be based on the best available evidence and individual circumstances. Psychological support is important for couples experiencing RPL. Pregnancy after RPL can be anxiety-inducing, and couples should have a plan for care. The emotional impact of RPL on men should also be studied. Care for RPL couples should consider their psychosocial needs.

Treatment of couples with recurrent first-trimester and second-trimester miscarriage. A dedicated Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL) clinic offers specialist investigations, support, and treatment to couples who have experienced RPL. Staff should be appropriately trained, and the clinic should provide information, evaluations, and tailored psychological care. Couples seek expertise, investigations, and a treatment plan to reduce the risk of further losses. Psychological care should include recognition of the patient as an individual, time for questions, good listening, respect, clear language, honesty, shared planning, and supportive care. Risk factors for RPL include advanced female age, stress, and depression. Female age is a well-established risk factor for RPL, with a higher risk for women over 40. Stress and depression are associated with RPL, but the impact on miscarriage risk is unclear.

Stress is associated with RPL, but couples should be informed that there is no evidence that stress is a direct cause of pregnancy loss. Exposure to occupational and environmental factors may be associated with an increased risk of pregnancy loss in women with RPL. Chronic endometritis and abnormal endometrial decidualization may also play a role in RPL. Smoking cessation is recommended for couples with RPL, as smoking can have a negative impact on chances of a live birth. Obesity, particularly a BMI over 30 kg/m2, has been associated with an increased risk of RPL, and maintaining a healthy BMI is recommended for women with RPL.

In women with recurrent pregnancy loss, maternal obesity and being significantly underweight are associated with obstetric complications and can impact chances of a live birth. Maintaining a healthy normal range BMI is recommended. Avoiding excessive alcohol consumption is advised, as it can be a risk factor for pregnancy loss. The impact of exercise on live birth chances in women with recurrent pregnancy loss is unclear. Limited evidence suggests a potential association between caffeine intake and late pregnancy loss. There is no evidence on the impact of intercourse during pregnancy or soft drug use on pregnancy loss in women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Radiation exposure during pregnancy can have deleterious effects on the embryo or fetus. It is recommended for couples with recurrent pregnancy loss to strive for a healthy BMI, limit alcohol consumption, and be cautious of caffeine intake.

Medical and family history should be reviewed during the first visit after referral for recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). Lifestyle factors such as smoking, alcohol consumption, exercise, and weight should be assessed in both partners. Information on medical conditions and family history should also be collected to determine relevant diagnostic tests. Genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue is not routinely recommended but can be performed for explanatory purposes, with array-CGH being the preferred method. Parental genetic analysis is not routinely recommended but could be considered after individual risk assessment. Parents with chromosomal abnormalities have a higher risk of subsequent pregnancy loss, but the cumulative live birth rates are good. Couples should be informed of the limitations and implications of genetic testing for decision-making regarding future pregnancies.

Thrombophilia screening is recommended for women with recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL), as it can predispose them to venous thromboembolism. Genetic causes such as Factor V Leiden mutation, Prothrombin mutation, Protein C, Protein S, and Antithrombin deficiency have been evaluated in women with RPL. Screening for hereditary thrombophilia is not recommended unless in a research context or in women with additional risk factors. Acquired thrombophilia, such as antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), can also contribute to RPL. Lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibodies are associated with RPL, particularly prior to 24 weeks' gestation. Testing for APS is justifiable in women with a history of two or more pregnancy losses.

An association was found between antiphospholipid antibodies and recurrent pregnancy loss, particularly before 24 weeks' gestation. Screening for antiphospholipid antibodies is recommended after two pregnancy losses. Screening for aβ2GPI antibodies can also be considered. Other antibodies have limited clinical value and further research is needed. Testing for these antibodies can provide information for diagnosis and treatment, as well as potentially preventing pregnancy complications. Timing of testing and confirmation of results are important. References are available for further information.

The effect of HLA-DRB1*15 and *DQB1*05:01/02 was confirmed to have a negative prognostic effect. HLA-DRB1*07:01 and HLA-DRB3*03:01 also seemed to have a negative effect, though weaker. Maternal carriage of HY-restricting HLA class II alleles had a negative effect on subsequent live birth for women with a firstborn boy. NK cell reactions in pregnant women may be modified by interactions between specific receptors on NK cells and HLA-C or HLA-G. Studies on HLA-G polymorphisms in RPL suggest an association with increased risk. Testing HLA compatibility and HLA-C alleles in couples is not recommended for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. Anti-HY antibodies in women with RPL may have a negative prognostic impact. Measurement of anti-HY antibodies in women with RPL is not recommended. Cytokine testing and cytokine gene polymorphisms should not be used in women with RPL in clinical practice. ANA testing could be considered for explanatory purposes in women with RPL. NK cells in peripheral blood may be higher in RPL women, but the association is inconsistent. NK cells in endometrial biopsies or decidual tissue also show mixed results in studies with RPL women.

There is insufficient evidence to recommend NK cell testing in women with RPL. Testing anti-HLA antibodies in women with RPL is not recommended. Other immunological tests are not recommended in clinical practice.

Thyroid dysfunction, including hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, subclinical hypothyroidism, and isolated hypothyroxinemia, as well as the presence of thyroid autoantibodies such as TPOAb, have been associated with an increased risk of pregnancy complications and recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). Studies have shown that TPOAb may predispose women to hypothyroidism, but not all women with TPOAb develop thyroid disorders. An association between TPOAb and RPL has been found in several studies, with an increased odds of miscarriage for women with thyroid autoantibodies.

An association between thyroid autoimmunity and RPL has been found. Thyroid screening is recommended in women with RPL, and abnormal TSH and TPO-antibody levels should be followed up by T4 testing. PCOS is associated with pregnancy complications, but assessment of PCOS, fasting insulin, and fasting glucose is not recommended to improve pregnancy prognosis in women with RPL. Prolactin testing is not recommended unless there are clinical symptoms of hyperprolactinemia. Ovarian reserve testing may be beneficial in assessing RPL, as diminished ovarian reserve could be a causative or prognostic factor.

Ovarian reserve testing is not recommended in women with RPL. Luteal phase insufficiency testing is not recommended in women with RPL. Androgen testing is not recommended in women with RPL. Vitamin D testing is not recommended for women with RPL. LH testing is not recommended in women with RPL. Hyperhomocysteinemia is associated with RPL, but testing is not recommended.

In a study of postpartum patients with vascular-related pregnancy complications, associations were found between homocysteine levels and certain pregnancy conditions. However, these associations were no longer significant after adjusting for time interval and maternal age. Studies also found no significant differences in homocysteine levels between women with recurrent pregnancy loss and healthy controls. Hyperhomocysteinemia may be a factor in the link between polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and recurrent pregnancy loss. One study suggested an association between paternal homocysteine levels and recurrent pregnancy loss. Measurement of homocysteine levels is not routinely recommended in women with recurrent pregnancy loss.

An association between congenital uterine malformations and recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) has been well documented. The prevalence of uterine malformations is higher in women with RPL than in the general population. Diagnostic imaging of the uterus can be considered in women with RPL. Different techniques such as hysteroscopy, laparoscopy, sonohysterography, and 3D ultrasound can be used to diagnose uterine malformations. Acquired uterine malformations such as submucous myomas, endometrial polyps, and uterine adhesions have also been found prevalent in women with pregnancy loss. Recommendations include assessing the uterine anatomy in all women with RPL using transvaginal 3D ultrasound as the preferred technique. Sonohysterography is more accurate than hysterosalpingography in diagnosing uterine malformations. Further investigation should be considered if a uterine malformation is diagnosed, including evaluation of the kidneys and urinary tract. MRI is not recommended as the first-line option for assessing uterine malformations in women with RPL.

Congenital uterine malformations are more prevalent in women with recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) compared to controls. There is uncertainty about the exact contribution of these malformations to RPL. Acquired uterine malformations do not appear to be associated with RPL. Uterine assessment is recommended for all women with RPL, with transvaginal 3D ultrasound being the preferred method. MRI can be used if 3D ultrasound is not available. Further research is needed to clarify the role of uterine malformations in RPL. 

Male factors, such as sperm quality, occupational exposure, and lifestyle habits, can contribute to RPL. Couples with RPL should assess both male and female factors. Men with RPL may have reduced sperm quality, higher DNA damage, and lifestyle factors that increase the risk of RPL. Sperm DNA damage testing should be considered for couples following a miscarriage. Oxidative stress, smoking, obesity, and excessive exercise can contribute to sperm DNA damage. Surgically retrieved immature sperm for intracytoplasmic sperm injection may also be a cause of pregnancy loss.

In the male partner, it is suggested to assess lifestyle factors such as smoking, alcohol consumption, exercise pattern, and body weight. Assessing sperm DNA fragmentation in couples with RPL can be considered for explanatory purposes. Sperm DNA damage is associated with poor quality sperm and unhealthy lifestyles. Prognosis in RPL couples can be affected by factors such as reproductive history, sex of firstborn, and family history. Prognostic tools can help evaluate the chances of a live birth in couples with RPL.

There was a significantly decreased chance of at least one subsequent live birth with increasing maternal age; of women aged 40 years or older, 41.7% achieved a live birth within 5 years compared to 81.3% of women aged 20 –24 years. There was also a significant decrease in chance of a live birth by increasing number of miscarriages before first consultation ranging from 71.9% in women with 3 miscarriages to 50.2% in women with 6 or more previous miscarriages. Another longitudinal study collected data of 716 RPL patients attending a referral clinic in Liverpool over a 10-year period. Of the patients achieving a further pregnancy, 75% had a successful outcome with survival beyond 24 weeks. Previous miscarriage history and age of the patient significantly affected the chances of a successful outcome, with age being slightly more significant than previous number of miscarriages. The GDG recommends basing prognosis on the number of preceding pregnancy losses and female age. Prognostic tools can be used to provide an estimate of subsequent chance of live birth in couples with unexplained RPL. Unproven therapeutic interventions for unexplained RPL should only be applied in a research setting with relying on reasonable pathophysiological hypotheses.

Treatment for women with thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) aims to prevent venous thromboembolism and placental thrombosis. Antithrombotic agents like aspirin and heparin are investigated as treatments. Evidence suggests no benefit of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) for preventing pregnancy loss in women with hereditary thrombophilia. A combination of heparin and aspirin may improve live birth rates in women with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) and RPL. Recommendations include starting low-dose aspirin and heparin before conception for women with APS and a history of three or more pregnancy losses. Further research is needed to determine the effectiveness of treatment for APS and clinical criteria for treatment.

Treatment for RPL with metabolic or endocrinologic abnormalities should include levothyroxine for overt hypothyroidism. There is conflicting evidence for subclinical hypothyroidism, but treatment may reduce the risk of miscarriage. Women with thyroid autoimmunity should also be treated with levothyroxine if pregnant. However, there is insufficient evidence to support levothyroxine treatment in euthyroid women with thyroid antibodies and RPL outside a clinical trial. Further research is needed to assess the potential benefits and risks of levothyroxine supplementation in these cases.

Thyroid autoimmunity has been suggested as a causative factor in RPL, but testing for luteal phase insufficiency is not routinely recommended. Progesterone and HCG have been studied in women with unexplained RPL, but evidence is limited. Metformin has been shown to improve pregnancy outcomes in women with PCOS, but there is limited evidence for its use in women with RPL. Ovulation induction and bromocriptine may be beneficial for women with RPL associated with hyperprolactinemia. Vitamin D supplementation could be considered for women with RPL, but evidence is lacking. Treatment for hyperhomocysteinemia may improve live birth rates in women with RPL. Testing for Hcy levels is not routinely recommended, but treatments are available if elevated levels are detected.

Treatment options for septate uterus include hysteroscopic metroplasty, which has been shown to decrease the risk of pregnancy loss. Other uterine abnormalities may require different treatments, such as laparoscopic removal of a rudimentary horn for hemi-uterus. Metroplasty is not recommended for bicorporeal uterus with a normal cervix, and there is insufficient evidence to support metroplasty for women with bicorporeal uterus and a double cervix. Clinical trials are needed to evaluate the benefits of hysteroscopic septum resection in women with RPL and septate uterus.

Observational studies suggest treatment may reduce miscarriage rate. Hysteroscopic septum resection may decrease spontaneous miscarriage probability. More research is needed on the effects of treatment on fertility. For other Müllerian malformations, high-quality randomized trials are urgently needed. IVF with gestational carrier can be an option for irreparable uterine abnormalities and RPL. Acquired intrauterine malformations may be detected in women with RPL, but evidence on treatment effects is inconclusive. Hysteroscopic removal of submucosal fibroids or endometrial polyps in women with RPL is not recommended. Surgical removal of intramural fibroids is not recommended. Insufficient evidence supports surgical removal of intrauterine adhesions for pregnancy outcomes. Cervical weakness may be a factor in pregnancy loss, but evidence on cerclage is inconclusive. Serial cervical sonographic surveillance is recommended for women with suspected cervical weakness. Cerclage could be considered for women with recurrent second-trimester pregnancy loss due to cervical weakness, but evidence on its benefits is lacking.

Couples with RPL should be informed that smoking, alcohol consumption, obesity, and excessive exercise could have a negative impact on their chances of a live birth, and therefore cessation of smoking, a normal body weight, limited alcohol consumption, and a normal exercise pattern is recommended. Sperm selection is not recommended as a treatment in couples with RPL. Antioxidants for men have not been shown to improve the chance of a live birth.

Lymphocyte immunization therapy should not be used for unexplained RPL due to lack of significant effect and potential serious adverse effects. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) is not recommended for RPL treatment. Glucocorticoids are not recommended for unexplained RPL or RPL with selected immunological biomarkers. Heparin or low dose aspirin are not recommended for women with unexplained RPL. Low dose folic acid is recommended preconceptionally for neural tube defect prevention but not for preventing pregnancy loss in women with RPL. Progesterone treatment does not improve live birth rates in women with unexplained RPL. Intralipid therapy is not recommended for RPL treatment.

One trial found that the live birth rate in women with RPL after Intralipid treatment was similar to that after IvIg. No serious adverse effects have been reported after the use of low-dose intralipid treatment in women with RPL. However, serious adverse effects have been reported after the use of higher doses of intravenous lipid emulsions. There is insufficient evidence to recommend intralipid therapy for improving live birth rate in women with unexplained RPL.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) has shown a beneficial effect on the outcome of subsequent pregnancy in women with RPL. However, more trials of good quality in different populations are needed before it can be recommended for use in clinical practice. There is insufficient evidence to recommend G-CSF in women with unexplained RPL.

There is no evidence to recommend endometrial scratching in women with unexplained RPL. There is no evidence that endometrial scratching improves subsequent pregnancy outcome in women with RPL.

Treatment options for couples with recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) include IVF/ICSI, antioxidants, and multi-vitamin supplements. Antioxidants may reduce oxidative stress in the placenta, but vitamin E could be harmful. Other therapies like homeopathy, bioresonans therapy, and naprotechnology have not been proven effective. Women with RPL can consider using multi-vitamin supplements that are safe in pregnancy. It is recommended to avoid vitamin supplements unless a specific deficiency is detected.

Chinese herbal 
medicines versus 
placebo)   
(Li et al., 2016 ) 475 per 1.000  514 per 
1.000  
(333 to 793)  RR 1.08  
(0.70 to 1.66)  80 
(1 RCT)  ⊕ 
VERY LOW b,c,d,e  
*The risk in the intervention group  (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect  of the intervention (and its 95% CI).  
b. Very low quality of evidence  
c. Optimal information size not met  
d. Single RCT  
e. Wide confidence intervals  
   [144]

Combined medicines versus other pharmaceuticals show a relative risk of 1.55 in favor of combined medicines. The risk in the intervention group is based on assumed risk in the comparison group. Further research is recommended in various areas related to recurrent pregnancy loss, including genetics, thrombophilia, immunology, metabolic factors, uterine malformations, male factors, and female factors. The guideline was developed following the Manual for ESHRE guideline development, with experts selected based on expertise and geographical location. Literature searches were performed up to March 31, 2017.

A guideline was developed for the management of recurrent pregnancy loss, with recommendations labeled as either 'strong' or 'conditional' based on the GRADE approach. Strong recommendations indicate that most individuals should receive the intervention, while conditional recommendations recognize that different choices may be appropriate for individual patients. The guideline was open for review between June 30 and August 15, 2017, with stakeholders including clinicians, patient organizations, and national societies providing feedback. Implementation strategies include dissemination through various channels and the development of a patient version to aid in clinical decision-making. The guideline will be considered for revision in 2021, with updates based on new evidence. For more information on the methodology of ESHRE guidelines, visit their website.