Management of Bartholin’s cyst/abscess

Bartholin’s cyst is the accumulation of sterile mucous within the Bartholin’s gland following blockage of the gland duct. Bartholin’s abscess is an infection of the sterile mucous that leads to an acute inflammatory reaction and abscess formation within the gland. 

Bartholin’s cyst presents as a soft, fluctuant painless mass, while Bartholin’s abscess presents with acute pain, inflammation, and swelling of the gland. 

Management of a Bartholin’s cyst may not be necessary unless there is a risk of it becoming an abscess. Surgical intervention is required for women with a Bartholin’s abscess. Outpatient management with a WORD catheter may be appropriate for women under 40, while women over 40 should have marsupialisation and biopsy of the gland under general anaesthesia. 

For women showing signs of cellulitis, admission for IV antibiotics should be considered. The Word Bartholin’s Gland Catheter is used for drainage, and a discharge plan with follow-up care is essential. Marsupialisation of Bartholin's cyst may be necessary for inpatients. 

Vulval abscesses should be managed conservatively with analgesia and warm compress for small abscesses, while larger abscesses should be managed surgically with incision and drainage. Routine antibiotics are not indicated unless there is cellulitis or suspected co-existing PID/STI. Recurrent Bartholin’s abscess may require screening for diabetes mellitus and consultation with a senior clinician. Excision of the gland should only be attempted by a consultant.

Surgery Unit ext 7242  
 Take notes to Day Surgery Unit    
Do you give permission for a nurse led discharge post op?  Yes No GYNAECOLOGY 
CEPOD PATHWAY  
Management of Bartholin’s cyst/abscess  
Word Catheter vs Marsupialisation:  
- Word Catheter: Can be performed as an outpatient, no waiting time, does not require patient to starve, potentially less time off work, possible pain during procedure, reduced pain score following procedure, catheter may fall out, 97% success rate at 6 months.  
- Marsupialisation: Requires general anaesthetic, often performed on CEPOD, patient must be starved, will require time off work following general anaesthetic, no pain during procedure as under GA, higher pain score following procedure, no catheter, long term data available, 5-15% of Bartholin's abscesses reoccur after marsupialisation.