Termination of Pregnancy Under 14 Weeks 
This protocol applies to all women requesting a Termination of Pregnancy with underlying Medical and Anesthetic risks and for Fetal Abnormality. Nurses, Midwives, Obstetricians, and Gynaecologists are responsible for following this guidance and using their professional judgement. Referrals from BPAS must fall into specific ASA PS physical classification criteria. Exclusion criteria include requests for second-trimester surgical termination. Specific organ systems and diseases that may affect treatment eligibility are outlined, including respiratory, cardiovascular, endocrine, renal, liver, neurological, and haematological conditions. Referral pathways, clinical assessment, surgical and in-patient medical management, and follow-up procedures are detailed. Key principles emphasize the use of measurable standards and professional judgement in protocol application.

7.18 Codydramol 2 tablets to be taken 4 to 6 hourly PRN, max of 8 tablets a day should be prescribed for 4 days

7.19 Ibuprofen 400mg TDS should be recommended, in suitable patients, for use only if required (care with asthmatic patients). Patient to be advised to purchase over the counter.

7.20 Due to the high success rates of medical management, formal follow up in EPU is not required. Patients should be advised to do a home pregnancy test three weeks after the medication is given. If this is positive then they should contact EPU for follow up.

7.21 If at 3 weeks pregnancy test is still positive then a transvaginal ultrasound scan is indicated.

7.22 Medical evacuation is a safe alternative management shown to be acceptable to some patients.

7.23 It empowers these patients the choice of an alternative method to surgical evacuation.

7.24 The regime of 200mg Mifepristone PO followed by 800mcg of vaginal Misoprostol is associated with high efficacy rates, low failure rates, and high patient acceptability rates.

7.25 There is limited specific data on the number of ERPCs required following medical management, but is likely to be small overall and less than is seen with conservative management.

7.26 Form HSA 4 (Yellow Booklet): this form is to be completed immediately post TOP by the practitioner terminating the pregnancy. It must not be filed in the notes and should be and sent to Gynae Secretary Denise Hemsley on L11, this is then sent in a sealed envelope to:

The Chief Medical Officer
Department of Health
Richmond House
79 White Hall
London
SW1A 2NS

8.0 Discharge & Follow Up For Women Referred From BPAS

8.1 Following completion of termination of pregnancy it is the responsibility of the clinician carrying out the procedure to complete an electronic discharge summary.

8.2 A copy of this discharge summary must be sent to Gynae Secretary Denise Hemsley on L11 to be faxed to BPAS within 24 hours of discharge. Fax to: 01273 562337

8.3 All women must be entered on the TOP Dentrite Database

8.4 All counselling services and contraception advice will be offered at BPAS prior to termination of pregnancy

8.5 No hospital follow up is required

8.6 Written and verbal discharge information must be given to the patient on discharge