Management of Recurrent Miscarriage GP019 
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals 

Key Principles: A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol. 

Scope: This guideline applies to all women attending for Recurrent Miscarriages 

Responsibilities: Nursing staff & Gynaecologists should access, read, understand and follow this guidance, and use their professional judgement in the application of this protocol. Management should ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National recommendations, and is accessible to all relevant staff and service users upon request. 

Patient Selection (Criteria for investigation): Criteria include 3 or more consecutive first trimester miscarriages, one or more second trimester miscarriages, 2 consecutive first trimester miscarriages in a woman above age 38 years, and women with other markers indicative of Antiphospholipid syndrome in previous pregnancies. 

Investigations: Blood tests for Antiphospholipid antibodies should be arranged before discharge from EPU clinic, to be performed 6 weeks after the miscarriage. Follow-up will be arranged in the Recurrent Miscarriage Clinic. 

Test for Antiphospholipid Syndrome (APLS): Screening should be performed at least 6 weeks after a pregnancy loss, including tests for lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibodies. 

Cytogenetics for product of Conception: Karyotyping should be offered to women at the third consecutive miscarriage, and tissue should be sent for analysis. 

Thrombophilia Screen: Full Thrombophilia screen is indicated in women with second trimester miscarriage only, and treatment should be discussed and initiated with consultant discussion. Women with positive thrombophilia screen should be advised to use LMWH. 

No abnormality detected: Women with no detected cause behind their miscarriage should be reassured and offered early contact with EPU. Anti-D Administration should be referred to the current miscarriage guideline.