The Management of Third- and 
Fourth-Degree Perineal T ears
Green-top Guideline No. 29 
June 2015
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists2 of 19The Management of Third- and Fourth-Degree Perineal Tears
This is the third edition of this guideline, which was previously published in July 2001 and March 2007 
under the same title.
Executive summary of recommendations 
Classification and terminology
How should obstetric anal sphincter injury be classified?
It is recommended that the classification outlined in this guideline be used when describing any 
obstetric anal sphincter injury.
If there is any doubt about the degree of third-degree tear, it is advisable to classify it to the higher 
degree rather than the lower degree.
Prediction and prevention of obstetric anal sphincter injury
Can obstetric anal sphincter injury be predicted? 
Clinicians need to be aware of the risk factors for obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS).
Clinicians should be aware, however, that risk factors do not allow the accurate prediction of OASIS.
Can obstetric anal sphincter injury be prevented?
Clinicians should explain to women that the evidence for the protective effect of episiotomy is 
conflicting. [ New 2015 ]
Mediolateral episiotomy should be considered in instrumental deliveries. [ New 2015 ]
Where episiotomy is indicated, the mediolateral technique is recommended, with careful attention 
to ensure that the angle is 60 degrees away from the midline when the perineum is distended.
Perineal protection at crowning can be protective. [ New 2015 ]
Warm compression during the second stage of labour reduces the risk of OASIS. [ New 2015 ]
Identification of obstetric anal sphincter injuries 
How can the identification of obstetric anal sphincter injuries be improved? 
All women having a vaginal delivery are at risk of sustaining OASIS or isolated rectal buttonhole 
tears. They should therefore be examined systematically, including a digital rectal examination, to 
assess the severity of damage, particularly prior to suturing.
Repair of OASIS
General principles
Repair of third- and fourth-degree tears should be conducted by an appropriately trained clinician 
or by a trainee under supervision. 
Repair should take place in an operating theatre, under regional or general anaesthesia, with good 
lighting and with appropriate instruments. If there is excessive bleeding, a vaginal pack should D
P
P
D
ACDC
D
P
P
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists3 of 19be inserted and the woman should be taken to the theatre as soon as possible. Repair of OASIS 
in the delivery room may be performed in certain circumstances after discussion with a senior 
obstetrician. [ New 2015 ]
Figure of eight sutures should be avoided during the repair of OASIS because they are haemostatic 
in nature and may cause tissue ischaemia. [ New 2015 ]
A rectal examination should be performed after the repair to ensure that sutures have not been 
inadvertently inserted through the anorectal mucosa. If a suture is identified it should be removed. 
[New 2015 ]
Which techniques should be used to accomplish the repair of the anorectal mucosa? 
The torn anorectal mucosa should be repaired with sutures using either the continuous or 
interrupted technique. [ New 2015 ]
Which techniques should be used to accomplish the repair of the internal anal sphincter? 
Where the torn internal anal sphincter (IAS) can be identified, it is advisable to repair this separately 
with interrupted or mattress sutures without any attempt to overlap the IAS.
Which techniques should be used to repair the external anal sphincter? 
For repair of a full thickness external anal sphincter (EAS) tear, either an overlapping or an end-to-
end (approximation) method can be used with equivalent outcomes.
For partial thickness (all 3a and some 3b) tears, an end-to-end technique should be used. [ New 2015 ]
Choice of suture materials 
Which suture materials should be used to accomplish repair of obstetric anal sphincter injuries? 
3-0 polyglactin should be used to repair the anorectal mucosa as it may cause less irritation and 
discomfort than polydioxanone (PDS) sutures. [ New 2015 ]
When repair of the EAS and/or IAS muscle is being performed, either monofilament sutures such as 
3-0 PDS or modern braided sutures such as 2-0 polyglactin can be used with equivalent outcomes. 
When obstetric anal sphincter repairs are being performed, the burying of surgical knots beneath 
the superficial perineal muscles is recommended to minimise the risk of knot and suture migration 
to the skin.
Surgical competence 
Who should repair obstetric anal sphincter injury? 
Obstetric anal sphincter repair should be performed by appropriately trained practitioners.
Formal training in anal sphincter repair techniques should be an essential component of obstetric 
training.
Postoperative management 
How should women with obstetric anal sphincter injury be managed postoperatively? 
The use of broad-spectrum antibiotics is recommended following repair of OASIS to reduce the risk 
of postoperative infections and wound dehiscence.P
P
D
C
A
D
D
B
B
BD
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists4 of 19The use of postoperative laxatives is recommended to reduce the risk of wound dehiscence.
Bulking agents should not be given routinely with laxatives. [ New 2015 ]
Local protocols should be implemented regarding the use of antibiotics, laxatives, examination 
and follow-up of women with obstetric anal sphincter repair.
Women should be advised that physiotherapy following repair of OASIS could be beneficial.
Women who have undergone obstetric anal sphincter repair should be reviewed at a convenient 
time (usually 6–12 weeks postpartum). Where possible, review should be by clinicians with a 
special interest in OASIS.
If a woman is experiencing incontinence or pain at follow-up, referral to a specialist gynaecologist 
or colorectal surgeon should be considered.
Prognosis 
What is the prognosis following surgical repair? 
Women should be advised that 60–80% of women are asymptomatic 12 months following delivery 
and EAS repair.
Future deliveries
What advice should women be given following an obstetric anal sphincter injury concerning future 
pregnancies and mode of delivery?
All women who sustained OASIS in a previous pregnancy should be counselled about the mode of 
delivery and this should be clearly documented in the notes.
The role of prophylactic episiotomy in subsequent pregnancies is not known and therefore an 
episiotomy should only be performed if clinically indicated.
All women who have sustained OASIS in a previous pregnancy and who are symptomatic or have 
abnormal endoanal ultrasonography and/or manometry should be counselled regarding the option 
of elective caesarean birth.
Risk management 
What processes and policies should be in place for women who have sustained obstetric OASIS?
Units should have a clear protocol for the management of OASIS. [ New 2015 ]
Documentation of the anatomical structures involved, the method of repair and the suture materials 
should be made.
The woman should be fully informed about the nature of her tear and the offer of follow-up should 
be made, all supported by relevant written information.C
B
P
P
PP
B
P
P
P
P
P
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists5 of 191. Purpose and scope 
The purpose of this guideline is to provide evidence-based guidance on the diagnosis, management 
and treatment of third- and fourth-degree perineal tears (obstetric anal sphincter injuries, referred to 
as OASIS). 
2. Introduction and background epidemiology
The reported rate of OASIS (in singleton, term, cephalic, vaginal first births) in England has tripled 
from 1.8% to 5.9% from 2000 to 2012.1 The overall incidence in the UK is 2.9% (range 0–8%), with an 
incidence of 6.1% in primiparae compared with 1.7% in multiparae.2
With increased awareness and training, there appears to be an increase in the detection of anal sphincter 
injuries.1 A trend towards an increasing incidence of third- or fourth-degree perineal tears does not 
necessarily indicate poor quality care. It may indicate, at least in the short term, an improved quality of 
care through better detection and reporting.3
Obstetricians who are appropriately trained are more likely to provide a consistent, high standard of anal 
sphincter repair and contribute to reducing the extent of morbidity and litigation associated with anal 
sphincter injury.4 
3. Identification and assessment of evidence 
The Cochrane Library was searched for relevant randomised controlled trials, systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses. MEDLINE and EMBASE were also searched from 2006–2014 and the date of the last search 
was November 2014. NICE Evidence Search, Trip and the National Guideline Clearinghouse were also 
searched for relevant guidelines and reviews.
The databases were searched using the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), including all 
subheadings, and this was combined with a keyword search that included the terms: ‘human’, ‘female’, 
‘childbirth’, ‘obstetric’, ‘perineum’, ‘third degree’, ‘fourth degree’, ‘anal sphincter’, ‘tear’, ‘injury’, 
‘rupture’, ‘damage’, ‘incontinence’, ‘faecal’, ‘anal’, ‘repair’, ‘surgery’ and ‘sutures’. 
The definitions of the types of evidence used in this guideline originate from the Scottish Intercollegiate 
Guidelines Network. Where possible, recommendations are based on and explicitly linked to the evidence 
that supports them. Areas lacking evidence are highlighted and annotated as ‘good practice points’. 
4. Classification and terminology 
4.1 How should obstetric anal sphincter injury be classified? 
It is recommended that the classification outlined in this guideline be used when describing any 
obstetric anal sphincter injury.
If there is any doubt about the degree of third-degree tear, it is advisable to classify it to the higher 
degree rather than the lower degree.
The following classification described by Sultan5 has been adopted by the International 
Consultation on Incontinence6 and the RCOG: 
First-degree tear: Injury to perineal skin and/or vaginal mucosa.
Second-degree tear: Injury to perineum involving perineal muscles but not involving the anal 
sphincter. PD
Evidence 
level 4RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists6 of 19Third-degree tear: Injury to perineum involving the anal sphincter complex:
Grade 3a tear: Less than 50% of external anal sphincter (EAS) thickness torn.
Grade 3b tear: More than 50% of EAS thickness torn.
Grade 3c tear: Both EAS and internal anal sphincter (IAS) torn.
Fourth-degree tear: Injury to perineum involving the anal sphincter complex (EAS and IAS) 
and anorectal mucosa.
The lining of the anal canal varies along its length due to its embryological derivation. The 
proximal anal canal is lined with rectal mucosa (columnar epithelium) whereas the distal 1–1.5 
cm of the anal canal is lined with modified squamous epithelium.7 To avoid confusion, the 
term ‘anorectal mucosa’ has been used instead of anal epithelium throughout this guideline.
Obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS) encompass both third- and fourth-degree perineal tears. 
Anal incontinence is defined as the complaint of involuntary loss of flatus and/or faeces affecting 
quality of life.8
The IAS plays a role in the maintenance of continence. In a prospective study involving follow-
up of 531 women after OASIS, those with a grade 3c/4 tear had a significantly poorer outcome 
(P < 0.05) compared with women with a grade 3a/3b tear with respect to the development 
of defaecatory symptoms, anal manometry results and the associated quality of life.9 Another 
prospective follow-up study of 125 women who had OASIS reported a significantly increased 
incidence of anal incontinence ( P < 0.001) in women who had 3b and fourth-degree compared 
with 3a tears.10 A third prospective study of 500 women followed up at 3 months showed that 
IAS defect thickness (partial thickness defect greater than one quadrant or full thickness IAS 
defect) was predictive of severe incontinence (OR 5.1, 95% CI 1.5–22.9).11 A retrospective, 
descriptive cross-sectional study of 66 women who were followed up for a mean of 5 years 
showed that women with combined IAS and EAS injury (n = 6) had worse faecal incontinence 
(P < 0.05) and lower anal pressures ( P = 0.04) than women with isolated EAS injury (n = 10).12 
Inclusion of the IAS in the classification above would allow differentiation between future incontinence 
related to IAS injury and that related to EAS injury alone. It is recognised that identification of the IAS 
may be difficult in acute obstetric trauma, but every attempt should nonetheless be made to exclude 
and document injury to the IAS. Recording the degree of EAS damage (more or less than 50%) should 
be possible in all cases. If one is unsure whether it is more than 50% then it should be classified as 3b to 
avoid underestimation.
Rectal buttonhole tear
If the tear involves the rectal mucosa with an intact anal sphincter complex, it is by definition 
not a fourth-degree tear. This has to be documented as a rectal buttonhole tear. If not 
recognised and repaired, this type of tear may lead to a rectovaginal fistula.13
5. Prediction and prevention of obstetric anal sphincter injury
5.1 Can obstetric anal sphincter injury be predicted? 
Clinicians need to be aware of the risk factors for OASIS.
Clinicians should be aware, however, that risk factors do not allow the accurate prediction of OASIS. 
The following risk factors have been identified. There is, however, considerable difference in 
the reported risks for the same risk factor.1,14–16Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 4
P
D
Evidence 
level 3RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists7 of 19l Asian ethnicity1 (OR 2.27, 95% CI 2.14–2.41) 
l nulliparity15 (relative risk [RR] 6.97, 95% CI 5.40–8.99) 
l birthweight greater than 4 kg1 (OR 2.27, 95% CI 2.18–2.36)
l shoulder dystocia1 (OR 1.90, 95% CI 1.72–2.08)
l occipito-posterior position15 (RR 2.44, 95% CI 2.07–2.89) 
l prolonged second stage of labour:15 
 m duration of second stage between 2 and 3 hours (RR 1.47, 95% CI 1.20–1.79)
 m duration of second stage between 3 and 4 hours (RR 1.79, 95% CI 1.43–2.22)
 m duration of second stage more than 4 hours (RR 2.02, 95% CI 1.62–2.51)
l instrumental delivery:1
 m ventouse delivery without episiotomy (OR 1.89, 95% CI 1.74–2.05)
 m ventouse delivery with episiotomy (OR 0.57, 95% CI 0.51–0.63)
 m forceps delivery without episiotomy (OR 6.53, 95% CI 5.57–7.64) 
 m forceps delivery with episiotomy (OR 1.34, 95% CI 1.21–1.49).
Risk factors for OASIS were assessed in a retrospective study of 123 women who sustained 
third- or fourth-degree tears and 123 controls without OASIS. The authors concluded that a 
scoring system based on the reported risks from meta-analyses to identify women at risk is 
unlikely to be of practical use.16
There is limited evidence in relation to the risk of sustaining recurrent OASIS. A large 
retrospective cohort study showed an odds ratio of 5.51 (95% CI 5.18–5.86) of sustaining 
recurrent OASIS in the subsequent pregnancy.17 Risk factors for sustaining recurrent OASIS in 
the subsequent pregnancy include Asian ethnicity (OR 1.59, 95% CI 1.48–1.71), forceps delivery 
(OR 4.02, 95% CI 3.51–4.60) and birthweight more than 4 kg (OR 2.29, 95% CI 2.16–2.43). 
5.2 Can obstetric anal sphincter injury be prevented?
Clinicians should explain to women that the evidence for the protective effect of episiotomy 
is conflicting.
Mediolateral episiotomy should be considered in instrumental deliveries.
Where episiotomy is indicated, the mediolateral technique is recommended, with careful attention 
to ensure that the angle is 60 degrees away from the midline when the perineum is distended.
Perineal protection at crowning can be protective.
Warm compression during the second stage of labour reduces the risk of OASIS.
Episiotomy
The evidence that episiotomy prevents OASIS and/or anal incontinence is conflicting. Hospital 
Episode Statistics data have shown that episiotomy is associated with the lowest risk of OASIS.1 
Some studies have shown a protective effect while others have not.18–20
However, there is evidence that a mediolateral episiotomy should be performed with 
instrumental deliveries as it appears to have a protective effect on OASIS.1,10
The angle of the episiotomy away from the midline has been shown to be important in reducing 
the incidence of OASIS,21,22 with the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 
recommending an angle of 45–60 degrees from the midline.23 Nonetheless, a prospective 
study by Kalis et al. suggests that a resultant suture angle of 40–60 degrees is more important 
than the incision angle of 45–60 degrees.24Evidence 
level 2–
Evidence 
level 2++
CC
D
D
A
Evidence 
level 2–
Evidence 
level 3RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists8 of 19However, this can be difficult to achieve at ‘crowning’ when the perineum is fully stretched. 
An episiotomy performed at 40 degrees results in a post-delivery angle of 22 degrees, which is 
too close to the midline to be maximally protective. A 60-degree episiotomy from the centre 
of the introitus results in a post-delivery angle of 45 degrees.24 A study has demonstrated 
that doctors and midwives were unable to correctly estimate angles and lengths required 
to perform safe mediolateral episiotomies.25 None of the midwives and only 22% of doctors 
were able to perform a truly mediolateral episiotomy. Only 13% of episiotomies were at a post-
delivery angle of 40 degrees or more.26 Special scissors designed to ensure an incision angle of 
60 degrees have been shown to be effective in achieving the correct angle.27,28
Perineal protection
The NICE Intrapartum care guideline23 found no difference between ‘hands poised’ and ‘hands on’ the 
perineum as prevention for OASIS. However, more recently there have been interventional studies using 
programmes which have successfully reduced OASIS rates, all of which have described manual perineal 
protection/‘hands on’ techniques.29,30 
These include:
1. Left hand slowing down the delivery of the head.
2. Right hand protecting the perineum.
3. Mother NOT pushing when head is crowning (communicate).
4. Think about episiotomy (risk groups and correct angle).
The best method of perineal support/protection is unclear, with the Ritgen manoeuvre 
(delivering the fetal head, using one hand to pull the fetal chin from between the maternal 
anus and the coccyx and the other on the fetal occiput to control speed of delivery) no better 
than ‘standard care’ (not specifically defined but it included perineal protection/‘hands on’).31
However, the positive effects of perineal support29,30 suggest that this should be promoted, as 
opposed to ‘hands off’ or ‘poised’, in order to protect the perineum and reduce the incidence 
of OASIS.
Warm compress 
A Cochrane review has found the application of warm compresses during the second stage of 
labour to have a significant effect on reducing OASIS.32 The analysis, comprising two studies 
(1525 women), found that warm compresses significantly reduced the risk of third- and fourth-
degree tears (RR 0.48, 95% CI 0.28–0.84). The intervention involves holding the compress on 
the perineum continuously during and between contractions. 
Perineal massage during antenatal period and in second stage of labour
Perineal massage during the last month of pregnancy has been suggested as a possible way of 
enabling perineal tissue to expand more easily during birth. The Cochrane review33 of four 
trials (2497 women) showed that perineal massage undertaken by the woman or her partner 
was associated with an overall reduction in the incidence of trauma requiring suturing (four 
trials, 2480 women, RR 0.91, 95% CI 0.86–0.96, number needed to treat to benefit [NNTB] 15 
[10–36]). Women practising perineal massage were less likely to have an episiotomy (four trials, 
2480 women, RR 0.84, 95% CI 0.74–0.95, NNTB 21 [12–75]). These findings were significant 
for women without previous vaginal birth only. No differences were seen in the incidence of 
first- or second-degree perineal tears or third-/fourth-degree perineal trauma (four trials, 2480 
women, RR 0.81, 95% CI 0.56–1.18).Evidence 
level 2+Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 1++
Evidence 
level 1–RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists9 of 19The data regarding the protective effect of perineal massage in the second stage of labour are 
inconclusive; a small randomised trial found that the rates of intact perineums, first- and second-
degree tears and episiotomies were similar in the massage and control groups. There were 
fewer third-degree tears in the massage group (12 [1.7%] versus 23 [3.6%]; absolute risk 2.11, 
RR 0.45, 95% CI 0.23–0.93), although the trial was underpowered to measure this outcome.32,34
6. Identification of obstetric anal sphincter injuries 
6.1 How can the identification of obstetric anal sphincter injuries be improved? 
All women having a vaginal delivery are at risk of sustaining OASIS or isolated rectal buttonhole 
tears. They should therefore be examined systematically, including a digital rectal examination, to 
assess the severity of damage, particularly prior to suturing.
According to NICE perineal care guidance,23 before assessing for genital trauma, healthcare professionals should:
l explain to the woman what they plan to do and why
l offer inhalational analgesia
l ensure good lighting
l position the woman so that she is comfortable and so that the genital structures can be seen clearly.
The examination should be performed gently and may be done in the immediate period following 
birth. If genital trauma is identified following birth, further systematic assessment should be carried out, 
including a rectal examination.
Systematic assessment of genital trauma should include:13
l further explanation of what the healthcare professional plans to do and why
l confirmation by the woman that effective local or regional analgesia is in place
l visual assessment of the extent of perineal trauma to include the structures involved, the apex of 
the injury and assessment of bleeding
l a rectal examination to assess whether there has been any damage to the external or internal anal 
sphincter if there is any suspicion that the perineal muscles are damaged.
The woman should usually be in the lithotomy position to allow adequate visual assessment of the 
degree of the trauma and for the repair itself. This position should only be maintained for as long as is 
necessary for the systematic assessment and repair. The systematic assessment and its results should be 
fully documented, preferably pictorially.
The woman should be referred to a more experienced healthcare professional if uncertainty exists as to 
the nature or extent of the trauma sustained. All relevant healthcare professionals should attend hands-
on training in perineal/genital assessment and repair and ensure that they maintain these skills.
Following vaginal delivery, anal sphincter and anorectal mucosal injury cannot be excluded 
without performing a rectal examination. With increased awareness and training in 
examination and diagnosis, there appears to be an increase in the detection of OASIS;4 one 
observational study showed that increased vigilance can double the detection rate.35
 
Since the introduction of endoanal ultrasound, sonographic abnormalities of the anal sphincter 
(‘occult’ injuries) have been identified in 33% of women following vaginal delivery.36 However, 
when endoanal ultrasound was performed immediately following delivery, the detection 
rate of OASIS was not significantly increased compared with clinical examination alone.37 
As there are current limitations in availability, image quality, interpretation skills and patient 
acceptability, the use of endoanal ultrasound in detecting anal sphincter injuries immediately 
after delivery should be viewed as a research tool.Evidence 
level 1–
Evidence 
level 2+P
Evidence 
level 3RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists10 of 197. Repair of OASIS
7.1 General principles
Repair of third- and fourth-degree tears should be conducted by an appropriately trained clinician 
or by a trainee under supervision. 
Repair should take place in an operating theatre, under regional or general anaesthesia, with 
good lighting and with appropriate instruments. If there is excessive bleeding, a vaginal pack 
should be inserted and the woman should be taken to the theatre as soon as possible. Repair 
of OASIS in the delivery room may be performed in certain circumstances after discussion with 
a senior obstetrician.
Figure of eight sutures should be avoided during the repair of OASIS because they are haemostatic 
in nature and may cause tissue ischaemia.
A rectal examination should be performed after the repair to ensure that sutures have not been 
inadvertently inserted through the anorectal mucosa. If a suture is identified it should be removed.
Involvement of a colorectal surgeon will be dependent on local protocols, expertise and 
availability as the majority of colorectal surgeons are not familiar with acute OASIS.38 Repair 
in an operating theatre will allow the repair to be performed under optimal conditions with 
appropriate instruments, adequate light and an assistant. Regional or general anaesthesia will 
facilitate identification of the full extent of the injury and enable retrieval of the retracted ends 
of the torn anal sphincter.13
7.2 Which techniques should be used to accomplish the repair of the anorectal mucosa? 
The torn anorectal mucosa should be repaired with sutures using either the continuous or 
interrupted technique.
Traditionally, the technique described to repair the torn anal mucosa was to insert interrupted 
sutures with the knot tied within the anal canal. However, this was recommended when catgut 
was in use to minimise tissue reaction and infection.39 With the availability of polyglactin 
suture material this is no longer necessary as it dissolves by hydrolysis. Whichever technique 
is used, figure of eight sutures should be avoided during repair of the anal mucosa as they can 
cause ischaemia.
7.3 Which techniques should be used to accomplish the repair of the internal anal sphincter? 
Where the torn IAS can be identified, it is advisable to repair this separately with interrupted or 
mattress sutures without any attempt to overlap the IAS.
In 1999, Sultan first described separate repair of the IAS during primary repair using the end-
to-end technique.40 Since then, a number of studies have demonstrated that a separate repair 
of the IAS improves the likelihood of subsequent anal continence.9–12
7.4 Which techniques should be used to repair the external anal sphincter? 
For repair of a full thickness EAS tear, either an overlapping or an end-to-end (approximation) 
method can be used with equivalent outcomes.
For partial thickness (all 3a and some 3b) tears, an end-to-end technique should be used.
A Cochrane review demonstrated no difference in outcomes between an end-to-end and an 
overlap repair and therefore the end-to-end technique can be used for all external sphincter tears.41Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 1++P
P
P
P
Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 4D
C
A
DRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists11 of 19This Cochrane review on the method of repair for third- and fourth-degree tears examined six 
trials involving 588 women.41 There was considerable heterogeneity in the outcome measures, 
time points and reported results. Meta-analyses showed that there was no statistically significant 
difference in perineal pain (RR 0.08, 95% CI 0.00–1.45, one trial, 52 women), dyspareunia 
(average RR 0.77, 95% CI 0.48–1.24, two trials, 151 women) or flatus incontinence (RR 1.14, 95% CI 
0.58–2.23, three trials, 256 women) between the two repair techniques at 12 months. However, 
it showed a statistically significant lower incidence of faecal urgency (RR 0.12, 95% CI 0.02–0.86, 
one trial, 52 women) and lower anal incontinence score (standardised mean difference [SMD] 
–0.70, 95% CI –1.26 to –0.14, one trial, 52 women) in the overlap group. The overlap technique 
was also associated with a statistically significant lower risk of deterioration of anal incontinence 
symptoms over 12 months (RR 0.26, 95% CI 0.09–0.79, one trial, 41 women). There was no 
significant difference in quality of life. At 36 months’ follow-up, there was no difference in flatus 
incontinence (average RR 1.12, 95% CI 0.63–1.99, one trial, 68 women) or faecal incontinence 
(average RR 1.01, 95% CI 0.34–2.98, one trial, 68 women). The overlap technique can only be 
used for full thickness external sphincter tears to allow the torn ends to be overlapped without 
tension and this technique has only been described to repair full thickness EAS tears. As two 
free ends of the muscle are needed for a proper overlap repair, overlapping of partial thickness 
EAS tears would exert undue tension on the repair. Therefore an end-to-end repair should be 
performed in a partial thickness EAS tear (3a and some 3b).40
8. Choice of suture materials 
8.1 Which suture materials should be used to accomplish repair of obstetric anal sphincter 
injuries? 
3-0 polyglactin should be used to repair the anorectal mucosa as it may cause less irritation and 
discomfort than polydioxanone (PDS) sutures.
When repair of the EAS and/or IAS muscle is being performed, either monofilament sutures such as 
3-0 PDS or modern braided sutures such as 2-0 polyglactin can be used with equivalent outcomes.
When obstetric anal sphincter repairs are being performed, the burying of surgical knots beneath 
the superficial perineal muscles is recommended to minimise the risk of knot and suture migration 
to the skin.
The use of PDS sutures for repair of the anorectal mucosa should be avoided as they take 
longer to dissolve and may cause discomfort in the anal canal.39
There are no systematic reviews available to evaluate the best suture material for the repair of 
the EAS. The only randomised controlled trial comparing Vicryl® (3-0 polyglactin; Ethicon, 
Somerville, New Jersey, USA) and PDS reported no significant difference in suture-related 
morbidity at 6 weeks and bowel symptoms at 6 and 12 months.42 There are no systematic 
reviews or randomised studies available to evaluate the type of suture materials used in the 
repair of the IAS. Similar to EAS repair, the use of fine suture sizes such as 3-0 PDS and 2-0 
polyglactin (Vicryl®) may cause less irritation and discomfort.
Suture migration is recognised when a woman complains of irritation/pain around the 
perineum after repair of OASIS. This may also be detected at the time of examination where 
the exposed ends of suture material are seen or felt on digital examination. Exposed suture 
ends can be trimmed in the outpatient setting under local anaesthesia. The reported incidence 
of suture migration is about 7% and this can be reduced by trimming the suture ends and 
burying the knots in the deep and superficial perineal muscles.42Evidence 
level 4
BD
B
Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 1–RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists12 of 199. Surgical competence 
9.1 Who should repair obstetric anal sphincter injury? 
Obstetric anal sphincter repair should be performed by appropriately trained practitioners.
Formal training in anal sphincter repair techniques should be an essential component of obstetric training.
Inexperienced attempts at anal sphincter repair may contribute to maternal morbidity, 
especially subsequent anal incontinence. Published randomised controlled trials have 
reported residual EAS defects in 19–36% overall following repair.43–45 The clinical relevance 
of asymptomatic defects demonstrated by ultrasound is currently unclear, but it has been 
suggested that this may be due to inadequate primary repair.9,46
In 2002, a survey of UK consultant obstetricians and trainee obstetricians in two regions 
highlighted the deficiency in and their dissatisfaction with their training in the management 
of third-degree tears.38,47
Repair of third- and fourth-degree perineal tears has now been incorporated in the module 
on postpartum problems in the RCOG core training log book.48 Many regions now conduct 
training workshops involving the use of simulation models.2
10. Postoperative management 
10.1 How should women with obstetric anal sphincter injury be managed postoperatively? 
The use of broad-spectrum antibiotics is recommended following repair of OASIS to reduce the risk 
of postoperative infections and wound dehiscence.
The use of postoperative laxatives is recommended to reduce the risk of wound dehiscence.
Bulking agents should not be given routinely with laxatives.
Local protocols should be implemented regarding the use of antibiotics, laxatives, examination 
and follow-up of women with obstetric anal sphincter repair.
Women should be advised that physiotherapy following repair of OASIS could be beneficial.
Women who have undergone obstetric anal sphincter repair should be reviewed at a convenient 
time (usually 6–12 weeks postpartum). Where possible, review should be by clinicians with a 
special interest in OASIS.
If a woman is experiencing incontinence or pain at follow-up, referral to a specialist gynaecologist 
or colorectal surgeon should be considered.
A Cochrane review addressing antibiotic prophylaxis for third- and fourth-degree perineal 
tears, comparing prophylactic antibiotics against placebo or no antibiotics, included only one 
randomised controlled trial of 147 participants.49 Although the data suggested that prophylactic 
antibiotics help to prevent perineal wound complications following third- or fourth-degree 
perineal tears, loss to follow-up was very high. The authors concluded that results should be 
interpreted with caution as they are based on one small trial.
No systematic reviews were identified which evaluated the use of postoperative laxatives and 
stool softeners. Laxatives are recommended during the postoperative period as passage of a 
hard stool may disrupt the repair.40 Use of stool softeners such as lactulose is recommended 
for about 10 days after the repair.Evidence 
level 1–D
P
Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 4
B
PCB
P
P
P
Evidence 
level 1–
Evidence 
level 2+RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists13 of 19One randomised controlled study compared laxatives and bulking agents in the postoperative 
period following primary OASIS repair.50 In this study, women in the laxative group had a 
significantly earlier and less painful bowel motion and earlier postnatal discharge. There was 
no difference in the symptomatic or functional outcome of repair between the two regimens. 
The dose of lactulose should be titrated to keep the stool soft but not loose. A randomised 
controlled trial of lactulose alone versus lactulose with ispaghula husk (Fybogel®, Reckitt 
Benckiser, Hull, UK) demonstrated that incontinence in the immediate postpartum period 
was more frequent (32.86% versus 18.18%; P = 0.03) with the latter regime and therefore 
routine prescription of bulking agents and lactulose together is not recommended.51
There was one randomised controlled trial comparing early home biofeedback therapy and 
pelvic floor exercises for women who sustained OASIS and this study showed that there was 
no added value in using early home biofeedback therapy.52
As there are considerable variations in the use of antibiotics, laxatives and physiotherapy and in 
available facilities for follow-up in different hospitals, the follow-up regimen is best designed according 
to local facilities.
There were no systematic reviews or randomised controlled trials to indicate the optimal 
method of follow-up after OASIS. It is appropriate to review women in the postnatal period 
to discuss injury sustained during childbirth, assess symptoms and offer advice on how to 
seek help if symptoms develop, offer treatment and/or referral if indicated and offer advice on 
future mode of delivery. Use of a validated health-related quality of life questionnaire may be 
useful for assessment of women who develop anal incontinence after sustaining OASIS.53 The 
RCOG has produced a patient information leaflet on third- and fourth-degree perineal care 
and this, or a suitable alternative, should be given to all women who have had OASIS.54 
If facilities are available and resources allow, follow-up of women with OASIS should be in a 
dedicated perineal clinic with access to endoanal ultrasonography and anal manometry as this 
can aid decision making regarding future delivery.55,56
11. Prognosis 
11.1 What is the prognosis following surgical repair? 
Women should be advised that 60–80% of women are asymptomatic 12 months following delivery 
and EAS repair.
Several randomised controlled studies carried out since 2000 comparing overlap and end-to-
end techniques of EAS repair have reported low incidences of anal incontinence symptoms in 
both arms,42–45 with 60–80% of women described as asymptomatic at 12 months.4,42,44,45
12. Future deliveries
12.1 What advice should women be given following an obstetric anal sphincter injury 
concerning future pregnancies and mode of delivery?
All women who sustained OASIS in a previous pregnancy should be counselled about the mode of 
delivery and this should be clearly documented in the notes.
The role of prophylactic episiotomy in subsequent pregnancies is not known and therefore an 
episiotomy should only be performed if clinically indicated.Evidence 
level 1–
Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 1–B
P
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists14 of 19All women who have sustained OASIS in a previous pregnancy and who are symptomatic or have 
abnormal endoanal ultrasonography and/or manometry should be counselled regarding the option 
of elective caesarean birth.
There were no systematic reviews or randomised controlled trials to suggest the best method 
of delivery following OASIS. The risk of sustaining a further third- or fourth-degree tear after 
a subsequent delivery is 5–7%.56,57 The risks of a subsequent vaginal delivery after a third-
degree tear have been assessed, with 17% of women developing worsening faecal symptoms 
after a second vaginal delivery.58–61 This seemed to occur if there had been faecal incontinence 
beyond 3 months but resolution by 6 months after the index delivery.60
There are no studies to suggest that prophylactic episiotomy in the subsequent delivery would prevent 
OASIS. Hence the decision to perform an episiotomy during the subsequent delivery after previous 
OASIS needs to be a clinical decision independent of the previous OASIS.
All women who have suffered OASIS should be counselled regarding the mode of delivery 
and this should be clearly documented in the notes. If the woman is symptomatic or shows 
abnormally low anorectal manometric pressures and/or endoanal ultrasonographic defects, 
an elective caesarean section may be considered.39 One prospective study of pregnant women 
who previously sustained OASIS evaluated a protocol in which women who had a sonographic 
defect of the external sphincter of more than 30 degrees accompanied by an incremental 
squeeze pressure of less than 20 mmHg were offered a caesarean section. All other women 
were advised to have a vaginal delivery. Short-term follow-up of this cohort of 73 women 
showed that the women who underwent vaginal delivery suffered no significant deterioration 
in anal sphincter function or quality of life.56
13. Risk management 
13.1 What processes and policies should be in place for women who have sustained 
obstetric OASIS? 
Units should have a clear protocol for the management of OASIS.
Documentation of the anatomical structures involved, the method of repair and the suture materials 
should be made.
The woman should be fully informed about the nature of her tear and the offer of follow-up should 
be made, all supported by relevant written information.
There has been a rise in litigation related to OASIS. The majority of cases are related to failure to identify 
the injury after delivery, leading to subsequent anal incontinence and rectovaginal and anovaginal 
fistulae.62 From 1 April 2000 to 31 March 2010, there were 441 claims in England in which allegations of 
negligence were made arising out of obstetric perineal trauma (the fourth highest number of claims in 
obstetrics). The total value of those claims, including both damages and legal costs, was estimated to be 
£31.2 million and 85% of these claims were related to misdiagnosis of perineal trauma.62
At present, the occurrence of OASIS is not considered substandard care because it is a known complication 
of vaginal delivery. However, failure to recognise anal sphincter damage or carry out an adequate repair 
may be considered substandard care. A poor technique, poor selection of materials or poor healing may 
cause a repair to fail.63
Clear documentation, preferably using a drawing, together with providing the woman with an explanation 
and patient information leaflet, is important.54Evidence 
level 4P
PPPEvidence 
level 4RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists15 of 1914. R ecommendations for future research
There is a lack of evidence to inform decision making regarding the optimal mode of delivery following 
OASIS. This needs to be addressed by encouraging participation in multicentre randomised controlled trials.
Further research is required into patient acceptability of endoanal ultrasound and the interpretation of 
endoanal ultrasound in detecting residual anal sphincter defects immediately after primary surgical repair.
The need for secondary surgery in women who have had OASIS should be investigated.
15. A uditable topics
Organisations should audit the recognition of OASIS and institute a protocol for repair and follow-up. 
Collected data should be audited against recommended/locally agreed standards.
l I ncidence of OASIS compared with reported incidence of less than 3% in the UK. 
l 1 00% evidence of adequate documentation of systematic examination of the vagina, perineum and 
rectum prior to suturing of OASIS.
l 1 00% of OASIS repaired with documented evidence of type of analgesia, suture material, method of 
repair and grade of operator.
l 1 00% of women with OASIS receiving postoperative advice as per local protocol and follow-up 
appointment. 
l 1 00% of doctors and midwives undertaking repair of OASIS have attended recognised training courses. 
16. U seful links and support groups
l B ladder and Bowel Foundation [http://www.bladderandbowelfoundation.org/bowel/].
l R oyal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. A third- or fourth-degree tear during birth: 
Information for you. London: RCOG; 2015.
References
1.G urol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, Edozien LC, Mahmood TA ,
Adams EJ, Richmond DH, et al. Third- and fourth-degre e
perineal tears among primiparous women in Englan d
between 2000 and 2012: time trends and risk factors. BJOG
2013;120:1516–25.
2. T hiagamoorthy G, Johnson A, Thakar R, Sultan AH. National 
survey of perineal trauma and its subsequent manageme nt
in the United Kingdom. Int Urogynecol J 2014;25:1621–7.
3.B aghurst PA. The case for retaining severe perineal tear s
as an indicator of the quality of obstetric care. Aust N Z J
Obstet Gynaecol 2013;53:3–8.
4.A ndrews V, Shelmeridine S, Sultan AH, Thakar R. Anal an d
urinary incontinence 4 years after a vaginal delivery. Int
Urogynecol J 2013;24:55–60.
5. S ultan AH. Obstetric perineal injury and anal incontinence. 
Clin Risk 1999;5:193–6.
6. K oelbl H, Igawa T, Salvatore S, Laterza RM, Lowry A, Sievert 
KD, et al. Pathophysiology of urinary incontinence, faecal 
incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse. In: Abrams P,Cardozo L, Khoury S, Wein A, editors. Incontinence . 5t
h
ed. [place unknown]: ICUD-EAU; 2013. p. 261–359.
7.T hakar R, Fenner DE. Anatomy of the Perineum an d
the Anal Sphincter. In: Sultan AH, Thakar R, Fenner DE ,
editors. Perineal and anal sphincter trauma . London:
Springer; 2007. p. 1–12.8.H aylen BT, de Ridder D, Freeman RM, Swift SE, Berghman s
B, Lee J, et al.; International Urogynecological Association ;
International Continence Society. An Internationa l
Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/InternationalContinence Society (ICS) joint report on the terminolog
y
for female pelvic floor dysfunction. Neurourol Urodyn
2010;29:4–20.
9.R oos AM, Thakar R, Sultan AH, Outcome of primary repair
of obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS): does the gradeof tear matter? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2010;36:368–74.
10.D e Leeuw JW, Vierhout ME, Struijk PC, Hop WC ,
Wallenburg HC. Anal sphincter damage after vagina l
delivery: functional outcome and risk factors for feca l
incontinence. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2001;80:830–4.
11.M ahony R, Behan M, Daly L, Kirwan C, O’Herlihy C ,
O’Connell PR. Internal anal sphincter defect in flu ence s
continence outcome following obstetric anal sphincte r
injury. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2007;196:217.e1–5.
12.V isscher AP, Lam TJ, Hart N, Felt-Bersma RJ. Feca l
incontinence, sexual complaints, and anorectal functio n
after third-degree obstetric anal sphincter injury (OASI) :
5-year follow-up. Int Urogynecol J 2014;25:607–13.
13.S ultan AH, Kettle C. Diagnosis of Perineal Trauma. In :
Sultan AH, Thakar R, Fenner DE, editors. Perineal an d
anal sphincter trauma . London: Springer; 2007. p. 13–9.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists16 of 1914. Richter HE, Brumfield CG, Cliver SP, Burgio KL, Neely 
CL, Varner RE. Risk factors associated with anal sphincter 
tear: a comparison of primiparous patients, vaginal births 
after cesarean deliveries, and patients with previous 
vaginal delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;187:1194–8.
15. McLeod NL, Gilmour DT, Joseph KS, Farrell SA, Luther ER. 
Trends in major risk factors for anal sphincter lacerations: 
a 10-year study. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2003;25:586–93.
16. Williams A, Tincello DG, White S, Adams EJ, Alfirevic 
Z, Richmond DH. Risk scoring system for prediction of 
obstetric anal sphincter injury. BJOG 2005;112:1066–9. 
17. Edozien LC, Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, Adams EJ, 
Richmond DH, Mahmood TA, et al. Impact of third- and fourth-
degree perineal tears at first birth on subsequent pregnancy 
outcomes: a cohort study. BJOG 2014;121:1695–704. 
18. Fritel X, Schaal JP, Fauconnier A, Bertrand V, Levet C, 
Pigné A. Pelvic floor disorders 4 years after first delivery: 
a comparative study of restrictive versus systematic 
episiotomy. BJOG 2008;115:247–52.
19. de Vogel J, van der Leeuw-van Beek A, Gietelink D, 
Vujkovic M, de Leeuw JW, van Bavel J, et al. The effect of a 
mediolateral episiotomy during operative vaginal delivery 
on the risk of developing obstetrical anal sphincter injuries. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2012;206:404.e1–5. 
20. Räisänen S, Vehviläinen-Julkunen K, Heinonen S. Need for 
and consequences of episiotomy in vaginal birth: a critical 
approach. Midwifery 2010;26:348–56.
21. Eogan M, Daly L, O’Connell PR, O’Herlihy C. Does the 
angle of episiotomy affect the incidence of anal sphincter 
injury? BJOG 2006;113:190–4.
22. Stedenfeldt M, Pirhonen J, Blix E, Wilsgaard T, Vonen B, 
Øian P. Episiotomy characteristics and risks for obstetric 
anal sphincter injuries: a case-control study. BJOG 
2012;119:724–30.
23. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
Intrapartum care: Care of healthy women and their 
babies during childbirth . NICE clinical guideline 55. 
Manchester: NICE; 2007.
24. Kalis V, Landsmanova J, Bednarova B, Karbanova J, 
Laine K, Rokyta Z. Evaluation of the incision angle of 
mediolateral episiotomy at 60 degrees. Int J Gynaecol 
Obstet 2011;112:220–4.
25. Tincello DG, Williams A, Fowler GE, Adams EJ, Richmond 
DH, Alfirevic Z. Differences in episiotomy technique 
between midwives and doctors. BJOG 2003;110:1041–4.
26. Andrews V, Thakar R, Sultan AH, Jones PW. Are mediolateral 
episiotomies actually mediolateral? BJOG 2005;112:1156–8.
27. Freeman RM, Hollands HJ, Barron LF, Kapoor DS. Cutting 
a mediolateral episiotomy at the correct angle: evaluation 
of a new device, the Episcissors-60. Med Devices (Auckl) 
2014;7:23–8.
28. Patel RP, Ubale SM. Evaluation of the angled Episcissors-60® 
episiotomy scissors in spontaneous vaginal deliveries. Med 
Devices (Auckl) 2014:7;253–6.
29. Hals E, Øian P, Pirhonen T, Gissler M, Hjelle S, Nilsen EB, 
et al. A multicenter interventional program to reduce 
the incidence of anal sphincter tears. Obstet Gynecol 
2010;116:901–8.
30. Laine K, Skjeldestad FE, Sandvik L, Staff AC. Incidence of 
obstetric anal sphincter injuries after training to protect 
the perineum: cohort study. BMJ Open 2012;2:e001649.
31. Jönsson ER, Elfaghi I, Rydhström H, Herbst A. Modified 
Ritgen’s maneuver for anal sphincter injury at delivery: 
a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 
2008;112:212–7.
32. Aasheim V, Nilsen AB, Lukasse M, Reinar LM. Perineal 
techniques during the second stage of labour for 
reducing perineal trauma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2011;(12):CD006672.
33. Beckmann MM, Stock OM. Antenatal perineal massage for 
reducing perineal trauma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2013;(4):CD005123.34. Stamp G, Kruzins G, Crowther C. Perineal massage in 
labour and prevention of perineal trauma: randomised 
controlled trial. BMJ 2001;322:1277–80.
35. Groom KM, Paterson-Brown S. Can we improve on the 
diagnosis of third degree tears? Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol 2002;101:19–21.
36. Sultan AH, Kamm MA, Hudson CN, Thomas JM, Bartram 
CI. Anal-sphincter disruption during vaginal delivery. N 
Engl J Med 1993;329:1905–11.
37. Andrews V, Sultan AH, Thakar R, Jones PW. Occult 
anal sphincter injuries—myth or reality? BJOG 
2006;113:195–200.
38. Fernando RJ, Sultan AH, Radley S, Jones PW, Johanson RB. 
Management of obstetric anal sphincter injury: a systematic 
review & national practice survey. BMC Health Serv Res 
2002;2:9. 
39. Sultan AH, Thakar R. Lower genital tract and anal 
sphincter trauma. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 
2002;16:99–115.
40. Sultan AH, Monga AK, Kumar D, Stanton SL. Primary 
repair of obstetric anal sphincter rupture using the overlap 
technique. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1999;106:318–23.
41. Fernando RJ, Sultan AH, Kettle C, Thakar R. Methods 
of repair for obstetric anal sphincter injury. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2013;(12):CD002866.
42. Williams A, Adams EJ, Tincello DG, Alfirevic Z, Walkinshaw 
SA, Richmond DH. How to repair an anal sphincter injury 
after vaginal delivery: results of a randomised controlled 
trial. BJOG 2006;113:201–7.
43. Fitzpatrick M, Behan M, O’Connell PR, O’Herlihy C. A 
randomized clinical trial comparing primary overlap with 
approximation repair of third-degree obstetric tears. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:1220–4.
44. Garcia V, Rogers RG, Kim SS, Hall RJ, Kammerer-Doak DN. 
Primary repair of obstetric anal sphincter laceration: a 
randomized trial of two surgical techniques. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2005;192:1697–701.
45. Fernando RJ, Sultan AH, Kettle C, Radley S, Jones P, 
O’Brien PM. Repair techniques for obstetric anal sphincter 
injuries: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 
2006;107:1261–8.
46. Pronk P, Van Leeuwen E, Albicher C, Dermout SM, 
Doornbos JP, Engel AF. Temporal endosonographic 
evaluation of anal sphincter integrity after primary repair 
for obstetric ruptures: a case for specific training of 
obstetricians. Colorectal Dis 2010;12:e140–4.
47. Andrews V, Thakar R, Sultan AH. Structured hands-on 
training in repair of obstetric anal sphincter injuries 
(OASIS): an audit of clinical practice. Int Urogynecol J 
Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2009;20:193–9.
48. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Core 
Module 12: Postpartum Problems (the Puerperium) 
[https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/
careers-and-training/core-curriculum/2013-05-16_core_
module_12.pdf]. Accessed 2014 Oct 2.
49. Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, Thinkhamrop 
B. Antibiotic prophylaxis for third- and fourth-degree 
perineal tear during vaginal birth. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2010;(11):CD005125.
50. Mahony R, Behan M, O’Herlihy C, O’Connell PR. 
Randomized, clinical trial of bowel confinement vs. 
laxative use after primary repair of a third-degree obstetric 
anal sphincter tear. Dis Colon Rectum 2004;47:12–7.
51. Eogan M, Daly L, Behan M, O’Connell PR, O’Herlihy 
C. Randomised clinical trial of a laxative alone versus 
a laxative and a bulking agent after primary repair of 
obstetric anal sphincter injury. BJOG 2007;114:736–40.
52. Peirce C, Murphy C, Fitzpatrick M, Cassidy M, Daly L, 
O’Connell PR, et al. Randomised controlled trial comparing 
early home biofeedback physiotherapy with pelvic fl oor 
exercises for the treatment of third-degree tears (EBAPT 
Trial). BJOG 2013;120:1240–7.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists17 of 1953. Bugg GJ, Kiff ES, Hosker G. A new condition-specific health-
related quality of life questionnaire for the assessment of 
women with anal incontinence. BJOG 2001;108:1057–67.
54. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. A third- 
or fourth-degree tear during birth: Information for you . 
London: RCOG; 2015.
55. Fowler G, Williams A, Murphy G, Taylor K, Wood C, Adams 
E. How to set up a perineal clinic. The Obstetrician & 
Gynaecologist 2009;11:129–32.
56. Scheer I, Thakar R, Sultan AH. Mode of delivery after 
previous obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS)—a 
reappraisal? Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 
2009;20:1095–101.
57. Harkin R, Fitzpatrick M, O’Connell PR, O’Herlihy C. Anal 
sphincter disruption at vaginal delivery: is recurrence 
predictable? Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 
2003;109:149–52.
58. Poen AC, Felt-Bersma RJ, Strijers RL, Dekker GA, Cuesta 
MA, Meuwissen SG. Third-degree obstetric perineal tear: 
long-term clinical and functional results after primary 
repair. Br J Surg 1998;85:1433–8.59. Goffeng AR, Andersch B, Andersson M, Berndtsson I, 
Hulten L, Öresland T. Objective methods cannot predict 
anal incontinence after primary repair of extensive anal 
tears. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1998;77:439–43.
60. Bek KM, Laurberg S. Risks of anal incontinence from 
subsequent vaginal delivery after a complete obstetric anal 
sphincter tear. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1992;99:724–6. 
61. Fynes M, Donnelly VS, O’Connell PR, O’Herlihy C. Cesarean 
delivery and anal sphincter injury. Obstet Gynecol 
1998;92:496–500.
62. NHS Litigation Authority. Ten Years of Maternity Claims. 
An Analysis of NHS Litigation Authority Data . London: 
NHSLA; 2012.
63. Eddy A. Litigating and quantifying maternal damage 
following childbirth. Clin Risk 1999;5:178–80.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists18 of 19Appendix I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in 
making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. Each guideline is systematically 
developed using a standardised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical 
Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website 
at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These recommendations are not intended to dictate 
an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individual 
patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. 
It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into routine 
practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated. 
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations 
formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or 
randomised controlled trial rated as 1++, and 
directly applicable to the target population; or 
A systematic review of randomised controlled 
trials or a body of evidence consisting 
principally of studies rated as 1+, directly 
applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results
A body of evidence including studies rated 
as 2++ directly applicable to the target 
population, and demonstrating overall 
consistency of results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
1++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2+ directly applicable to the target population, 
and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a very 
low risk of bias
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
low risk of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of 
randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a high 
risk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of 
case–control or cohort studies or high-
quality case–control or cohort studies 
with a very low risk of confounding, bias 
or chance and a high probability that the 
relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort 
studies with a low risk of confounding, 
bias or chance and a moderate 
probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a 
high risk of confounding, bias or chance 
and a significant risk that the 
relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, 
case series
4 Expert opinionClassification of evidence levels Grades of recommendations
Good practice point
Recommended best practice based on the 
clinical experience of the guideline 
development groupDCBA
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 29 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists19 of 19This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by: 
Mr RJ Fernando FRCOG, London; Mr AH Sultan FRCOG, London; Professor RM Freeman FRCOG, Plymouth; 
Dr AA Williams MRCOG, Bolton; and Dr EJ Adams FRCOG, Liverpool
and peer reviewed by: 
Dr AAM Abdou MRCOG, Gloucester; British Maternal and Fetal Medicine Society; British Society of Urogynaecology; 
Mrs AHD Diyaf MRCOG, Barnstaple; Mr O Eskandar FRCOG, Barnstaple; Mr DI Fraser FRCOG, Norwich; 
Mrs E Hawkins FRCOG, Romford; Professor Emerita C Kettle, Staffordshire University, Stafford; 
Mr B Kumar FRCOG, Wrexham; Dr MJ Perera MRCOG, Glasgow; RCOG Women’s Network; 
Dr S Rutter MRCOG, Rotherham; Dr JR Scott FRCOG, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA; Mr SS Sharma MRCOG, King’s Lynn; 
and Mr C Spence-Jones FRCOG, London. 
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr M Gupta MRCOG, London; Mrs G Kumar FRCOG, Wrexham; 
Mr AT Leather FRCOG, Ipswich; and Dr P Owen FRCOG, Glasgow.
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta1 MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen2 FRCOG, Glasgow; 
and Dr AJ Thomson1 MRCOG, Paisley. 
1 co-chairs from June 2014 2 until May 2014. 
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising any 
conflicts of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research- 
services/guidelines/gtg29/ .
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. 
The review process will commence in 2018, unless otherwise indicated.
DISCLAIMER 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical 
practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for 
consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement 
regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light 
of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to 
be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols 
or guidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.