Umbilical Cord Prolapse
Green-top Guideline No. 50
November 2014RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 2o f 1 9 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsUmbilical Cord Prolapse
This is the second edition of this guideline. It replaces the first edition which was published in 2008 under
the same title.
Executive summary of recommendations
Clinical issues
What factors are associated with a higher chance of cord prolapse?
Clinicians need to be aware of several clinical factors associated with umbilical cord prolapse. 
Can cord presentation be detected antenatally?
Routine ultrasound examination is not sufficiently sensitive or specific for identification of cord
presentation antenatally and should not be performed to predict increased probability of cord prolapse,unless in the context of a research setting.
Selective ultrasound screening can be considered for women with breech presentation at term who are
considering vaginal birth.
Can cord prolapse or its effects be avoided?
With transverse, oblique or unstable lie, elective admission to hospital after 37 +0weeks of gestation
should be discussed and women in the community should be advised to present urgently if there aresigns of labour or suspicion of membrane rupture.
Women with non-cephalic presentations and preterm prelabour rupture of membranes should be
recommended inpatient care.
Artificial membrane rupture should be avoided whenever possible if the presenting part is mobile
and/or high.
If it becomes necessary to rupture the membranes with a high presenting part, this should be performed
with arrangements in place for immediate caesarean section.
Upward pressure on the presenting part should be kept to a minimum in women during vaginal
examination and other obstetric interventions in the context of ruptured membranes because of the riskof upward displacement of the presenting part and cord prolapse.
Rupture of membranes should be avoided if on vaginal examination the cord is felt below the presenting
part. When cord presentation is diagnosed in established labour, caesarean section is usually indicated.
When should cord prolapse be suspected?
Cord presentation or prolapse should be excluded at every vaginal examination in labour and afterspontaneous rupture of membranes if risk factors are present.
In addition to the national guidance for fetal heart rate monitoring in labour, the fetal heart rate should
be auscultated after every vaginal examination in labour and after spontaneous membrane rupture.
Cord prolapse should be suspected when there is an abnormal fetal heart rate pattern, especially if such
changes commence soon after membrane rupture, either spontaneous or artificial.
Speculum and/or digital vaginal examination should be performed when cord prolapse is suspected.P
D
DC
P
PD
P
PC
P
PD© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 3 of 19 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50When spontaneous rupture of membranes occurs, if there is normal fetal heart rate monitoring and there
are no risk factors for cord prolapse, then a routine vaginal examination is not indicated.
What is the optimal initial management of cord prolapse in a fully equipped hospital setting?
When cord prolapse is diagnosed before full dilatation, assistance should be immediately called andpreparations made for immediate birth in theatre.
There are insufficient data to evaluate manual replacement of the prolapsed cord above the presenting
part to allow continuation of labour. This practice is not recommended.
To prevent vasospasm, there should be minimal handling of loops of cord lying outside the vagina.
To prevent cord compression, it is recommended that the presenting part be elevated either manually or
by filling the urinary bladder.
Cord compression can be further reduced by the mother adopting the knee–chest or left lateral
(preferably with head down and pillow under the left hip) position.
Tocolysis can be considered while preparing for caesarean section if there are persistent fetal heart rate
abnormalities after attempts to prevent compression mechanically, particularly when birth is likely tobe delayed.
Although the measures described above are potentially useful during preparation for birth, they must
not result in unnecessary delay.
What is the optimal mode of birth with cord prolapse?
Caesarean section is the recommended mode of delivery in cases of cord prolapse when vaginal birth isnot imminent in order to prevent hypoxic acidosis.
A category 1 caesarean section should be performed with the aim of achieving birth within 30 minutes
or less if the cord prolapse is associated with a suspicious or pathological fetal heart rate pattern butwithout compromising maternal safety.
Category 2 caesarean birth can be considered for women in whom the fetal heart rate pattern is normal,
but continuous assessment of the fetal heart trace is essential. If the cardiotocograph (CTG) becomesabnormal, re-categorisation to category 1 birth should immediately be considered.
Discussion with the anaesthetist should take place to decide on the appropriate form of anaesthesia.
Regional anaesthesia can be considered in consultation with an experienced anaesthetist.
Verbal consent is satisfactory for category 1 caesarean section.Vaginal birth, in most cases operative, can be attempted at full dilatation if it is anticipated that birth
would be accomplished quickly and safely, using standard techniques and taking care to avoidimpingement of the cord when possible.
Breech extraction is appropriate under some circumstances, for example, after internal podalic version
for a second twin.
A practitioner competent in the resuscitation of the newborn should attend all births that follow 
cord prolapse.
Paired cord blood samples should be taken for pH and base excess measurement.DP
P
D
CD
P
P
P
DP
P
P
BB
PDWhat is the optimal management in community settings?
Midwives should assess the risk of cord prolapse for women requesting home birth or birth in centres
without facilities for immediate caesarean section and at the start of labour in the community.
Women with known cord prolapse should be advised by telephone to assume the knee–chest face-down
position while waiting for hospital transfer.
During emergency ambulance transfer, the knee–chest position is potentially unsafe and the
exaggerated Sims position (left lateral with pillow under hip) should be used.
All women with cord prolapse should be advised to be transferred to the nearest consultant-led unit for
birth, unless an immediate vaginal examination by a competent professional reveals that aspontaneous vaginal birth is imminent.
The presenting part should be elevated during transfer either manually or by using bladder distension.
It is recommended that community midwives carry a Foley catheter for this purpose and equipment forfluid infusion.
To prevent vasospasm, there should be minimal handling of loops of cord lying outside the vagina.
What is the optimal management of cord prolapse at the threshold of viability?
Expectant management should be discussed for cord prolapse complicating pregnancies with a
gestational age at the threshold of viability (23 +0to 24 +6weeks).
Clinicians should be aware that there is no evidence to support replacement of the cord into the uterus
when prolapse occurs at or before the threshold of viability.
Women should be counselled on both continuation and termination of pregnancy following cord
prolapse at the threshold of viability.
Should delayed cord clamping (DCC) be used after cord prolapse?
Delayed cord clamping can be considered if a baby is uncompromised at birth.
Immediate resuscitation should take priority over DCC when the baby is unwell at birth.
Clinical governance
Explanation of events
An opportunity to discuss the events should be offered to the woman (possibly with her companions in
labour) at a mutually convenient time.
Training
All staff involved in maternity care should receive training in the management of obstetric emergenciesincluding the management of cord prolapse.
Training for cord prolapse should be multidisciplinary and include team rehearsals.
Clinical incident reporting
Clinical incident forms should be submitted for all cases of cord prolapse.
Documentation
Preformatted sheets should be considered for the recording of clinical events related to cord prolapse.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 4o f 1 9 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsD
PPP
PPD
DD
D
D
DB
DB
D5o f 1 9 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists1. Purpose and scope
The purpose of this guideline is to describe the prevention, diagnosis and management of cord prolapse. 
It addresses those women who are pregnant and at high risk or with a diagnosis of cord prolapse in bothhospital and community settings. Pregnancies with cord prolapse before 23
+0weeks are not covered by 
this guideline. All later gestations are covered by the guidance, including those pregnancies at the thresholdof viability.
2. Introduction and background epidemiology
Cord prolapse has been defined as the descent of the umbilical cord through the cervix alongside (occult) orpast (overt) the presenting part in the presence of ruptured membranes.
1,2Cord presentation is the presence
of the umbilical cord between the fetal presenting part and the cervix, with or without intact membranes.The overall incidence of cord prolapse ranges from 0.1–0.6%.
1,3–11In the case of breech presentation, the
incidence is higher at 1%.12The incidence is influenced by population characteristics and is higher when
there is a greater percentage of multiple gestations.13
Cases of cord prolapse consistently feature in perinatal mortality enquiries.14–16One large study found a
perinatal mortality rate of 91 per 1000.1Prematurity and congenital malformation account for the majority of
adverse outcomes associated with cord prolapse in hospital settings,1but birth asphyxia is also associated
with cord prolapse.1,9Perinatal death has been described with normally formed term babies, especially during
home births.1,15,17Delay in diagnosis to delivery because transfer to hospital is required appears to be a
contributing factor.1
The principal causes of asphyxia in this context are thought to be cord compression and umbilical arterialvasospasm preventing venous and arterial blood flow to and from the fetus. There is a paucity of long-termfollow-up data of babies born alive after cord prolapse in both hospital and community settings.
The management of cord prolapse is currently one of the labour ward Minimum Data Sets for skills and drills
training mandated by the Clinical Negligence Scheme for Trusts (CNST) in England [http://www.nhsla.com/safety/Documents/CNST%20Maternity%20Standards%202013-14.pdf] and is a guideline mandated by theWelsh Risk Pool [http://www.wales.nhs.uk/sitesplus/955/page/52730] and Clinical Negligence and OtherRisks Indemnity Scheme (CNORIS) [http://www.clo.scot.nhs.uk/our-services/cnoris.aspx] maternity riskmanagement standards in Wales and Scotland respectively.
3. Identification and assessment of evidence
This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing RCOG Green-topGuidelines. MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, the Cochrane CentralRegister of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE), the ACPJournal Club and Ovid database were searched. The search was restricted to articles published betweenJune 2005 and October 2012 and limited to humans and the English language. A top-up literature searchwas performed in July 2014. Search terms included ‘umbilical cord’, ‘cord’, ‘cord prolapse’, ‘delayed cordclamping’ and ‘funic (cord)’. Selection of articles for analysis and review was then made based on relevanceto objectives. Further documents were obtained by the use of free text terms and hand searches.
The levels of evidence and the grades of recommendations used in this guideline originate from the guidance
by the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network Grading Review Group
18that incorporates formal
assessment of the methodological quality, quantity, consistency and applicability of the evidence base.
Because of the emergent nature and rare incidence of the condition, there are no randomised controlled trials
comparing interventions. There are a large number of case reports, case–control studies and case series. Somestudies have simply used the general population as a control group. Other studies have controlled for knownconfounding variables. 4. Clinical issues
4.1 What factors are associated with a higher chance of cord prolapse?
Clinicians need to be aware of several clinical factors associated with umbilical cord prolapse.
Several clinical features are associated with cord prolapse and they are shown in Table 1 below.1,5,7,9,10,19,20
Table 1: Associations with cord prolapse (and cord presentation)
General Procedure-related
Multiparity Artificial rupture of membranes with high presenting part
Low birthweight ( <2.5 kg) Vaginal manipulation of the fetus with ruptured membranes
Preterm labour ( <37+0weeks) External cephalic version (during procedure)
Fetal congenital anomalies Internal podalic version
Breech presentation Stabilising induction of labour
Transverse, oblique and unstable lie* Insertion of intrauterine pressure transducer
Second twin Large balloon catheter induction of labour
Polyhydramnios
Unengaged presenting part
Low-lying placenta
*Unstable lie is when the longitudinal axis of the fetus (lie) is changing repeatedly after 37+0weeks.
Interventions can result in cord prolapse, with approximately half of the cases reported being
preceded by obstetric intervention.21The manipulation of the fetus during external cephalic version,
internal podalic version of the second twin, manual rotation, placement of intrauterine pressurecatheters (with or without prior membrane rupture)
21,22and artificial rupture of membranes,11,21
particularly in the presence of an unengaged presenting part, are the interventions that mostfrequently precede cord prolapse. In general, these factors predispose to cord prolapse by preventingclose application of the presenting part to the lower part of the uterus and/or pelvic brim.
One study of induction of labour using transcervical balloon catheters showed a significant
increase in the rate of cord presentation after inflation with saline above 180 ml.
20
Amnioinfusion is used for suspected umbilical cord compression in labour. Large studies would berequired to detect an increased risk of cord prolapse associated with this intervention,
23but this is
not practised widely in the UK.24
Artificial membrane rupture can precede cord prolapse.11,21However, in a recent Cochrane
systematic review of amniotomy for augmenting spontaneous labour there was no differencebetween the two groups (artificial rupture of the membranes [ARM] versus no ARM) in theincidence of cord prolapse (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.14–7.10). This would suggest that artificialmembrane rupture in this context carries a low risk of cord prolapse provided clinical judgementis made as to its safety in individual women.
24
Some authorities have speculated that cord abnormalities, such as true knots, low content ofWharton’s jelly or a single umbilical artery, are associated with a higher chance of cord prolapse.
25–28
Induction of labour with prostaglandins is not associated with a higher chance of cord prolapse.1,29
4.2 Can cord presentation be detected antenatally?
Routine ultrasound examination is not sufficiently sensitive or specific for identification of cord
presentation antenatally and should not be performed to predict increased probability of cord prolapse,unless in the context of a research setting.
6o f 1 9 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsEvidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2+
Evidence
level 1++
Evidence
level 2+
DPRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 7 of 19 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsSelective ultrasound screening can be considered for women with breech presentation at term who are
considering vaginal birth.
In a Canadian study, cord prolapse was preceded by the identification of cord presentation at
routine ultrasound (real time with colour mapping) in only 12.5% of cases. Just one of 13 cases ofsuspected cord presentation developed cord prolapse.
30
A cohort study with historical controls looked at the effect of weekly transvaginal ultrasoundscreening for cord presentation in women with a breech presentation beyond 36
+0weeks of
gestation. Elective caesarean section was recommended for persistent cord presentation. There wasa 4% cord presentation rate. In the women who underwent the screening there were no cases ofcord prolapse in a 10-year period. In the women who had not undergone screening, there were tencases of cord prolapse in an 11-year period with one perinatal death.
31This intervention has the
potential to help give women more information to make an informed choice if their baby is ofbreech presentation and they want to consider a vaginal breech birth.
4.3 Can cord prolapse or its effects be avoided?
With transverse, oblique or unstable lie, elective admission to hospital after 37 +0weeks of gestation
should be discussed and women in the community should be advised to present urgently if there aresigns of labour or suspicion of membrane rupture.
Women with non-cephalic presentations and preterm prelabour rupture of membranes should be
recommended inpatient care.
Artificial membrane rupture should be avoided whenever possible if the presenting part is mobile
and/or high.
If it becomes necessary to rupture the membranes with a high presenting part, this should be performed
with arrangements in place for immediate caesarean section.
Upward pressure on the presenting part should be kept to a minimum in women during vaginal
examination and other obstetric interventions in the context of ruptured membranes because of the riskof upward displacement of the presenting part and cord prolapse.
Rupture of membranes should be avoided if on vaginal examination the cord is felt below the presenting
part. When cord presentation is diagnosed in established labour, caesarean section is usually indicated.
One study that evaluated outcomes in 29 women with transverse or unstable lie after 37+0weeks
of gestation found that, when managed expectantly as outpatients, five (17%) eventually presentedin labour with a persistent transverse lie. Major complications included two cord prolapses and oneneonatal death.
32
Labour in the context of an abnormal lie is usually an indication for immediate caesarean section.Similarly, ruptured membranes with an abnormal lie may be an indication to expedite delivery bycaesarean section, although this will depend on gestational age.
32
Women with preterm prelabour rupture of membranes with non-cephalic presentations appear tohave a significantly higher risk of cord prolapse when compared with their cephalic counterparts.
33
To reduce the likelihood of cord prolapse, which may occur at the time of amniotomy, the NationalInstitute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
34recommends that before induction of labour,
engagement of the presenting part should be assessed. Obstetricians and midwives should palpatefor umbilical cord presentation during the preliminary vaginal examination and avoid dislodging thebaby’s head. NICE also recommended that amniotomy should be avoided if the baby’s head is high.PP
PDCD
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2+
Evidence
level 4C
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2+4.4 When should cord prolapse be suspected?
Cord presentation or prolapse should be excluded at every vaginal examination in labour and after
spontaneous rupture of membranes if risk factors are present.
In addition to the national guidance for fetal heart rate monitoring in labour, the fetal heart rate should
be auscultated after every vaginal examination in labour and after spontaneous membrane rupture.
Cord prolapse should be suspected when there is an abnormal fetal heart rate pattern, especially if such
changes commence soon after membrane rupture, either spontaneous or artificial.
Speculum and/or digital vaginal examination should be performed when cord prolapse is suspected.When spontaneous rupture of membranes occurs, if there is normal fetal heart rate monitoring and there
are no risk factors for cord prolapse, then a routine vaginal examination is not indicated.
Vaginal examination and membrane rupture can provoke cord prolapse (see Table 1).5
Mismanagement of abnormal fetal heart rate patterns is a feature identified in perinatal death
associated with cord prolapse. Bradycardia or variable fetal heart rate decelerations have beenassociated with cord prolapse and their presence should prompt vaginal examination.
35In one
series of 89 cases of cord prolapse in women being monitored electronically, each case hadabnormalities of the fetal heart rate; 66% had variable decelerations and 34% had a prolongeddeceleration of more than 1 minute or persistent bradycardia.
36
Prompt vaginal examination is the most important aspect of diagnosis and should be performed if there is aparticularly high risk of cord prolapse: for example, rupture of membranes with high presenting part orrupture of membranes with polyhydramnios.
Cord presentation and prolapse may occur without outward physical signs and with a normal fetal
heart rate pattern and might first be diagnosed at routine vaginal examination in labour.
1
4.5 What is the optimal initial management of cord prolapse in a fully equipped hospital setting?
When cord prolapse is diagnosed before full dilatation, assistance should be immediately called and
preparations made for immediate birth in theatre.
There are insufficient data to evaluate manual replacement of the prolapsed cord above the presenting
part to allow continuation of labour. This practice is not recommended.
To prevent vasospasm, there should be minimal handling of loops of cord lying outside the vagina.To prevent cord compression, it is recommended that the presenting part be elevated either manually or
by filling the urinary bladder.
Cord compression can be further reduced by the mother adopting the knee–chest or left lateral
(preferably with head down and pillow under the left hip) position.
Tocolysis can be considered while preparing for caesarean section if there are persistent fetal heart rate
abnormalities after attempts to prevent compression mechanically, particularly when birth is likely tobe delayed.
Although the measures described above are potentially useful during preparation for birth, they must
not result in unnecessary delay.
Umbilical cord replacement by digital elevation has been advocated for managing cord prolapse in
order to allow labour to continue. In a series of eight cases of cord prolapse, the procedure was not
8o f 1 9 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsEvidence
level 2+
DEvidence
level 3
D
DP
P
PP
Evidence
level 3P
P
PD
P
Evidence
level 2+RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 9 of 19 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologistspossible in one woman and vaginal birth was imminent in another two. The prolapsed cord was
successfully replaced in the five other women. The prolapsed segment was described as short in allfive. Continuous fetal heart rate monitoring was used before, during and after the replacement.Typically there was a prolonged deceleration of 4 minutes during the replacement. Two fetuses(40%) had persistent cardiotocographic abnormalities after the reduction and in both the umbilicalartery blood gas pH was less than 7.25 after birth. There were no neonatal deaths or Apgar scoresof less than 7 at 5 minutes, but other short- or long-term outcome measures of neonatal morbiditywere not reported.
37In this study all five women where replacement was successful had a vaginal
birth. These data are insufficient to support cord replacement and this should not be used outsidea clinical trial. There have been no studies in which cord replacement has been used as a temporarymeasure while preparing for caesarean section.
There are concerns that manipulation of the cord or exposure to air may cause reactive
vasoconstriction and fetal hypoxic acidosis.
2,38,39Some authorities advise that swabs soaked in warm
saline are wrapped around the cord but this is of unproven benefit.37,38
Elevation of the presenting part is thought to reduce pressure on the umbilical cord and preventvascular occlusion. There have been no randomised controlled trials but its use has been associatedwith a high chance of good outcome. Displacement of the presenting part was assessed in 132cases in a large Oxford study.
1After excluding death due to extreme prematurity and lethal anomaly,
there was only one death from asphyxia in the remaining 121 cases. This death was associated withthe delay incurred by having to transfer into hospital from home.
Manual elevation is achieved by inserting two fingers of a gloved hand into the vagina and pushing
the presenting part upwards. A variation is to remove the hand from the vagina once the presentingpart is above the pelvic brim and apply continuous suprapubic pressure upwards.
40Excessive
displacement may encourage more cord to prolapse. If the diagnosis-to-birth interval is likely to beprolonged, elevation through bladder filling may be more practical. Bladder filling can be achievedquickly by inserting the end of a blood giving set into a Foley catheter. The catheter should beclamped once 500–750 ml have been instilled. It is essential to empty the bladder again just beforeany attempt to assist birth, be it vaginal or caesarean section.
In the original description of bladder filling by Vago,
41the procedure was performed in moderate
Trendelenburg position (head-down tilt). There was one neonatal death in 28 cases, with a decision-to-delivery interval of 25 to 115 minutes. In a second study,
4288 cases of cord prolapse in the first
stage were treated with bladder instillation before caesarean section. There were no fetal deathsdespite a diagnosis-to-delivery interval of more than 30 minutes for 48 women. Chetty et al.
43
recorded no perinatal deaths in 24 cases similarly managed with an average diagnosis-to-deliveryinterval of 65 minutes.
Bladder filling to further displace the presenting part if manual displacement is already taking place
does not improve neonatal outcomes any further.
44
The knee–chest and head-down positions have not been evaluated for the management of cord prolapseindependently of other interventions.
Tocolysis has been used to reduce contractions and limit bradycardia, including in women with
cord prolapse.
45–47The suggested tocolytic regimen is terbutaline 0.25 mg subcutaneously.38,39,48,49
4.6 What is the optimal mode of birth with cord prolapse?
Caesarean section is the recommended mode of delivery in cases of cord prolapse when vaginal birth is
not imminent in order to prevent hypoxic acidosis.
A category 1 caesarean section should be performed with the aim of achieving birth within 30 minutes
or less if the cord prolapse is associated with a suspicious or pathological fetal heart rate pattern butwithout compromising maternal safety.Evidence
level 3Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 4
Evidence
level 4Evidence
level 2++
Evidence
level 3
B
BRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 10 of 19 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsCategory 2 caesarean birth can be considered for women in whom the fetal heart rate pattern is normal,
but continuous assessment of the fetal heart trace is essential. If the cardiotocograph (CTG) becomesabnormal, re-categorisation to category 1 birth should immediately be considered.
Discussion with the anaesthetist should take place to decide on the appropriate form of anaesthesia.
Regional anaesthesia can be considered in consultation with an experienced anaesthetist.
Verbal consent is satisfactory for category 1 caesarean section.Vaginal birth, in most cases operative, can be attempted at full dilatation if it is anticipated that birth
would be accomplished quickly and safely, using standard techniques and taking care to avoidimpingement of the cord when possible.
Breech extraction is appropriate under some circumstances, for example, after internal podalic version
for a second twin.
A practitioner competent in the resuscitation of the newborn should attend all births that follow 
cord prolapse.
Paired cord blood samples should be taken for pH and base excess measurement.
Caesarean section is associated with a lower perinatal mortality and reduced risk of Apgar score
less than 3 at 5 minutes compared to spontaneous vaginal birth in cases of cord prolapse whenvaginal birth is not imminent.
9However, when vaginal birth is imminent, outcomes are similar or
better compared with caesarean section.1,8
There is poor correlation between the decision-to-delivery interval (DDI) and umbilical cord pH.50–53
The 30-minute DDI is the acknowledged target for category 1 caesarean section [http://www.nhsla.com/safety/Documents/CNST%20Maternity%20Standards%202013-14.pdf].
54The unit average
interval between decision and childbirth for fetal concern in maternity departments in the UKranges between 30 and 40 minutes,
49but in the National Sentinel Caesarean Section Audit,55for
cases with cord prolapse the median interval was 17 minutes and 75% of births were performedwithin less than 26 minutes (interquartile range 12–26). It has been acknowledged that maternalsafety and attention to the individual woman is more important than fixation on time targets.
56
For women at and beyond 26+0weeks with a pathological fetal heart rate pattern on transfer from
home, emergency birth should be advised as dictated by national guidelines.57For women with a
pathological pattern at less than 26+0weeks, a discussion of the chance of (healthy) survival should
take place.
With modern techniques, the complications of general anaesthesia are rare but still higher than for
regional anaesthesia.58The use of temporary measures, as described above, can reduce cord
compression, making regional anaesthesia the technique of choice.51Repeated attempts at regional
anaesthesia should be avoided.
One case report described a spinal anaesthetic sited while the pregnant woman was in the
knee–chest position because of an anticipated difficult intubation.59This case was successful, but
it has been criticised by others.60At present this is not recommended.
In a study in which 39 women with cord prolapse in the second stage of labour were supported
to give birth vaginally, the percentage of babies with 5-minute Apgar scores of less than 7 was 5%for DDI less than 10 minutes, 30% for 10–20 minutes, and 71% for 20–30 minutes. There were nocases with a DDI of 30 minutes or more.
42
One large retrospective study demonstrated that a mean DDI of 15 minutes (SD 9.5 minutes) isachievable in operative vaginal births in a labour room (and an interval of 30 minutes for P
DP
CDP
P
Evidence
level 2++
Evidence
level 4
Evidence
level 1+
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2+11 of 19 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologistsassisted births in an operating theatre) for urgent indications (‘fetal distress’).61However, 
another study showed that assisted vaginal birth for urgent indications took 27 minutes on average(SD 14 minutes). Further analysis showed that 41/91 (45%) gave birth within 20 minutes and themajority within 30 minutes.
62
It is important that clinicians only attempt vaginal birth for those women with very favourable characteristics.It should also be remembered that any delays could be compounded by the possible need to then undertakea caesarean section.
In the Oxford study,
1the only case of birth asphyxia was associated with an emergency caesarean
section after unplanned home birth had initially started. There were 21 forceps births for viablefetuses with cord prolapse, all of which were successful. Of surviving fetuses that were bornvaginally, none had a 5-minute Apgar score of less than 7 or an arterial cord pH of less than 7.1. TheDDI was 20 minutes or less in 31 of 32 vaginal births and 30 minutes or less in the remaining case.
The operator should choose the instrument most appropriate to the clinical circumstances and
their level of skill. Forceps- and vacuum-assisted births have different benefit and risk profiles.
63,64A
recent study showed no difference in neonatal outcomes for fetal distress61but the two instruments
have not been compared directly in the context of cord prolapse.
Neonates born alive after cord prolapse are highly likely to require resuscitation, as evidenced by a
high rate of low Apgar scores: 21% at 1 minute and 7% at 5 minutes.1
The strong predictive value of a normal paired cord blood gas for the exclusion of intrapartum-relatedhypoxic ischaemic brain damage justifies the use of paired cord gas analysis in cord prolapse.
49
4.7 What is the optimal management in community settings?
Midwives should assess the risk of cord prolapse for women requesting home birth or birth in centres
without facilities for immediate caesarean section and at the start of labour in the community.
Women with known cord prolapse should be advised by telephone to assume the knee–chest face-down
position while waiting for hospital transfer.
During emergency ambulance transfer, the knee–chest position is potentially unsafe and the
exaggerated Sims position (left lateral with pillow under hip) should be used.
All women with cord prolapse should be advised to be transferred to the nearest consultant-led unit for
birth, unless an immediate vaginal examination by a competent professional reveals that aspontaneous vaginal birth is imminent.
The presenting part should be elevated during transfer either manually or by using bladder distension.
It is recommended that community midwives carry a Foley catheter for this purpose and equipment forfluid infusion.
To prevent vasospasm, there should be minimal handling of loops of cord lying outside the vagina.
It has been advised that it is essential for a careful risk assessment by the midwifery team to take
place before a home birth or births in centres without facilities for caesarean section are advisedand supported.
65
Perinatal mortality is increased by more than ten-fold when cord prolapse occurs outside hospitalcompared to inside the hospital
36and neonatal morbidity is also increased in this circumstance. A
small case series noted that of five cases of cord prolapse, there were three perinatal deaths, all aftertransfer in from neighbourhood clinics. The other two cases that were diagnosed and gave birth inhospital had infants with normal neurological assessment at 2 years of age.
66DPEvidence
level 2++
PDEvidence
level 2+
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2++
Evidence
level 4
D
D
Evidence
level 3Elevation of the presenting part during transfer may prevent cord compression.67,68
There are concerns that manipulation of the cord or exposure to air may cause reactive vaso-
constriction and fetal hypoxic acidosis.2,38,39Some authorities advise that swabs soaked in warm
saline are wrapped around the cord but this is of unproven benefit.37,38
4.8 What is the optimal management of cord prolapse at the threshold of viability?
Expectant management should be discussed for cord prolapse complicating pregnancies with a
gestational age at the threshold of viability (23 +0to 24 +6weeks).
Clinicians should be aware that there is no evidence to support replacement of the cord into the uterus
when prolapse occurs at or before the threshold of viability.
Women should be counselled on both continuation and termination of pregnancy following cord
prolapse at the threshold of viability.
At the threshold of viability (23+0 to 24+6weeks), temporary measures have been recorded for
periods up to 3 weeks.2,69–71
Some women might prefer to choose termination of pregnancy, perhaps after a short period ofobservation to see if labour commences spontaneously. Late termination of pregnancy requiresspecialist expertise and should only be performed in context of recommendations of the RCOG.
72
There should be a clear distinction between augmentation of labour with the intention ofdelivering a live baby and termination of the pregnancy where the intention is that the baby is notborn alive, since if over 21
+6weeks, feticide must be considered.
There is one reported case of cord replacement at 23+0weeks of gestation. The woman was in
labour and vaginal birth occurred after 8 hours.37There have been no reports of cases in which
uterine replacement of the cord was used to assist expectant management of cord prolapse atextreme preterm gestation.
There are no data to guide decisions about the timing of birth. It should be considered if there are signs of
severe fetal compromise once viability has been reached or a gestational age associated with a reasonableneonatal outcome is achieved. Some women might prefer to run a high risk of fetal death in order to achievea gestational age associated with a better chance of intact neonatal survival. 
4.9 Should delayed cord clamping (DCC) be used after cord prolapse?
Delayed cord clamping can be considered if a baby is uncompromised at birth.
Immediate resuscitation should take priority over DCC when the baby is unwell at birth.
A Cochrane Review concluded that, in term infants, delayed cord clamping (DCC) should be assessed
at each birth, especially in infants where access to good nutrition is poor, and this simple interventionmay be advantageous.
73
In a systematic review of preterm infants (less than 37+0weeks of gestation), DCC for up to 180
seconds was associated with fewer blood transfusions for anaemia, better circulatory stability, fewerintraventricular haemorrhages (all grades) and a lower risk of necrotising enterocolitis. The risk ofdeath or high-grade intraventricular haemorrhage was not found to be significantly different.
74The
UK newborn resuscitation guideline 2010 states ‘For uncompromised babies, a delay in cordclamping of at least one minute from the complete delivery of the infant, is now recommended. ’
75
The recommendation also states that most preterm babies are uncompromised and in need ofstabilisation rather than resuscitation and therefore the recommendation might be equally appliedto them as it is to uncompromised babies at term.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 12 of 19 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsEvidence
level 4
DEvidence
level 3
BPD
DEvidence
level 3
Evidence
level 4
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 1+Most studies have excluded babies who require resuscitation at birth. There is, therefore,
insufficient evidence to make a recommendation for babies requiring resuscitation.76
5. Clinical governance
5.1 Explanation of events
An opportunity to discuss the events should be offered to the woman (possibly with her companions in
labour) at a mutually convenient time.
After obstetric emergencies, women can be psychologically affected by postnatal depression, post-
traumatic stress disorder or fear of further childbirth. Women with cord prolapse and those whoundergo urgent transfer to hospital might be particularly vulnerable to emotional problems.
67
5.2 Training
All staff involved in maternity care should receive training in the management of obstetric emergencies
including the management of cord prolapse.
Training for cord prolapse should be multidisciplinary and include team rehearsals.
Updates on the management of obstetric emergencies (including the interpretation of fetal heart
rate patterns) are a proactive approach to risk management. CNST [http://www.nhsla.com/safety/Documents/CNST%20Maternity%20Standards%202013-14.pdf], CNORIS [http://www.clo.scot.nhs.uk/our-services/cnoris.aspx] and Welsh Risk Pool [http://www.wales.nhs.uk/sitesplus/955/page/52730] standards currently mandate that all staff involved in maternity care should attendregular multidisciplinary rehearsals (skill drills) including the management of cord prolapseaccording to a local training needs analysis (see Appendix 1).
The Simulation and Fire-drill Evaluation (SaFE) Study showed that practical, multidisciplinary,
obstetric emergency training increased midwives’ and doctors’ knowledge of emergencymanagement
77and improved the management of simulated obstetric emergencies in general.78,79
One study of training did not demonstrate any benefit for the management of cord prolapse;80in
contrast, a SaFE follow-up study looking at the effect of multidisciplinary training on themanagement of cord prolapse, using a retrospective cohort design with historical controls, found areduction in median diagnosis-to-birth times from 25 minutes to 14.5 minutes, without any increasein the use of general anaesthesia and a slight increase in the use of regional anaesthesia. There wasalso a significant increase in the conduct of recommended actions to alleviate cord compressionpost training, which was associated with improved neonatal outcomes.
81
5.3 Clinical incident reporting
Clinical incident forms should be submitted for all cases of cord prolapse.
Currently the CNST [http://www.nhsla.com/safety/Documents/CNST%20Maternity%20Standards%202013-14.pdf]encourages that all cases of cord prolapse are investigated. 
5.4 Documentation
Preformatted sheets should be considered for the recording of clinical events related to cord prolapse.
Preformatted sheets improved the documentation of a simulated obstetric emergency82and should
be considered for the recording of clinical events (see Appendix 2).
13 of 19 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsPEvidence
level 4
Evidence
level 4
Evidence
level 2–Evidence
level 1+
DPB
D
Evidence
level 2+Evidence
level 46. Recommendations for future research
●Prospective study of diagnosis–birth interval for spontaneous and assisted vaginal births and category 1
caesarean sections in cases of cord prolapse, combined with outcomes at appropriate long-term follow-up.
●Should cord replacement be used in cases at the threshold of viability?
7. Auditable topics
●Audit of the management of cord prolapse in hospital settings (100%).
●Audit of the management of cord prolapse in community settings (100%).
●Synthesis of critical analyses of adverse outcomes related to cord prolapse (100%).
●Proportion of cases of cord prolapse that were incident reported (100%).
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 14 of 19 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsReferences
1. Murphy DJ, MacKenzie IZ. The mortality and morbidity
associated with umbilical cord prolapse. Br J Obstet Gynaecol
1995;102:826–30.
2. Lin MG. Umbilical cord prolapse. Obstet Gynecol Surv
2006;61:269–77.
3. Myles TJ. Prolapse of the umbilical cord. J Obstet Gynaecol Br
Emp 1959;66:301–10.
4. Cope E. Presentation and prolapse of umbilical cord; an analysis
of 350 cases. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Emp 1951;58:259–71.
5. Dilbaz B, Ozturkoglu E, Dilbaz S, Ozturk N, Sivaslioglu AA,
Haberal A. Risk factors and perinatal outcomes associated withumbilical cord prolapse. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2006;274:104–7.
6. Boyle JJ, Katz VL. Umbilical cord prolapse in current obstetric
practice. J Reprod Med 2005;50:303–6.
7. Kahana B, Sheiner E, Levy A, Lazer S, Mazor M. Umbilical cord
prolapse and perinatal outcomes. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
2004;84:127–32.
8. Dare FO, Owolabi AT, Fasubaa OB, Ezechi OC. Umbilical cord
prolapse: a clinical study of 60 cases seen at Obafemi AwolowoUniversity Teaching Hospital, Ile-Ife. East Afr Med J
1998;75:308–10.
9. Critchlow CW , Leet TL, Benedetti TJ, Daling JR. Risk factors and
infant outcomes associated with umbilical cord prolapse: apopulation-based case-control study among births inWashington State. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:613–8.
10. Ylä-Outinen A, Heinonen PK, Tuimala R. Predisposing and risk
factors of umbilical cord prolapse. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
1985;64:567–70.
11. Woo JS, Ngan YS, Ma HK. Prolapse and presentation of the
umbilical cord. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 1983;23:142–5. 
12. Panter KR, Hannah ME. Umbilical cord prolapse: so far so
good? Lancet 1996;347:74.
13. Faiz SA, Habib FA, Sporrong BG, Khalil NA. Results of delivery
in umbilical cord prolapse. Saudi Med J 2003;24:754–7. 
14. Centre for Maternal and Child Enquiries (CMACE). Perinatal
Mortality 2008: United Kingdom. London: CMACE; 2010. 
15. Maternal and Child Health Research Consortium. Confidential
Enquiry into Stillbirths and Deaths in Infancy. 7th AnnualReport Focusing on Breech Presentation at Onset of Labour,Obstetric Anaesthesia – Delays and Complications,Cardiotocograph Education Survey and Sudden UnexpectedDeaths in Infancy – Pathology. London: Maternal and Child
Health Research Consortium; 2000. 
16. Conﬁdential Enquiry into Maternal and Child Health
(CEMACH). Perinatal Mortality 2006: England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. London: CEMACH; 2008. 
17. Johnson KC, Daviss BA. Outcomes of planned home births
with certified professional midwives: large prospective study inNorth America. BMJ 2005;330:1416.
18. Harbour R, Miller J. A new system for grading recommendations
in evidence based guidelines. BMJ 2001;323:334–6.
19. Uygur D, Ki şS, Tuncer R, Özcan FS, Erkaya S. Risk factors and
infant outcomes associated with umbilical cord prolapse. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 2002;78:127–30.20. Yamada T, Kataoka S, Takeda M, Kojima T, Yamada T, Morikawa M,
et al. Umbilical cord presentation after use of a trans-cervicalballoon catheter. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2013;39:658–62.
21. Usta IM, Mercer BM, Sibai BM. Current obstetrical practice and
umbilical cord prolapse. Am J Perinatol 1999;16:479–84.
22. Skupski DW , Harrison-Restelli C, Dupont RB. External cephalic
version: an approach with few complications. Gynecol Obstet
Invest 2003;56:83–8.
23. Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA. Amnioinfusion for potential or
suspected umbilical cord compression in labour. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2012;(1):CD000013. 
24. Smyth RM, Alldred SK, Markham C. Amniotomy for shortening
spontaneous labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2013;(1):CD006167.
25. McDaniels HR, Umezaki H, Harer WB, Valenzuela GJ. Is umbilical
cord prolapse secondary to fetal acidemia? Prenat Neonat Med
2001;6:129–32.
26. Clark DO, Copeland W , Ullery JC. Prolapse of the umbilical cord.
A study of 117 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1968;101:84–90.
27. Hershkovitz R, Silberstein T, Sheiner E, Shoham-Vardi I, Holcberg
G, Katz M, et al. Risk factors associated with true knots of theumbilical cord. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2001;98:36–9.
28. Burshtein S, Levy A, Holcberg G, Zlotnik A, Sheiner E. Is single
umbilical artery an independent risk factor for perinatalmortality? Arch Gynecol Obstet 2011;283:191–4.
29. Dare MR, Middleton P , Crowther CA, Flenady VJ, Varatharaju B.
Planned early birth versus expectant management (waiting) forprelabour rupture of membranes at term (37 weeks or more).Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;(1):CD005302.
30. Ezra Y , Strasberg SR, Farine D. Does cord presentation on
ultrasound predict cord prolapse? Gynecol Obstet Invest
2003;56:6–9.
31. Kinugasa M, Sato T, Tamura M, Suzuki H, Miyazaki Y , Imanaka M.
Antepartum detection of cord presentation by transvaginalultrasonography for term breech presentation: potentialprediction and prevention of cord prolapse. J Obstet Gynaecol
Res 2007;33:612–8.
32. Phelan JP , Boucher M, Mueller E, McCart D, Horenstein J, Clark
SL. The nonlaboring transverse lie. A management dilemma. J Reprod Med 1986;31:184–6.
33. Lewis DF , Robichaux AG, Jaekle RK, Salas A, Canzoneri BJ,
Horton K, et al. Expectant management of preterm prematurerupture of membranes and nonvertex presentation: what arethe risks? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2007;196:566.e1–6.
34. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Induction
of labour. NICE clinical guideline 70. Manchester: NICE; 2008.
35. Tejani S, Tejani N, Weiss RR, Nathanson H. Vasa previa. Diagnosis
and management. N Y State J Med 1979;79:772–3.
36. Koonings PP , Paul RH, Campbell K. Umbilical cord prolapse. A
contemporary look. J Reprod Med 1990;35:690–2.
37. Barrett JM. Funic reduction for the management of umbilical
cord prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;165:654–7.
38. American Academy of Family Physicians. Advanced Life
Support in Obstetrics (ALSO) Instructor Manual. 5th ed.
Washington, DC: AAFP; 2012.15 of 19 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists39. Grady K, Howell C, Cox C, editors. Managing Obstetric
Emergencies and Trauma. The MOET Course Manual. 2nd ed.
London: RCOG Press; 2007.
40. World Health Organization, United Nations Population Fund,
UNICEF , The World Bank. Managing Complications in
Pregnancy and Childbirth: A guide for midwives anddoctors. Geneva: WHO; 2007.
41. Vago T. Prolapse of the umbilical cord: a method of
management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1970;107:967–9.
42. Caspi E, Lotan Y , Schreyer P . Prolapse of the cord: reduction of
perinatal mortality by bladder instillation and cesarean section.Isr J Med Sci 1983;19:541–5.
43. Chetty RM, Moodley J. Umbilical cord prolapse. S Afr Med J
1980;57:128–9.
44. Bord I, Gemer O, Anteby EY , Shenhav S. The value of bladder
filling in addition to manual elevation of presenting fetal part incases of cord prolapse. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2011;283:989–91.
45. Ingemarsson I, Arulkumaran S, Ratnam SS. Single injection of
terbutaline in term labor. I. Effect on fetal pH in cases withprolonged bradycardia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;153:859–65.
46. Katz Z, Shoham Z, Lancet M, Blickstein I, Mogilner BM, Zalel Y .
Management of labor with umbilical cord prolapse: a 5-yearstudy. Obstet Gynecol 1988;72:278–81.
47. Katz Z, Lancet M, Borenstein R. Management of labor with
umbilical cord prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1982;142:239–41.
48. Module 10. Cord Prolapse. In: Winter C, Crofts J, Laxton C,
Barnfield S, Draycott T, editors. PROMPT: PRactical Obstetric
Multi-Professional Training. Practical locally based trainingfor obstetric emergencies. Course Manual. 2nd ed. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 2012. p.169–78.
49. National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s
Health. Intrapartum care: care of healthy women and their
babies during childbirth. London: RCOG Press; 2007.
50. Tan WC, Tan LK, Tan HK, Tan AS. Audit of ‘crash’ emergency
caesarean sections due to cord prolapse in terms of responsetime and perinatal outcome. Ann Acad Med Singapore
2003;32:638–41.
51. Bloom SL, Leveno KJ, Spong CY , Gilbert S, Hauth JC, Landon
MB, et al.; National Institute of Child Health and HumanDevelopment Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network.Decision-to-incision times and maternal and infant outcomes.Obstet Gynecol 2006;108:6–11.
52. Thomas J, Paranjothy S, James D. National cross sectional survey
to determine whether the decision to delivery interval iscritical in emergency caesarean section. BMJ 2004;328:665.
53. MacKenzie IZ, Cooke I. What is a reasonable time from
decision-to-delivery by caesarean section? Evidence from 415deliveries. BJOG 2002;109:498–504.
54. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Caesarean
section. NICE clinical guideline 132. Manchester: NICE; 2011.
55. Thomas J, Paranjothy S; Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists Clinical Effectiveness Support Unit. The
National Sentinel Caesarean Section Audit Report . London:
RCOG Press; 2001.
56. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, Royal
College of Anaesthetists. Classification of urgency of
caesarean section – a continuum of risk. Good Practice 
No. 11. London: RCOG; 2010.
57. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Intrapartum
care: Care of healthy women and their babies during childbirth.NICE clinical guideline 55. Manchester: NICE; 2007.
58. Afolabi BB, Lesi AF , Merah NA. Regional versus general
anaesthesia for caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2012;(10):CD004350. 
59. Ginosar Y , Weiniger C, Elchalal U, Davidson E. Emergency
Cesarean delivery for umbilical cord prolapse: the head-down,knee-chest prone position for spinal anesthesia. Can J Anaesth
2008;55:612–5.
60. McKeen D, George RB, Shukla R. We “can do it” does not mean
we “should do it”: obesity, umbilical cord prolapse, and spinalanesthesia in the knee-chest position. Can J Anaesth
2009;56:168–9. 61. Murphy DJ, Koh DK. Cohort study of the decision to delivery
interval and neonatal outcome for emergency operativevaginal delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2007;196:145.e1–7.
62. Okunwobi-Smith Y , Cooke I, MacKenzie IZ. Decision to delivery
intervals for assisted vaginal vertex delivery. BJOG
2000;107:467–71.
63. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Operative
vaginal delivery. Green-top Guideline No. 26. London: RCOG;
2011.
64. Altaras M, Potashnik G, Ben-Adereth N, Leventhal H. The use of
vacuum extraction in cases of cord prolapse during labor. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1974;118:824–30.
65. Richardson J. Supervisory issues: lessons to learn from a home
birth. Br J Midwifery 2009;17:710–2.
66. Kamoshita E, Amano K, Kanai Y , Mochizuki J, Ikeda Y , Kikuchi S,
et al. Effect of the interval between onset of sustained fetalbradycardia and cesarean delivery on long-term neonatalneurologic prognosis. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2010;111:23–7.
67. Weston R. When birth goes wrong. Pract Midwife 2001;4:10–2.
68. Patterson C. Managing cord prolapse at a home birth. Pract
Midwife 2005;8:34–5.
69. Leong A, Rao J, Opie G, Dobson P . Fetal survival after
conservative management of cord prolapse for three weeks.BJOG 2004;111:1476–7.
70. Nizard J, Cromi A, Molendijk H, Arabin B. Neonatal outcome
following prolonged umbilical cord prolapse in pretermpremature rupture of membranes. BJOG 2005;112:833–6.
71. Poetker DM, Rijhsinghani A. Fetal survival after umbilical cord
prolapse for more than three days. A case report. J Reprod Med
2001;46:776–8.
72. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The Care of
Women Requesting Induced Abortion. Evidence-based Clinical
Guideline Number 7. London: RCOG Press; 2011.
73. McDonald SJ, Middleton P . Effect of timing of umbilical cord
clamping of term infants on maternal and neonatal outcomes.Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;(2):CD004074.
74. Rabe H, Diaz-Rossello JL, Duley L, Dowswell T. Effect of timing
of umbilical cord clamping and other strategies to influenceplacental transfusion at preterm birth on maternal and infantoutcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;(8):CD003248. 
75. Richmond S, Wyllie J. Newborn Life Support. In: Nolan JP ,
editor, Resuscitation Council (UK). Resuscitation Guidelines
2010 . London: Resuscitation Council (UK); 2010. p.118–27.
76. Wyllie J. Recent changes to UK newborn resuscitation
guidelines. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2012;97:F4–7.
77. Crofts JF , Ellis D, Draycott TJ, Winter C, Hunt LP , Akande VA.
Change in knowledge of midwives and obstetricians followingobstetric emergency training: a randomised controlled trial oflocal hospital, simulation centre and teamwork training. BJOG
2007;114:1534–41.
78. Crofts JF , Bartlett C, Ellis D, Hunt LP , Fox R, Draycott TJ. Training
for shoulder dystocia: a trial of simulation using low-fidelity andhigh-fidelity mannequins. Obstet Gynecol 2006;108:1477–85.
79. Crofts JF , Bartlett C, Ellis D, Hunt LP , Fox R, Draycott TJ.
Management of shoulder dystocia: skill retention 6 and 12months after training. Obstet Gynecol 2007;110:1069–74.
80. Johanson RB, Menon V , Burns E, Kargramanya E, Osipov V ,
Israelyan M, et al. Managing Obstetric Emergencies and Trauma(MOET) structured skills training in Armenia, utilising modelsand reality based scenarios. BMC Med Educ 2002;2:5.
81. Siassakos D, Hasafa Z, Sibanda T, Fox R, Donald F , Winter C, et al.
Retrospective cohort study of diagnosis–delivery interval withumbilical cord prolapse: the effect of team training. BJOG
2009;116:1089–96.
82. Crofts JF , Bartlett C, Ellis D, Fox R, Draycott TJ. Documentation
of simulated shoulder dystocia: accurate and complete? BJOG
2008;115:1303–8.Appendix I: Suggested actions for management of cord prolapse
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 16 of 19 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAt every vaginal examination in labour
If abnormal fetal heart with spontaneous rupture of membranesAfter membrane rupture with risk factors/circle6
/circle6
/circle6Consider
Obstetricians and midwives
Anaesthetist and perioperative teamNeonatal team/circle6
/circle6/circle6Organise help
Manually elevate presenting part or 
fill bladderEncourage into left lateral position with head down and pillow placed under left hip OR knee–chest positionConsider tocolysis/circle6
/circle6
/circle6Relieve pressure
Emergency transfer to hospital labour ward
Assess and assist birth by quickest meansUrgency of birth dependent on fetal heart rate and gestational ageIf caesarean section, consider if regional anaesthesia appropriate/circle6
/circle6/circle6
/circle6Decision for birthCORD48Appendix II: Cord prolapse documentation pro forma
17 of 19 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsPlease tick the relevant boxes:
Senior midwife called: Yes No
Time called:........................ Time called:........................ Name:..................................Obstetrician called: Yes NoTime called:........................ Time called:........................ Name:..................................Grade of obstetrician: ...................................................................................................................
Anaesthetist called: Yes NoTime called:........................ Time called:........................ Name:..................................Neonatologist called: Yes NoTime called:........................ Time called:........................ Name:..................................Diagnosed at home or hospital: Home Hospital Time of diagnosis:........................Cervical dilation at diagnosis:.............cm
Procedures used in managing cord prolapse
Elevating the presenting part manually Yes No
Filling the bladder Yes No
Left lateral, head tilted down / knee–chest position (please circle)
Tocolysis with subcutaneous terbutaline Yes No
Mode of birth Mode of anaesthesia
Normal General anaesthetic
Forceps Spinal
Ventouse Epidural
Caesarean section None
Other
Diagnosis-to-birth interval: ..........................minutes
Neonatal outcome
Apgar scores: Weight:.......................kg
1 min: Cord pH Base excess
5 mins: Venous:
10 mins Arterial:
Admission to neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)/special care baby unit (SCBU):
Y es No Reason:................................................................................................................
Risk incident reporting form completed: Y es 
Known risk factors? Please state:.............................................................................................. ....................
Mother debriefed Y es No
Signature:.................................... ................... Print:.................................... ...........................
Designation:................................................. Date: .................................... ...........................Name .................................................
Date of Birth .....................................Hospital No .......................................Appendix III: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in
making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. Each guideline is systematicallydeveloped using a standardised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in ClinicalGovernance Advice No.1 Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website
at
http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These recommendations are not intended to dictate
an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individualpatient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. It ishoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into routinepractice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated. 
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations
formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
Grades of recommendations
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or
randomised controlled trial rated as 1++ anddirectly applicable to the target population; or 
A systematic review of randomised controlled
trials or a body of evidence consistingprincipally of studies rated as 1+ directlyapplicable to the target population anddemonstrating overall consistency of results
A body of evidence including studies rated as
2++ directly applicable to the targetpopulation and demonstrating overallconsistency of results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as1++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as
2+ directly applicable to the target populationand demonstrating overall consistency ofresults; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good practice point
Recommended best practice based on theclinical experience of the guidelinedevelopment groupClassification of evidence levels
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trialsor randomised controlled trials with avery low risk of bias
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trialsor randomised controlled trials with alow risk of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of
randomised controlled trials orrandomised controlled trials with a highrisk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of
case–control or cohort studies or high-quality case–control or cohort studieswith a very low risk of confounding, biasor chance and a high probability that therelationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort
studies with a low risk of confounding,bias or chance and a moderateprobability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a
high risk of confounding, bias or chanceand a significant risk that therelationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports,
case series
4 Expert opinion
PC
DBA
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 18 of 19 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 50 19 of 19DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical
practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, forconsideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgementregarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the lightof clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to
be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols orguidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.The review process will commence in 2017, unless otherwise indicated.This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by: 
Dr CS Chebsey MB BS, Bristol; Dr R Fox MRCOG, Taunton; Professor TJ Draycott FRCOG, Bristol; 
Dr D Siassakos MRCOG, Bristol; and Ms C Winter RM, Bristol
and peer reviewed by: Mrs JAC Allen MRCOG, Hull; Mr IA Babarinsa MRCOG, Gloucester; British Maternal and Fetal Medicine Society; Dr P Dixit FRCOG, Patna, Bihar, India; Dr PP Fogarty FRCOG, Belfast; Mr DI Fraser FRCOG, Norwich; Mr DJR Hutchon FRCOG, Darlington; Dr TA Kay MRCOG, Exeter; Miss SA Irani FRCOG, Birmingham; Dr C Love FRCOG, Edinburgh; Mr S Maiti FRCOG, Manchester; Dr S Pringle FRCOG, Glasgow; RCOG Women’s Network;Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health; Dr S Sabir MRCOG, Bradford; Mrs S Thamban MRCOG, London; Mr DJ Tuffnell FRCOG, Bradford; Dr LM Verghese MRCOG, Manchester; Mr DP Webster MRCOG, Poole.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr M Gupta MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen FRCOG, Glasgow; and 
Dr AJ Thomson MRCOG, Paisley.
Conflicts of interest: No relevant interests declared.The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.