The Initial Management of Chronic Pelvic Pain 
This guideline provides an evidence-based summary for appropriate investigation and management of women with chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pelvic pain can significantly impact a woman's ability to function and may have multiple contributing factors. Pain is a symptom, not a diagnosis, and may be influenced by physical, psychological, and social factors. The initial assessment aims to identify factors contributing to the pain and develop a management plan. Adequate time should be allowed for the initial assessment, and a partnership between the clinician and the woman should be established to plan a management program. Referral to a specialist may be considered if the pain is not adequately controlled. The history should include questions about the pattern of pain, association with other symptoms, and the effect of movement and posture on the pain. Red flag symptoms should be noted for further investigation. Additionally, asking about past or present sexual assault may be helpful. Completing a daily pain diary may help identify provoking factors or associations.

Establishing the woman's level of function at the start of treatment is important for monitoring progress and setting functional goals. Symptom-based diagnostic criteria can confidently diagnose IBS. Referral to relevant healthcare professionals should be considered if a non-gynaecological component to the pain is suspected. Examination should include abdominal and pelvic examination. Screening for infection, particularly STIs, should be offered to sexually active women with chronic pelvic pain. TVS and MRI are useful for identifying structural abnormalities. Diagnostic laparoscopy should be considered as a second-line investigation. Therapeutic options include hormonal treatment for cyclical pain and antispasmodics for IBS. Other treatments such as analgesia, ovarian suppression, and dietary modifications may also be beneficial. Self-management techniques and support from organizations can be valuable for patients. Chronic pelvic pain should be seen as a symptom with multiple contributing factors, and a comprehensive management plan should be developed in partnership with the woman.

Gastroenterol 2009;23:593–610. A consensus recommendation. Pelvic Pain Expert Working Group. Validation study of nonsurgical diagnosis of endometriosis. Characteristics indicating adenomyosis coexisting with leiomyomas. An update on adenomyosis in the adolescent. Pain threshold variations in somatic wall tissues as a function of menstrual cycle. Do gastrointestinal symptoms vary with the menstrual cycle? Laparoscopic adhesiolysis in patients with chronic abdominal pain. Irritable bowel syndrome in the gynecological clinic. The prevalence of interstitial cystitis in gynecologic patients with pelvic pain. Diagnosing interstitial cystitis in women with chronic pelvic pain. Voiding symptoms in chronic pelvic pain. Lower abdominal and pelvic pain with advanced pelvic organ prolapse. Abdominal myofascial pain syndrome must be considered in the differential diagnosis of chronic pelvic pain. Myofascial trigger points. Reliability of physical examination for the diagnosis of myofascial trigger points. Injuries to the levator ani in unexplained, chronic pelvic pain. Botulinum toxin type A for chronic pain and pelvic floor spasm in women. Musculoskeletal factors in chronic pelvic pain. Physical therapy in the management of women with chronic pelvic pain. Prevalence of pelvic musculoskeletal disorders in a female chronic pelvic pain clinic. Physical therapy evaluation of patients with chronic pelvic pain. The low transverse Pfannenstiel incision and the prevalence of incisional hernia and nerve entrapment. Peripheral neuropathies causing chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pelvic pain: a meta-analytic review. Coping with emotions and abuse history in women with chronic pelvic pain. A comparative study of women with chronic pelvic pain. Abuse history and chronic pain in women. Chronic pelvic pain and previous sexual abuse. Chronic pain syndromes and their relation to childhood abuse and stressful life events. Relationship of sexual and physical abuse to pain description, coping, psychological distress, and health-care utilization in a chronic pain sample. Abuse history and chronic pain in women. The association of sexual abuse with pelvic pain complaints in a primary care population. Childhood victimization and pain in adulthood. Pelvic congestion syndrome-associated pelvic pain. Skills for communicating with patients. How do you explain a pain that can’t be seen?: the narratives of women with chronic pelvic pain. Attitudes of women with chronic pelvic pain to the gynecological consultation. Factors influencing outcome in consultations for chronic pelvic pain. A randomized clinical trial to compare two different approaches in women with chronic pelvic pain. Efficacy of multidisciplinary pain treatment centers. Effectiveness of an interdisciplinary pain management program for the treatment of chronic pelvic pain. Psychosomatic group treatment helps women with chronic pelvic pain. Guidelines on the irritable bowel syndrome: mechanisms and practical management. Diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome. Management of acute pelvic inflammatory disease. Management of genital Chlamydia trachomatis infection. A systematic review of the accuracy of ultrasound in the diagnosis of endometriosis. The use of ultrasound-based ‘soft markers’ for the prediction of pelvic pathology in women with chronic pelvic pain. Magnetic resonance imaging and transvaginal ultrasonography for the diagnosis of adenomyosis. Ultrasonography compared with magnetic resonance imaging for the diagnosis of adenomyosis. Ultrasound scan and magnetic resonance imaging for the diagnosis of adenomyosis. Diagnostic accuracy of transvaginal sonography for the diagnosis of adenomyosis. The investigation and management of endometriosis. Complications of laparoscopy: a prospective multicentre observational study. Surgical complications of diagnostic and operative gynaecological laparoscopy. Preventing entry-related gynaecological laparoscopic injuries. The role of laparoscopy as a diagnostic tool in chronic pelvic pain. “People sometimes react funny if they’re not told enough”: women’s views about the risks of diagnostic laparoscopy. Microlaparoscopy under local anesthesia and conscious pain mapping for the diagnosis and management of pelvic pain. Diagnosis, treatment and follow up of women undergoing conscious pain mapping for chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pelvic pain and quality of life after laparoscopy. The psychological effects of laparoscopy on women with chronic pelvic pain. A randomised trial of photographic reinforcement during postoperative counselling after diagnostic laparoscopy for pelvic pain. Ovarian cancer. The recognition and initial management of ovarian cancer.

Primary gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist therapy for suspected endometriosis: a nonsurgical approach to the diagnosis and treatment of chronic pelvic pain. Consensus statement for the management of chronic pelvic pain and endometriosis. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 51: Chronic pelvic pain. Opioids for persistent pain: Good practice. Anticonvulsant drugs for acute and chronic pain. Laparoscopic uterosacral nerve ablation for alleviating chronic pelvic pain. Rome III criteria for the diagnosis of IBS. 'Red flag' symptoms and signs. Grades of recommendations. Classification of evidence levels.