The Management of Ovarian 
Hyperstimulation Syndrome 
Green-top Guideline No. 5 
February 2016 
The Management of Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome 
This is the third edition of this guideline, previously published in 2006 with the same title. 
Executive summary of recommendations 
Incidence of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) 
What is the reported incidence of OHSS? 
Clinicians must remain alert to the possibility of OHSS in all women undergoing fertility treatment and 
women should be counselled accordingly. [New 2016 ]
Diagnosis of OHSS 
How is OHSS diagnosed and what differential diagnoses should be considered? 
Clinicians need to be aware of the symptoms and signs of OHSS, as the diagnosis is based on clinical
criteria.
In women presenting with severe abdominal pain or pyrexia, extra care should be taken to rule out 
other causes of the patient’s symptoms. The input of clinicians experienced in the management of 
OHSS should be obtained in such cases. [New 2016 ]
Assessing severity and reporting adverse outcomes 
How is the severity of OHSS classified? 
The severity of OHSS should be graded according to a standardised classification scheme.
How should OHSS be reported? 
Licensed centres should comply with Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) regulations 
in reporting cases of severe or critical OHSS among their patients.
Units that treat women with OHSS should inform the licensed centre where the fertility treatment was 
carried out to promote clinical continuity and to allow the licensed centre to meet its legal obligations. 
Organisation of services 
How should care be delivered for women at risk of OHSS? 
Fertility clinics should provide verbal and written information concerning OHSS to all women 
undergoing fertility treatment, including a 24-hour contact telephone number.
All acute units where women with suspected OHSS are likely to present should establish agreed local
protocols for the assessment and management of these women and ensure they have access to 
appropriately skilled clinicians with experience in the management of this condition.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 2of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists D
D
D
D
P
P
PDLicensed centres that provide fertility treatment should ensure close liaison and coordination with 
acute units where their patients may present. [New 2016 ] 
Initial assessment 
How should women suspected of suffering from OHSS be assessed? 
Women presenting with symptoms suggestive of OHSS should be assessed face-to-face by a clinician 
if there is any doubt about the diagnosis or if the severity is likely to be greater than mild. [New 2016 ]
Outpatient management of OHSS 
Which patients with OHSS are suitable for outpatient care? 
Outpatient management is appropriate for women with mild or moderate OHSS and in selected cases 
with severe OHSS.
What management is appropriate in the outpatient setting for patients with OHSS? 
Women undergoing outpatient management of OHSS should be appropriately counselled and provided 
with information regarding fluid intake and output monitoring. In addition, they should be provided 
with contact details to access advice.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents should be avoided, as they may compromise renal function.
Women with severe OHSS being managed on an outpatient basis should receive thromboprophylaxis 
with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). The duration of treatment should be individualised, 
taking into account risk factors and whether or not conception occurs.
Paracentesis of ascitic fluid may be carried out on an outpatient basis by the abdominal or transvaginal
route under ultrasound guidance.
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonists or 
dopamine agonists in treating established OHSS. [New 2016 ]
How should women with OHSS managed on an outpatient basis be monitored? 
Women with OHSS being managed on an outpatient basis should be reviewed urgently if they develop 
symptoms or signs of worsening OHSS (see Section 9.3). In the absence of these, review every 
2–3 days is likely to be adequate. [New 2016 ]
Baseline laboratory investigations should be repeated if the severity of OHSS is thought to be 
worsening. Haematocrit is a useful guide to the degree of intravascular volume depletion. [New 2016 ]
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 3of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5P
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
DPInpatient management 
When should women with OHSS be admitted? 
Hospital admission should be considered for women who: 
Gare unable to achieve satisfactory pain control
Gare unable to maintain adequate fluid intake due to nausea 
Gshow signs of worsening OHSS despite outpatient intervention 
Gare unable to attend for regular outpatient follow-up 
Ghave critical OHSS. [New 2016 ]
Who should provide care to women with OHSS? 
Multidisciplinary assistance should be sought for the care of women with critical OHSS and severe 
OHSS who have persistent haemoconcentration and dehydration.
Features of critical OHSS should prompt consideration of the need for intensive care.
A clinician experienced in the management of OHSS should remain in overall charge of the woman’s 
care. 
How should women with OHSS be monitored? 
Women admitted with OHSS should be assessed at least once daily. More frequent assessment is 
appropriate for women with critical OHSS and those with complications.
How should the symptoms of OHSS be relieved? 
Analgesia and antiemetics may be used in women with OHSS, avoiding nonsteroidal agents and 
medicines contraindicated in pregnancy.
What is the appropriate management of fluid balance? 
Fluid replacement by the oral route, guided by thirst, is the most physiological approach to correcting 
intravascular dehydration.
Women with persistent haemoconcentration despite volume replacement with intravenous colloids 
may need invasive monitoring and this should be managed with anaesthetic input. 
Diuretics should be avoided as they further deplete intravascular volume, but they may have a role in 
a multidisciplinary setting if oliguria persists despite adequate fluid replacement and drainage of 
ascites.
How should ascites and effusions be managed? 
Indications for paracentesis include the following: 
Gsevere abdominal distension and abdominal pain secondary to ascites 
Gshortness of breath and respiratory compromise secondary to ascites and increased intra-abdominal
pressure 
Goliguria despite adequate volume replacement, secondary to increased abdominal pressure causing 
reduced renal perfusion.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 4of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists D
PD
D
D
D
D
D
P
DParacentesis should be carried out under ultrasound guidance and can be performed abdominally or 
vaginally.
Intravenous colloid therapy should be considered for women who have large volumes of fluid 
removed by paracentesis.
How should the risk of thrombosis be managed? 
Women with severe or critical OHSS and those admitted with OHSS should receive LMWH prophylaxis. 
The duration of LMWH prophylaxis should be individualised according to patient risk factors and 
outcome of treatment. [New 2016 ]
Women with moderate OHSS should be evaluated for predisposing risk factors for thrombosis and 
prescribed either antiembolism stockings or LMWH if indicated. 
In addition to the usual symptoms and signs of venous thromboembolism (VTE), thromboembolism 
should be suspected in women with OHSS who present with unusual neurological symptoms, even if 
they present several weeks after apparent improvement in OHSS.
When is surgical management indicated? 
Surgery is only indicated in patients with OHSS if there is a coincident problem such as adnexal torsion,
ovarian rupture or ectopic pregnancy and should be performed by an experienced surgeon.
OHSS and pregnancy 
What are the risks associated with pregnancy and OHSS? 
Clinicians should be aware, and women informed, that pregnancies complicated by OHSS may be at 
increased risk of pre-eclampsia and preterm delivery. [New 2016 ] 
1.Purpose and scope 
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) is a complication of fertility treatment, which uses pharma -
cological ovarian stimulation to increase the number of oocytes and therefore embryos available during 
assisted reproductive technology (ART). In a minority of women undergoing treatment, the ovarian 
response exceeds that aimed for and results in a clinical condition with a specific pathophysiology. OHSS 
is associated with significant physical and psychosocial morbidity and has been associated with maternal 
death. 1However, in most cases OHSS is self-limiting and requires supportive management and monitoring 
while awaiting resolution. Women with more severe OHSS may require inpatient treatment to manage the 
symptoms and reduce the risk of further complications. The key principles of OHSS management therefore 
are early recognition and the prompt assessment and treatment of women with moderate or severe OHSS. 
The mechanism whereby OHSS develops has received a lot of interest in recent years and key 
proinflammatory mediators are believed to be involved in the pathogenesis. 2,3 However, translating 
this basic scientific knowledge into clinical practice has so far proved difficult. There are few high quality 
studies that address the management of OHSS, and the subject remains of great significance not only to 
clinicians who provide assisted conception treatment, but also to those who look after affected women 
in emergency and gynaecology departments distinct from the treating clinic. Very often, women with 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 5of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5DC
C
D
DP
D
COHSS present to clinicians who are not fertility specialists or who do not undertake assisted conception. 
This guideline aims to review the literature and provide evidence-based advice to help clinicians 
diagnose and manage patients with OHSS. Prevention of OHSS is outside the scope of this guideline and 
is covered by guidance from the British Fertility Society. 4
2.Introduction and background epidemiology 
Exposure of ovaries to human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) or luteinising hormone (LH) following 
controlled ovarian stimulation by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) underlies most cases of OHSS. 
Exposure of hyperstimulated ovaries to hCG leads to the production of proinflammatory mediators. Chief 
among these is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), but a variety of cytokines are likely to be 
involved in the pathogenesis and clinical features of OHSS. 1The occurrence of ovarian enlargement with 
the local and systemic effects of proinflammatory mediators, including increased vascular permeability and 
a prothrombotic effect, is responsible for the clinical features of OHSS. 
Increased vascular permeability leads to loss of fluid into the third space, manifesting as ascites or, less 
commonly, pleural and pericardial effusions. Women with severe OHSS demonstrate hypovolaemia, with 
a typical loss of 20% of their calculated blood volume in the acute phase of OHSS. 5Accompanying this 
hypovolaemia is reduced serum osmolality and sodium. This paradoxical combination of hypovolaemia 
and hypo-osmolality has been ascribed to a ‘reset’ of the osmotic thresholds of vasopressin and thirst to 
lower osmolality and sodium levels as these women remain able to concentrate and dilute their urine 
around the new, lower, level of osmolality. The parallel resetting of the osmotic thresholds is thought to 
explain the observed decreases in serum osmolality and sodium as opposed to electrolyte losses. 6,7 
Despite the growing number of cycles of assisted reproduction, the true incidence of OHSS remains 
unknown because there is no mandatory reporting for mild and moderate cases. Furthermore, the lack of 
an internationally agreed classification system makes it difficult to compare data from different units. 8
3.Identification and assessment of evidence 
This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing Royal College of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) Green-top Guidelines. MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane 
Library were searched. The search was restricted to articles published between January 2006 and May 2015. 
The databases were searched using the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms including all 
subheadings and this was combined with a keyword search. Search terms included ‘ovarian hyper -
stimulation syndrome’, ‘ovary hyperstimulation’, ‘OHSS’, ‘hyperstimulation’ and ‘hyper-stimulation’. The 
National Guideline Clearinghouse, NICE Evidence Search, Trip and Guidelines International Network were 
also searched for relevant guidelines. Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. 
Areas lacking evidence are highlighted and annotated as ‘good practice points’ (GPP). 
4.Incidence of OHSS 
4.1 What is the reported incidence of OHSS? 
Clinicians must remain alert to the possibility of OHSS in all women undergoing fertility treatment and 
women should be counselled accordingly.
It is known that the incidence of OHSS varies between different types of fertility treatment, 
with treatments involving greater degrees of ovarian stimulation being associated with a higher 
incidence. In cycles of conventional in vitro fertilisation (IVF), mild OHSS has been estimated 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 6of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists D
Evidence 
level 3 to affect around one-third of cycles, while the combined incidence of moderate or severe OHSS 
varies from 3.1% to 8%. 9The 14th European IVF-Monitoring report, 10 analysing data from 25 
European countries, found an incidence of hospitalisation due to OHSS of 0.3% in 2010. Data 
from the USA showed OHSS to be the commonest complication of IVF treatment, 11 with an 
incidence of moderate or severe OHSS in 2011 of 1.1%. OHSS is rare following ovulation 
induction with clomifene, or monofollicular ovulation induction with gonadotropins, but it has 
been reported. Very rarely, OHSS may occur spontaneously, in association with pregnancy. 12 
Certain patient and cycle characteristics increase the risk of OHSS; women with a previous 
history of OHSS, polycystic ovary syndrome, increased antral follicle count (AFC) or high levels 
of anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) are at an increased risk of OHSS. Evidence from meta-analysis 13 
also shows a reduced risk of OHSS in IVF cycles employing gonadotrophin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH) antagonists compared with cycles where GnRH agonists are used as part of the regimen 
for controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. However, OHSS still occurs despite these preventive 
measures and can occur in patients and treatment cycles that do not meet any criteria that 
might be considered ‘high risk’ for the development of OHSS. The outcome of treatment also 
influences the incidence, which is higher in cycles where conception occurs, compared with 
cycles without conception, and higher still in cycles resulting in multiple pregnancy, 
highlighting the important role of endogenous hCG. 
5.Diagnosis of OHSS 
5.1 How is OHSS diagnosed and what differential diagnoses should be considered? 
Clinicians need to be aware of the symptoms and signs of OHSS, as the diagnosis is based on clinical
criteria.
In women presenting with severe abdominal pain or pyrexia, extra care should be taken to rule out 
other causes of the patient’s symptoms. The input of clinicians experienced in the management of 
OHSS should be obtained in such cases.
The diagnosis of OHSS is made on clinical grounds (Tables 1 and 2). The typical patient presents 
with abdominal distension and discomfort following the trigger injection used to promote final 
follicular maturation prior to oocyte retrieval. There may be a preceding history of an excessive 
ovarian response to stimulation, but the absence of such a history does not rule out a diagnosis 
of OHSS. The time of presentation following trigger injection divides patients into two groups: 
early and late OHSS. ‘Early’ OHSS usually presents within 7 days of the hCG injection and is 
usually associated with an excessive ovarian response. ‘Late’ OHSS typically presents 10 or more 
days after the hCG injection and is usually the result of endogenous hCG derived from an early 
pregnancy. The preceding ovarian response in these women may be unremarkable. Late OHSS 
tends to be more prolonged and severe than the early form. 14 
The symptoms of OHSS are not specific and there are no diagnostic tests for the condition. 
Hence, care must be taken to exclude other serious conditions that may present in a similar 
manner but require very different management. Careful assessment by an experienced clinician 
may be needed, along with full blood count, serum electrolytes and osmolality, pelvic ultrasound 
scan and, in selected cases, abdominal imaging. The combination of elevated haematocrit and 
reduced serum osmolality and sodium is indicative of OHSS. 7It should be remembered that 
OHSS by itself is not commonly associated with severe pain, pyrexia or signs of peritonism. 
The presence of these features should lead to a thorough clinical review and investigation to 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 7of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5Evidence 
level 3 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
D
D
Evidence 
level 3 rule out other diagnoses. Important differential diagnoses include pelvic infection, pelvic 
abscess, appendicitis, ovarian torsion or cyst rupture, bowel perforation 15 and ectopic 
pregnancy. OHSS should not, therefore, be the ‘default diagnosis’ for women presenting with 
abdominal pain during fertility treatment. 
Table 1. Relevant history from a woman suspected to be suffering from OHSS 
History 
Time of onset of symptoms relative to trigger 
Medication used for trigger (hCG or GnRH agonist) 
Number of follicles on final monitoring scan 
Number of eggs collected 
Were embryos replaced and how many? 
Polycystic ovary syndrome diagnosis? 
Symptoms 
Abdominal bloating 
Abdominal discomfort/pain, need for analgesia 
Nausea and vomiting 
Breathlessness, inability to lie flat or talk in full sentences 
Reduced urine output 
Leg swelling 
Vulval swelling 
Associated comorbidities such as thrombosis 
Table 2. Examination and investigation of women with suspected OHSS 
Examination 
General: assess for dehydration, oedema (pedal, vulval and sacral); record heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, body weight 
Abdominal: assess for ascites, palpable mass, peritonism; measure girth 
Respiratory: assess for pleural effusion, pneumonia, pulmonary oedema 
Investigations 
Full blood count 
Haematocrit (haemoconcentration) 
C-reactive protein (severity) 
Urea and electrolytes (hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia) 
Serum osmolality (hypo-osmolality) 
Liver function tests (elevated enzymes and reduced albumin) 
Coagulation profile (elevated fibrinogen and reduced antithrombin) 
hCG (to determine outcome of treatment cycle) if appropriate 
Ultrasound scan: ovarian size, pelvic and abdominal free fluid. Consider ovarian Doppler if torsion suspected 
Other tests that may be indicated 
Arterial blood gases 
D-dimers 
Electrocardiogram (ECG)/echocardiogram 
Chest X-ray 
Computerised tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) or ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 8of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Evidence 
level 3 6. Assessing severity and reporting adverse outcomes 
6.1 How is the severity of OHSS classified? 
The severity of OHSS should be graded according to a standardised classification scheme.
Several schemes have been developed for classifying the severity of OHSS, 16–19 with no clear 
agreement between investigators. The scheme in Table 3 is based on the classification of OHSS 
severity proposed in the previous edition of the RCOG guideline combined with useful features 
from previous classifications. 
Table 3. Proposed RCOG classification of severity of OHSS 
Category Features 
Mild OHSS Abdominal bloating 
Mild abdominal pain 
Ovarian size usually < 8 cm a
Moderate OHSS Moderate abdominal pain 
Nausea ±vomiting 
Ultrasound evidence of ascites 
Ovarian size usually 8–12 cm a
Severe OHSS Clinical ascites ( ±hydrothorax) 
Oliguria ( < 300 ml/day or < 30 ml/hour) 
Haematocrit > 0.45 
Hyponatraemia (sodium < 135 mmol/l) 
Hypo-osmolality (osmolality < 282 mOsm/kg) 
Hyperkalaemia (potassium > 5 mmol/l) 
Hypoproteinaemia (serum albumin < 35 g/l) 
Ovarian size usually > 12 cm a
Critical OHSS Tense ascites/large hydrothorax 
Haematocrit > 0.55 
White cell count > 25 000/ml
Oliguria/anuria 
Thromboembolism 
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
a Ovarian size may not correlate with severity of OHSS in cases of assisted reproduction because of the effect of follicular 
aspiration. Women demonstrating any feature of severe or critical OHSS should be classified in that category.
Rarely, OHSS may be associated with life-threatening complications, including renal failure, 
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), haemorrhage from ovarian rupture, and 
 thrombo embolism. 1,2,20–22 The precise risk of mortality from OHSS is unknown, because there 
is no obligation to report such cases internationally. There were three deaths from OHSS 
between 1984 and 2008 in the Netherlands; it is estimated that 100 000 IVF cycles were 
performed during this period. 1No deaths were reported in 209 cases of severe or critical OHSS 
arising from 73 492 cycles of IVF performed between 1987 and 1996 in 16 out of 19 tertiary 
centres in Israel. 23 The 2011 triennial report of the Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths 
in the UK 24 did not identify any maternal deaths due to OHSS in the period 2006–08, during 
which time approximately 119 000 IVF and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) cycles were 
carried out in 92 813 women. 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 9of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5Evidence 
level 4 D
Evidence 
level 3 6.2 How should OHSS be reported? 
Licensed centres should comply with Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) regulations 
in reporting cases of severe or critical OHSS among their patients.
Units that treat women with OHSS should inform the licensed centre where the fertility treatment was 
carried out to promote clinical continuity and to allow the licensed centre to meet its legal obligations. 
Any death related to OHSS in the UK must be reported to MBRRACE-UK (Mothers and Babies: 
Reducing Risk through Audits and Confidential Enquiries across the UK), 25 irrespective of 
whether the woman was pregnant. 
UK clinics providing licensed fertility treatment are obliged to follow relevant Human 
 Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) guidelines 26 for reporting severe untoward 
incidents. In the context of OHSS, this may be taken to include cases of severe or critical OHSS 
(as per the classification above) where hospitalisation is needed. Clinicians must recognise the 
importance of accurately reporting OHSS as a means of providing reliable data to help patients, 
researchers and commissioners of services. The HFEA requires that all incidents be reported 
verbally within 12 working hours, followed by a completed incident form within 24 working 
hours of the incident being identified. 
Since women with OHSS are often admitted to centres other than the treating unit, it is important for the 
admitting centre to inform the originating clinic. The duty to report cases of OHSS to the HFEA, however, 
lies with the Person Responsible of the licensed centre providing the fertility treatment. 
7.Organisation of services 
7.1 How should care be delivered for women at risk of OHSS? 
Fertility clinics should provide verbal and written information concerning OHSS to all women 
undergoing fertility treatment, including a 24-hour contact telephone number.
All acute units where women with suspected OHSS are likely to present should establish agreed local
protocols for the assessment and management of these women and ensure they have access to 
appropriately skilled clinicians with experience in the management of this condition.
Licensed centres that provide fertility treatment should ensure close liaison and coordination with 
acute units where their patients may present.
OHSS results from fertility treatment carried out, in the UK, in specialist units licensed for this purpose by 
the HFEA. In many cases, the treating unit is separate to, and some distance from, acute gynaecology or 
emergency departments where women may present with symptoms of OHSS. As a result, in certain 
situations the clinicians looking after a patient with OHSS may lack experience in managing this condition. 
Efforts should be made to reduce the risk associated with this by patient empowerment and coordination 
of services between licensed centres and the acute units where their patients are likely to present. 
Women should be informed of the symptoms of OHSS and of the importance of reporting these. 
Information concerning OHSS should be delivered face-to-face to all patients undergoing fertility 
treatment, backed up with written information 27 and advice including a 24-hour contact. 
They should be advised to mention that they are undergoing fertility treatment even if they 
present with an apparently unrelated symptom, such as headache or visual disturbance. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 10 of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists P
DEvidence 
level 4 
Evidence 
level 4 P
P
PGynaecology and emergency departments in acute hospitals should develop evidence-based local 
protocols covering the assessment and management of women presenting with suspected OHSS. Input 
should be available from senior clinicians with experience of managing OHSS and, as soon as practicable, 
women with OHSS should be transferred to the care of such clinicians. 
The licensed centre should agree referral pathways and protocols with the acute units to ensure that 
specialists provide continuity of care for their patients with OHSS, particularly when women are admitted 
to a centre without the required specialist expertise .Acute hospitals with assisted conception units should 
ensure that 24-hour input is available from relevant senior clinicians. 
8.Initial assessment 
8.1 How should women suspected of suffering from OHSS be assessed? 
Women presenting with symptoms suggestive of OHSS should be assessed face-to-face by a clinician 
if there is any doubt about the diagnosis or if the severity is likely to be greater than mild.
The aim of initial assessment is to establish the diagnosis (see section 5) and grade the severity 
of OHSS (see section 6). Women with symptoms of OHSS may in the first instance be assessed 
over the telephone. It is important for staff triaging women over the telephone to have a clear 
understanding of the women who will require face-to-face clinical review. Important points to 
be noted in the history are specified in Table 1. Specific enquiry should be made for significant 
abdominal pain, shortness of breath or a subjective impression of reduced urine output. 
These symptoms may indicate severe OHSS and the occurrence of specific respiratory, renal 
or ovarian complications. 21,22,28 
Face-to-face clinical assessment allows examination and investigations with the aim of clarifying the 
diagnosis and severity of the patient’s condition (Table 2). 
9. Outpatient management of OHSS 
9.1 Which patients with OHSS are suitable for outpatient care? 
Outpatient management is appropriate for women with mild or moderate OHSS and in selected cases 
with severe OHSS.
A number of retrospective observational series 29–31 have described outpatient management of 
severe OHSS. Lincoln et al. 30 reported a retrospective series of 48 women with moderate to 
severe OHSS managed on an outpatient basis with transvaginal paracentesis and rehydration. 
The mean number of outpatient visits was 3.4 ± 0.45 (range 1–14). Hospitalisation was required 
in 8.4% of women and no complications were noted. Smith et al. 31 reported a retrospective 
case series of 146 outpatient transvaginal paracenteses in 96 women with OHSS with no 
procedure-related complications. A retrospective UK series of 99 women at risk of developing 
OHSS was reported by Shukla et al. 32 Women received a daily telephone call by a nurse and 
were reviewed by a doctor where necessary. Women were followed up for a median of 8 days 
(range 4–31) after egg collection and no woman had complications related to OHSS. 
Paracentesis was carried out in 7.1% of women with a mean volume of fluid drained of 
4543 ml (SD 2792 ml). Hospital admission was required in 4% of women, with a median length 
of admission of 2 days (range 2–5 days). 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 11 of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5D
DEvidence 
level 3 
Evidence 
level 3 9.2 What management is appropriate in the outpatient setting for patients with OHSS? 
Women undergoing outpatient management of OHSS should be appropriately counselled and provided 
with information regarding fluid intake and output monitoring. In addition, they should be provided 
with contact details to access advice.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents should be avoided, as they may compromise renal function. 
Women with severe OHSS being managed on an outpatient basis should receive thromboprophylaxis 
with LMWH. The duration of treatment should be individualised, taking into account risk factors and 
whether or not conception occurs.
Paracentesis of ascitic fluid may be carried out on an outpatient basis by the abdominal or transvaginal
route under ultrasound guidance.
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of GnRH antagonists or dopamine agonists in treating 
established OHSS.
Women with OHSS should be provided with verbal and written information about their 
condition. There are no specific studies to guide advice regarding fluid intake. However, it 
appears reasonable to encourage patients to drink to thirst rather than a set amount. 7Fluid 
intake of at least 1 litre a day should be advised. Outpatient management may be aided if patients 
are able to maintain fluid input–output charts. Urine output of less than 1000 ml per 24 hours 
or a positive fluid balance of greater than 1000 ml over 24 hours should prompt medical review 
to assess severity. 
Paracetamol and oral opiates including codeine can be offered to women for pain relief. 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided as they may compromise 
renal function in women with OHSS. 28 
Women with severe OHSS are at increased risk of thromboembolism. Although there are no 
trials on this subject, thromboprophylaxis should be provided for these women in view of the 
serious nature of this complication 33 (see section 10.7). 
A number of retrospective case series describe outpatient paracentesis in women with severe 
OHSS. 30–32 
An observational study 34 has suggested that GnRH antagonist administration in women with 
established severe early OHSS may result in quicker regression of the syndrome. Small 
observational studies 35,36 also suggest that dopamine agonists may have a beneficial role in the 
treatment of established OHSS. Further research is required to evaluate these interventions. 
9.3 How should women with OHSS managed on an outpatient basis be monitored? 
Women with OHSS being managed on an outpatient basis should be reviewed urgently if they develop 
symptoms or signs of worsening OHSS (see below). In the absence of these, review every 2–3 days is 
likely to be adequate. 
Baseline laboratory investigations should be repeated if the severity of OHSS is thought to be 
worsening. Haematocrit is a useful guide to the degree of intravascular volume depletion.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 12 of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists D
D
D
D
D
Evidence 
level 3 
Evidence 
level 4 
Evidence 
level 3 
DPIn the majority of women with OHSS, the condition is self-limiting. The object of monitoring is 
to identify women who suffer an increasing severity of OHSS and may require further measures. 
In most women, the condition resolves over a period of 7–10 days. 37 If conception occurs, 
endogenous hCG can lead to a worsening of OHSS, whereas, in the absence of pregnancy, 
recovery is usually complete by the time of the withdrawal bleed. 
Clinicians and patients should be vigilant for signs that the severity of OHSS is worsening. 
These include: 38,39 
Gincreasing abdominal distension and pain 
Gshortness of breath 
Gtachycardia or hypotension 
Greduced urine output (less than 1000 ml/24 hours) or positive fluid balance (more than 
1000 ml/24 hours) 
Gweight gain and increased abdominal girth 
Gincreasing haematocrit (greater than 0.45). 
10.Inpatient management 
10.1 When should women with OHSS be admitted? 
Hospital admission should be considered for women who: 
Gare unable to achieve satisfactory pain control
Gare unable to maintain adequate fluid intake due to nausea 
Gshow signs of worsening OHSS despite outpatient intervention 
Gare unable to attend for regular outpatient follow-up 
Ghave critical OHSS.
There is variability in the threshold for hospital admission between practitioners and it is not 
possible to be categorical about criteria for admission. The value of admission lies in the 
possibility of closer monitoring, ease of intervention and availability of multidisciplinary input. 
This is crucial in the care of women with critical OHSS, who may be at imminent risk of 
 complications or who have already developed complications that may require intensive care. 
However, each case should be considered on its merits with reference to the clinical features, 
social factors and the expertise available. Women with less severe OHSS may also benefit from 
admission depending on their social situation and the availability of out-of-hours expertise. 38 
The need for paracentesis is not in itself an absolute reason for admission, although it is 
recognised that several hospitals may not have easy access to outpatient paracentesis and 
volume replacement. 
10.2 Who should provide care to women with OHSS? 
Multidisciplinary assistance should be sought for the care of women with critical OHSS and severe 
OHSS who have persistent haemoconcentration and dehydration. 
Features of critical OHSS should prompt consideration of the need for intensive care.
A clinician experienced in the management of OHSS should remain in overall charge of the woman’s 
care. 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 13 of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5Evidence 
level 3 
Evidence 
level 4 
D
Evidence 
level 4 
D
D
PPatients with severe OHSS where dehydration and haemoconcentration persist despite adequate 
fluid replacement may need invasive haemodynamic monitoring, requiring input from 
anaesthetic/intensive care colleagues. Intensive care is also likely to be needed for women with 
critical OHSS, while specific complications such as thromboembolism, ARDS and renal failure 
require input from relevant specialties. 38 
Assisted reproduction centres should maintain close liaison with acute gynaecology and emergency units, 
so that appropriate expertise is available for the care of women admitted with OHSS. 
10.3 How should women with OHSS be monitored? 
Women admitted with OHSS should be assessed at least once daily. More frequent assessment is 
appropriate for women with critical OHSS and those with complications. 
Inpatient monitoring of women with OHSS aims to track changes in the severity of the disease 
process and to identify any complications at an early stage. Body weight, abdominal girth, and 
fluid intake and output should be measured on a daily basis, along with full blood count, 
haematocrit, serum electrolytes, osmolality and liver function tests. Depending on the clinical 
features, arterial blood gases, ECG, chest X-ray and other imaging may be required. Increasing 
abdominal girth, weight gain, oliguria with positive fluid balance and elevated haematocrit are 
signs of worsening OHSS. Conversely, recovery is signalled by a diuresis, normalisation of 
haematocrit and a reduction in abdominal girth and body weight. 38,39 C-reactive protein levels 
have been shown to correlate with other markers of OHSS such as abdominal girth and weight, 
and may have a role in monitoring severity. 40 
10.4 How should the symptoms of OHSS be relieved? 
Analgesia and antiemetics may be used in women with OHSS, avoiding nonsteroidal agents and 
medicines contraindicated in pregnancy.
Relief of abdominal pain and nausea forms an important part of the supportive care of women 
with OHSS. Analgesia with paracetamol and opiates, if required, is appropriate, while NSAIDs 
should be avoided as they may compromise renal function. 28 It should be borne in mind that 
severe pain may signal a complication such as ovarian torsion or rupture, or a coincident 
problem such as ectopic pregnancy or pelvic infection. 
10.5 What is the appropriate management of fluid balance? 
Fluid replacement by the oral route, guided by thirst, is the most physiological approach to correcting 
intravascular dehydration.
Women with persistent haemoconcentration despite volume replacement with intravenous colloids 
may need invasive monitoring and this should be managed with anaesthetic input.
Diuretics should be avoided as they further deplete intravascular volume, but they may have a role in 
a multidisciplinary setting if oliguria persists despite adequate fluid replacement and drainage of 
ascites. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 14 of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Evidence 
level 4 
D
Evidence 
level 3 
D
Evidence 
level 3 
D
D
PThere are no trials on the optimum regimen for managing fluid balance in women with OHSS. 
Vigorous intravenous fluid therapy with crystalloids has the potential of worsening ascites in 
the presence of increased capillary permeability. Hence, the oral route should be used for 
hydration wherever practicable. 7Some patients may need effective analgesia and antiemetics 
in order to be able to maintain adequate fluid balance. 
Acutely dehydrated women may need intravenous fluid therapy to correct fluid balance, 
followed by oral fluids to maintain hydration. Crystalloids are useful for the initial correction of 
dehydration in women who are unable to maintain adequate oral intake. There are theoretical 
advantages to using colloids rather than crystalloids for initial rehydration. Human albumin and 
hexaethyl starch (HES) have been used for correction of dehydration in women with severe 
OHSS. However, HES has been withdrawn in the UK as a result of evidence showing increased 
mortality in critically ill and septic patients receiving HES compared with those receiving 
crystalloids. Human albumin solution 25% may be used as a plasma volume expander in doses 
of 50–100 g, infused over 4 hours and repeated 4- to 12-hourly. 38 Strict fluid balance recording 
should be followed for these patients. 
Persistent haemoconcentration or low urine output despite apparent adequate volume 
 replacement by colloids is an indication to seek multidisciplinary assistance. In these cases, 
continuous urine output measurement and invasive haemodynamic monitoring may help guide 
fluid management more accurately. Oliguria despite adequate fluid replacement may in some 
cases respond to paracentesis. 41 Small nonrandomised studies 42,43 describe the use of dopamine 
infusion or oral docarpamine in treating severe OHSS. It is not possible to be categorical about 
the value of these interventions in the absence of adequate trials and they should only be 
undertaken in the multidisciplinary setting under close monitoring. 
Diuretics have been used in managing fluid balance in women with OHSS, but their use has not 
been subjected to controlled studies. There is a risk of worsening hypovolaemia if diuretics are 
administered without correcting dehydration. However, careful use of diuretics may be 
appropriate in women who continue to exhibit oliguria despite adequate fluid replacement, 
particularly if any tense ascites that may have been contributing to oliguria has been drained. 38,44 
10.6 How should ascites and effusions be managed? 
Indications for paracentesis include the following: 
Gsevere abdominal distension and abdominal pain secondary to ascites 
Gshortness of breath and respiratory compromise secondary to ascites and increased intra-abdominal
pressure 
Goliguria despite adequate volume replacement, secondary to increased abdominal pressure causing 
reduced renal perfusion.
Paracentesis should be carried out under ultrasound guidance and can be performed abdominally or 
vaginally.
Intravenous colloid therapy should be considered for women who have large volumes of fluid 
removed by paracentesis.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 15 of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5Evidence 
level 4 
Evidence 
level 3 
Evidence 
level 4 
D
C
DParacentesis should be carried out under ultrasound guidance to avoid trauma to the enlarged, 
vascular ovaries. Both abdominal and transvaginal routes are well described. Abdominal 
paracentesis allows the insertion of an indwelling catheter and this may minimise the need for 
repeat paracentesis. Raziel et al. 45 reported on the transvaginal insertion of an indwelling 
catheter in an obese woman, using a guide wire and an indwelling catheter fixed to the woman’s 
thigh. Most other reports on transvaginal paracentesis, however, describe aspirations in a single 
sitting. 
There is little evidence to guide clinical practice regarding the optimal amount of ascitic fluid 
to be removed on any one occasion, the time over which ascites should be drained or the route 
of drainage. Smith et al. 31 reported a series of 146 outpatient transvaginal paracenteses 
performed to manage OHSS in 96 patients. The mean volume of fluid removed was 2155 ml 
(range 500–450 0ml) with no complications reported. Ozgun et al. 46 reported the drainage of 
7.5 l on one occasion over 3 hours, and a total of 45 l by serial vaginal paracentesis with 
supportive fluid replacement with no adverse outcome. Patients with OHSS are generally a 
younger age group, and are likely to tolerate the removal of large volumes of ascites in a different 
way to elderly patients with malignant ascites who may experience significant fluid shifts in 
such situations. 38,47 
It has been suggested that early drainage of ascites to lower the intra-abdominal pressure in 
patients with moderate to severe OHSS may prevent disease progression and lower the risk of 
severe complications associated with this condition. 48 Drainage of 2000 ml of ascitic fluid in 
women with severe OHSS produced significant reductions in intra-abdominal pressure and 
renal vascular resistance. 41 Koike et al. 49 described autotransfusion of ultrafiltered ascitic fluid 
into the venous circulation and their observational study showed reduced haemo -
concentration, improved urine output and quicker recovery following this procedure 
compared with a conservative treatment regime of diuretics, fluid restriction and intravenous 
albumin (without paracentesis). It is not clear to what extent the benefit of this treatment 
method lies in drainage of the ascites as opposed to autotransfusion. A further study 50 describes 
autotransfusion of concentrated ultrafiltered ascetic fluid protein, aiming to replenish the 
woman’s albumin levels using her own protein, reducing the risk of infection and allergic 
reaction to exogenous albumin. 
10.7 How should the risk of thrombosis be managed? 
Women with severe or critical OHSS and those admitted with OHSS should receive LMWH 
prophylaxis. 
The duration of LMWH prophylaxis should be individualised according to patient risk factors and 
outcome of treatment.
Women with moderate OHSS should be evaluated for predisposing risk factors for thrombosis and 
prescribed either antiembolism stockings or LMWH if indicated.
In addition to the usual symptoms and signs of venous thromboembolism (VTE), thromboembolism 
should be suspected in women with OHSS who present with unusual neurological symptoms, even if 
they present several weeks after apparent improvement in OHSS.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 16 of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Evidence 
level 3 
C
D
DEvidence 
level 4 
PSevere OHSS is a prothrombotic state due to haemoconcentration and vascular endothelial 
dysfunction. The incidence of thrombosis been estimated to lie between 0.7% and 10% of cases 
of OHSS. Rova et al. 51 reported on the risk of VTE in early pregnancy in relation to IVF and OHSS. 
The review included all deliveries in Sweden (n = 964 532) during the period 1999–2008. Of 
these, 19 162 were IVF pregnancies compared to 935 178 non-IVF pregnancies. The incidence 
of VTE in the first trimester in non-IVF pregnancies was 0.2 per 1000 women, while the 
incidence in IVF pregnancies with no OHSS was 0.8 per 1000 women (OR 4.8, 95% CI 2.7 –8.7), 
compared with 16.8 VTE events per 1000 women for those who developed OHSS (OR 99.7, 
95% CI 61.6–161.1). 
There are no comparative studies addressing the value of thromboprophylaxis in women with 
severe OHSS. However, the incidence of this complication and its potentially life-threatening 
nature mean that thromboprophylaxis should be given to women with severe OHSS and 
those with risk factors such as reduced mobility, obesity or a pre-existing thrombophilia. 
Antiembolism stockings should be used in patients admitted to hospital with OHSS for 
whom chemical thromboprophylaxis is contraindicated, as they are likely to have reduced 
mobility. 33 
There is no agreement on the duration of thromboprophylaxis in women with OHSS. Several 
case reports describe thromboembolism occurring weeks after the apparent resolution of OHSS, 
particularly in association with pregnancy. The majority of delayed thromboses are reported 
to have occurred in the first trimester of pregnancy. Hence, in women with severe OHSS 
who conceive, thromboprophylaxis should be considered at least until the end of the first 
trimester. 33,52 In general, the duration of thromboprophylaxis should be based on individual 
risk factors and whether or not conception occurs. Liaison with a specialist haematologist may 
be beneficial in individualising therapy. 
Thrombosis in women with OHSS frequently affects upper body sites and frequently involves 
the arterial system. Therefore clinicians should remain vigilant of patients presenting with 
unusual symptoms such as dizziness, loss of vision and neck pain. Women may present with 
thromboembolism several weeks after apparent resolution of OHSS. 9,52 If a thrombosis is 
suspected, then therapeutic anticoagulation should be instigated, while appropriate imaging is 
arranged. These patients should be managed in collaboration with colleagues in haematology 
and maternal medicine. 
10.8 When is surgical management indicated? 
Surgery is only indicated in patients with OHSS if there is a coincident problem such as adnexal torsion,
ovarian rupture or ectopic pregnancy and should be performed by an experienced surgeon.
Hyperstimulated ovaries are likely to be highly vascular and liable to damage on handling. The 
risk of ovarian torsion or rupture appears to be increased in women with OHSS, particularly in 
the presence of pregnancy. 22,53 Laparoscopic ‘untwisting’ of torted hyperstimulated ovaries has 
been described. 54 The presence of ovarian enlargement and ascites should be kept in mind 
when considering a diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. 
In rare cases of critical OHSS, termination of pregnancy has been reported in the situation of progressive 
thrombosis despite anticoagulation, 55 and there have been cases reported for removal of the ovaries 
(bilateral oophorectomy) for intractable OHSS; 56 however, this is not a recommended treatment option. 57 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 17 of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5Evidence 
level 2+ 
Evidence 
level 3 
Evidence 
level 4 D11.OHSS and pregnancy 
11.1 What are the risks associated with pregnancy and OHSS? 
Clinicians should be aware, and women informed, that pregnancies complicated by OHSS may be at 
increased risk of pre-eclampsia and preterm delivery.
Controlled studies do not show an increase in the risk of miscarriage in pregnancies arising 
from assisted reproduction cycles complicated by OHSS compared to cycles without OHSS, 58 –60 
although some reports have suggested an increased rate of preclinical pregnancy loss in women 
with early, but not late, OHSS. 59 
Data concerning later gestational complications in pregnancies complicated by OHSS are 
limited. Courbierre et al. 60 found a higher incidence of pre-eclampsia (21.2% versus 9.2%) and 
prematurity (36% versus 10.7%) in 40 OHSS pregnancies compared with a control group of 80 
IVF pregnancies without OHSS. The proportions of multiple pregnancies were similar between 
the two groups. A larger study by Haas et al. 61 comparing the obstetric outcomes of 125 
pregnancies complicated by severe OHSS with 157 IVF pregnancies without OHSS found an 
increased risk of prematurity in singleton, but not multiple, pregnancies with OHSS compared 
with the corresponding non-OHSS controls. 
12.Recommendations for future research 
GMore research is required to clarify changes in the osmoregulatory system in women at different phases 
of OHSS, using well-defined cohorts of women with severe disease who are followed through the 
course of the OHSS. 
GThere is a need to compare outpatient and inpatient management of severe OHSS in terms of safety, 
efficacy, patient acceptability and health economic assessment. Such a trial could compare a 
‘conventional’ approach of inpatient management with conservative indications for abdominal 
paracentesis with a more ‘active’ approach emphasising earlier paracentesis on an outpatient basis. 
GFurther research is required to evaluate the role of GnRH antagonists and dopamine agonists in the 
management of women with established OHSS. 
13. Auditable topics 
GProportion of women undergoing stimulated assisted reproduction treatment who are provided with 
verbal and written information about symptoms of OHSS and 24-hour contact details (100%). 
GFormal agreements between licensed centres providing treatment that may lead to OHSS and acute 
units in their catchment area (100%). 
GReporting of cases of severe and critical OHSS admitted to hospital in accordance with HFEA 
regulations (100%). Responsibility for reporting lies with the licensed centre. 
GAcute unit to inform licensed centre regarding all patients seen with a suspected diagnosis of OHSS 
(100%). 
GEffectiveness of outpatient management of severe OHSS against locally agreed standard. 
GWomen admitted to hospital should have daily clinical review with weight and abdominal girth 
measurements and monitoring of intake and output of fluid (100%). 
GAll women with severe or critical OHSS should be prescribed LMWH, unless there is a contraindication, 
whether admitted to hospital or not (100%). 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 18 of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists C
Evidence 
level 2+ © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 19 of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51.Braat DD, Schutte JM, Bernardus RE, Mooij TM, van 
Leeuwen FE. Maternal death related to IVF in the 
Netherlands 1984–2008. Hum Reprod 2010;25:1782–6. 
2. Whelan JG 3rd, Vlahos NF. The ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. Fertil Steril 2000;73:883–96. 
3. Ata B, Tulandi T. Pathophysiology of ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome and strategies for its 
prevention and treatment. Expert Rev Obstet Gynecol 
2009;4:299–311. 
4. Mathur RS, Tan BK. British Fertility Society Policy 
and Practice Committee: prevention of ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome. Hum Fertil (Camb) 
2014;17:257–68. 
5. Evbuomwan IO, Davison JM, Murdoch AP. Coexistent 
 hemo concentration and hypoosmolality during 
superovulation and in severe ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome: a volume homeostasis paradox. Fertil Steril 
2000;74:67–72. 
6. Evbuomwan IO, Davison JM, Baylis PH, Murdoch AP. 
Altered osmotic thresholds for arginine vasopressin secre -
tion and thirst during superovulation and in the ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS): relevance to the 
pathophysiology of OHSS. Fertil Steril 2001;75:933–41. 
7. Evbuomwan I. The role of osmoregulation in the 
 patho physi ology and management of severe ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome. Hum Fertil (Camb) 2013; 
16:162–7. 
8. Zegers-Hochschild F, Mansour R, Ishihara O, Adamson GD, 
de Mouzon J, Nygren KG, et al. International Committee 
for Monitoring Assisted Reproductive Technology: world 
report on assisted reproductive technology, 2005. Fertil 
Steril 2014;101:366–78.e14. 
9. Delvigne A, Rozenberg S. Epidemiology and prevention of 
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS): a review. 
Hum Reprod Update 2002;8:559–77. 
10. Kupka MS, Ferraretti AP, de Mouzon J, Erb K, D’Hooghe T, 
Castilla JA, et al.; European IVF-Monitoring Consortium, for 
the European Society of Human Reproduction and 
Embryology (ESHRE). Assisted reproductive technology in 
Europe, 2010: results generated from European registers 
by ESHRE. Hum Reprod 2014;29:2099–113. 
11. Kawwass JF, Kissin DM, Kulkarni AD, Creanga AA, Session 
DR, Callaghan WM, et al.; National ART Surveillance System 
(NASS) Group. Safety of assisted reproductive technology 
in the United States, 2000-2011. JAMA 2015;313:88–90. 
12. Sridev S, Barathan S. Case report on spontaneous ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome following natural conception 
associated with primary hypothyroidism. J Hum Reprod 
Sci 2013;6:158–61. 
13. Al-Inany HG, Youssef MA, Aboulghar M, Broekmans F, 
Sterrenburg M, Smit J, et al. GnRH antagonists are safer than 
agonists: an update of a Cochrane review. Hum Reprod 
Update 2011;17:435. 
14. Mathur RS, Akande AV, Keay SD, Hunt LP, Jenkins 
JM. Distinction between early and late ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome. Fertil Steril 2000;73:901–7. 15. Memarzadeh MT. A fatal case of ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome with perforated duodenal ulcer. Hum Reprod 
2010;25:808–9. 
16. Schenker JG, Weinstein D. Ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome: a current survey. Fertil Steril 1978;30:255–68. 
17. Golan A, Ron-el R, Herman A, Soffer Y, Weinraub Z, Caspi E. 
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: an update review. 
Obstet Gynecol Surv 1989;44:430–40. 
18. Navot D, Bergh PA, Laufer N. Ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome in novel reproductive technologies: prevention 
and treatment. Fertil Steril 1992;58:249–61. 
19. Mathur R, Evbuomwan I, Jenkins J. Prevention and 
management of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 
Curr Obstet Gynaecol 2005;15:132–8. 
20. Zosmer A, Katz Z, Lancet M, Konichezky S, 
Schwartz-Shoham Z. Adult respiratory distress syndrome 
complicating ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Fertil 
Steril 1987;47:524–6. 
21. Abramov Y, Elchalal U, Schenker JG. Pulmonary 
mani festations of severe ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome: a multicenter study. Fertil Steril 1999;71: 
645–51. 
22. Al Omari W, Ghazal-Aswad S, Sidky IH, Al Bassam MK. 
Ovarian salvage in bilaterally complicated severe ovarian 
 hyper stimulation syndrome. Fertil Steril 2011;96:e77–9. 
23. Abramov Y, Elchalal U, Schenker JG. Severe OHSS: An 
‘epidemic’ of severe OHSS: a price we have to pay? Hum 
Reprod 1999;14:2181–3. 
24. Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority 
[http://www.hfea.gov.uk/docs/Latest_long_term_data_ 
analysis_report_91-06.pdf.pdf]. Accessed 2015 Oct 23. 
25. Knight M, Kenyon S, Brocklehurst P, Neilson J, 
Shakespeare J, Kurinczuk JJ (Eds.) on behalf of 
MBRRACE-UK. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers’ Care:
Lessons learned to inform future maternity care from 
the UK and Ireland Confidential Enquiries into 
Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009–2012.Oxford: 
National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit; 2014 [www.npeu. 
ox.ac.uk/mbrrace-uk/reports]. 
26. Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority 
[http://www.hfea.gov.uk/docs/General_Directions_0011_ 
-_Reporting_adverse_incidents_and_near_misses_V3.pdf]. 
Accessed 2015 Oct 23. 
27. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: what you need to 
know.London: RCOG; 2007 [https://www.rcog.org.uk/ 
globalassets/documents/patients/patient-information-
leaflets/gynaecology/ovarian-hyperstimulation-syndrome. 
pdf]. Accessed 2015 Oct 23. 
28. Balasch J, Carmona F, Llach J, Arroyo V, Jové I, Vanrell JA. 
Acute prerenal failure and liver dysfunction in a patient 
with severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Hum 
Reprod 1990;5:348 –51. 
29. Shrivastav P, Nadkarni P, Craft I. Day care management 
of severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome avoids 
hospitaliz ation and morbidity. Hum Reprod 1994;9:812–4. 14.Useful links and support groups 
GBritish Fertility Society. Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) 
[http://britishfertilitysociety.org.uk/downloads/ms_3642.pdf]. 
GInfertility Network UK. Fact Sheet: Ovarian Hyper Stimulation Syndrome (OHSS) 
[http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com/uploaded/Fact%20Sheets/Ovarian%20Hyper%20Stimulation 
%20Syndrome%20(OHSS).pdf]. 
References 30. Lincoln SR, Opsahl MS, Blauer KL, Black SH, Schulman JD. 
Aggressive outpatient treatment of ovarian hyper stimu -
lation syndrome with ascites using transvaginal 
culdocentesis and intravenous albumin minimizes 
hospitalization. J Assist Reprod Genet 2002;19:159–63. 
31. Smith LP, Hacker MR, Alper MM. Patients with severe 
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome can be managed safely 
with aggressive outpatient transvaginal paracentesis. 
Fertil Steril 2009;92:1953–9. 
32. Shukla U, Deval B, Hamoda H, Savvas M, Narvekar N. A 
programme of outpatient surveillance for women at risk of 
severe OHSS following IVF: a prospective follow-up review 
of 99 cases. Hum Fertil (Camb) 2011;14 Suppl 1:7. 
33. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 
Reducing the Risk of Venous Thromboembolism during 
Pregnancy and the Puerperium . Green-top Guideline 
No. 37a. London: RCOG; 2015. 
34. Lainas GT, Kolibianakis EM, Sfontouris IA, Zorzovilis IZ, 
Petsas GK, Tarlatzi TB, et al. Outpatient management of 
severe early OHSS by administration of GnRH antagonist in 
the luteal phase: an observational cohort study. Reprod 
Biol Endocrinol 2012;10:69. 
35. Rollene NL, Amols MH, Hudson SB, Coddington CC. 
Treatment of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome using a 
dopamine agonist and gonadotropin releasing hormone 
antagonist: a case series. Fertil Steril 2009;92:1169.e15–17. 
36. Baumgarten M, Polanski L, Campbell B, Raine-Fenning N. 
Do dopamine agonists prevent or reduce the severity of 
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome in women undergoing 
assisted reproduction? A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Hum Fertil (Camb) 2013;16:168–74. 
37. Nouri K, Tempfer CB, Lenart C, Windischbauer L, Walch K, 
Promberger R, et al. Predictive factors for recovery time in 
patients suffering from severe OHSS. Reprod Biol 
Endocrinol 2014;12:59. 
38. Practice Committee of the American Society for 
Reproductive Medicine. Ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. Fertil Steril 2008;90 Suppl 5:S188–93. 
39. Fábregues F, Balasch J, Manau D, Jiménez W, Arroyo V, 
Creus M, et al. Haematocrit, leukocyte and platelet counts 
and the severity of the ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. Hum Reprod 1998;13:2406–10. 
40. Nowicka MA, Fritz-Rdzanek A, Grzybowski W, Walecka I, 
Niemiec KT, Jakimiuk AJ. C-reactive protein as the indicator 
of severity in ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Gynecol 
Endocrinol 2010;26:399–403. 
41. Maslovitz S, Jaffa A, Eytan O, Wolman I, Many A, Lessing JB, 
et al. Renal blood flow alteration after paracentesis in 
women with ovarian hyperstimulation. Obstet Gynecol 
2004;104:321–6. 
42. Ferraretti AP, Gianaroli L, Diotallevi L, Festi C, Trounson A. 
Dopamine treatment for severe ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. Hum Reprod 1992;7:180–3. 
43. Tsunoda T, Shibahara H, Hirano Y, Suzuki T, Fujiwara H ,
Takamizawa S, et al. Treatment for ovarian hyper stimu -
lation syndrome using an oral dopamine prodrug, 
docarpamine. Gynecol Endocrinol 2003;17:281–6. 
44. Delvigne A, Rozenberg S. Review of clinical course and 
treatment of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS). 
Hum Reprod Update 2003;9:77–96. 
45. Raziel A, Friedler S, Schachter M, Strassburger D, Bukovsky 
I, Ron-El R. Transvaginal drainage of ascites as an alternative 
to abdominal paracentesis in patients with severe ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome, obesity, and generalized 
edema. Fertil Steril 1998;69:780–3. 46. Ozgun MT, Batukan C, Oner G, Uludag S, Aygen EM, 
Sahin Y. Removal of ascites up to 7.5 liters on one occasion 
and 45 liters in total may be safe in patients with severe 
ovarian hyper stimulation syndrome. Gynecol Endocrinol 
2008;24:656–8. 
47. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 
Manage ment of Ascites in Ovarian Cancer Patients.
Scientific Impact Paper No. 45. London: RCOG; 2014. 
48. Grossman LC, Michalakis KG, Browne H, Payson MD, 
Segars JH. The pathophysiology of ovarian hyper-
stim ulation syndrome: an unrecognized compartment 
syndrome. Fertil Steril 2010;94:1392–8. 
49. Koike T, Araki S, Minakami H, Ogawa S, Sayama M, 
Shibahara H, et al. Clinical efficacy of peritoneovenous 
shunting for the treatment of severe ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome. Hum Reprod 2000;15: 
113–17. 
50. Zhang Q, Xia L, Gao G. A new effective method in the 
treatment of severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 
Iran J Reprod Med 2012;10:589–94. 
51. Rova K, Passmark H, Lindqvist PG. Venous thrombo-
embolism in relation to in vitro fertilization: an approach 
to determining the incidence and increase in risk in 
successful cycles. Fertil Steril 2012;97:95–100. 
52. ESHRE Capri Workshop Group. Venous thromboembolism 
in women: a specific reproductive health risk. Hum 
Reprod Update 2013;19:471–82. 
53. Gelbaya TA. Short and long-term risks to women who 
conceive through in vitro fertilization. Hum Fertil 
(Camb) 2010;13:19–27. 
54. Gorkemli H, Camus M, Clasen K. Adnexal torsion after 
gonadotrophin ovulation induction for IVF or ICSI and its 
conservative treatment. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2002;267: 
4–6. 
55. Cupisti S, Emran J, Mueller A, Dittrich R, Beckmann MW, 
Binder H. Course of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
in 19 intact twin pregnancies after assisted reproduction 
techniques, with a case report of severe thrombo em -
bolism. Twin Res Hum Genet 2006;9:691–6. 
56. Amarin ZO. Bilateral partial oophorectomy in the 
management of severe ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. An aggressive, but perhaps life-saving 
procedure. Hum Reprod 2003;18:659 –64. 
57. Bellver J, Escudero E, Pellicer A. Bilateral partial 
oophorectomy in the management of severe ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS): ovarian mutilating 
surgery is not an option in the management of severe 
OHSS. Hum Reprod 2003;18:1363–7. 
58. Mathur RS, Jenkins JM. Is ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome associated with a poor obstetric outcome? 
BJOG 2000;107:943–6. 
59. Papanikolaou EG, Tournaye H, Verpoest W, Camus M, 
Vernaeve V, Van Steirteghem A, et al. Early and late ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome: early pregnancy outcome and 
profile. Hum Reprod 2005;20:636–41. 
60. Courbiere B, Oborski V, Braunstein D, Desparoir A, 
Noizet A, Gamerre M. Obstetric outcome of women with 
in vitro fertilization pregnancies hospitalized for ovarian 
 hyper stimulation syndrome: a case-control study. Fertil 
Steril 2011;95:1629–32. 
61. Haas J, Yinon Y, Meridor K, Hershko-Klement A, Orvieto R, 
Schiff E, et al. Is severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
associated with adverse pregnancy outcome? Evidence 
from a large case-control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2014;210 Suppl 1:S329–30. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 20 of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Appendix I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels 
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in 
making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. Each guideline is systematically 
developed using a standardised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical 
Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website 
at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These recommendations are not intended to dictate 
an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individual 
patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. 
It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into routine 
practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated. 
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations 
formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme. 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 21 of 22 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5Grades of recommendations 
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or 
randomised controlled trial rated as 1++, and 
directly applicable to the target population; or 
A systematic review of randomised controlled 
trials or a body of evidence consisting 
principally of studies rated as 1+, directly 
applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results 
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2++ directly applicable to the target 
population, and demonstrating overall 
consistency of results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
1++ or 1+ 
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2+ directly applicable to the target population 
and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
2++ 
Evidence level 3 or 4; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+ 
Good practice point 
Recommended best practice based on the 
clinical experience of the guideline 
development group Classification of evidence levels 
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
very low risk of bias 
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
low risk of bias 
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of 
randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a high 
risk of bias 
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case– 
control or cohort studies or high-quality 
case–control or cohort studies with a 
very low risk of confounding, bias or 
chance and a high probability that the 
relationship is causal 
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort 
studies with a low risk of confounding, 
bias or chance and a moderate 
probability that the relationship is causal 
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a 
high risk of confounding, bias or chance 
and a significant risk that the 
relationship is not causal 
3Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, 
case series 
4Expert opinion PC
DBARCOG Green-top Guideline No. 5 22 of 22 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists DISCLAIMER 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical 
practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for 
consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement 
regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light 
of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available. 
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to 
be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols or 
guidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken. This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by: 
Dr RS Mathur FRCOG, Manchester;Mr AJ Drakeley FRCOG, Liverpool; Mr NJ Raine-Fenning MRCOG,
Nottingham , Mr IO Evbuomwan FRCOG, Gateshead; and Dr H Hamoda MRCOG, London 
and peer reviewed by: 
Dr W Al Omari FRCOG, Rockhampton, Australia; Professor AH Balen FRCOG, Leeds; Mrs A Diyaf MRCOG, Barnstaple; 
Dr A Eapen DRCOG, Birmingham; Dr AP Ferraretti, Bologna, Italy; M rTA Gelbaya FRCOG, Leicester; Professor A Jakimiuk, 
Warsaw, Poland; Dr EM Kolibianakis, Thessaloniki, Greece; Mr B Kumar FRCOG, Wrexham; Dr Johannes Ott, Vienna, 
Austria; Professor A Raziel, Tel Aviv, Israel; Royal College of Emergency Medicine, London; Royal College of General 
Practitioners, London; RCOG Women’s Network; Professor JG Schenker FRCOG, Jerusalem, Israel; Dr A Zosmer, London. 
Committee lead reviewers were: Mrs G Kumar FRCOG, Wrexham, Wales; and Miss N Potdar MRCOG, Leicester. 
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta 1MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen 2FRCOG, Glasgow; and 
Dr AJ Thomson 1MRCOG, Paisley. 
1co-chairs from June 2014 2until May 2014. 
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising any 
conflicts of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/ 
guidelines/gtg05/ . 
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. 
The review process will commence in 2019, unless otherwise indicated.