Chickenpox in Pregnancy
This guideline addresses varicella prevention and management in pregnant women. It recommends considering varicella vaccination for non-immune women before or after pregnancy. Pregnant women should avoid contact with chickenpox and shingles. If exposed, a blood test for VZV immunity should be done. Treatment with VZIG is recommended if non-immune and exposed. Pregnant women with chickenpox should contact their doctor immediately and may be prescribed aciclovir. Hospital referral is necessary for severe cases. Risks to the fetus and newborn are also discussed, with recommendations for care and follow-up. Delivery should be individualized for pregnant women with chickenpox. Varicella vaccination is considered cost-effective for susceptible women. Routine screening for VZV immunity is not recommended in the UK. Contact with chickenpox or shingles should be carefully assessed, and VZIG may be offered if non-immune and exposed. Awareness of VZV infection risks and prevention strategies is crucial in managing chickenpox in pregnancy.

Pregnant women with shingles or chickenpox should notify their doctor early if a rash develops. Isolation is recommended for pregnant women with chickenpox. VZIG may be needed for further exposure to chickenpox. Chickenpox is infectious before and during the rash, ceasing when lesions crust over. Susceptibility to varicella infection should be determined through history or serology. VZIG should be offered to non-immune pregnant women with significant exposure to chickenpox. Pregnant women with chickenpox should contact their GP and avoid contact with others until lesions crust over. Aciclovir may be prescribed for pregnant women with chickenpox. Hospital assessment is recommended for severe chickenpox cases. Delivery timing and mode should be individualized for pregnant women with chickenpox. The risks of varicella infection to the fetus include FVS, which can be diagnosed prenatally through ultrasound. Amniocentesis may be considered for detecting varicella DNA in the fetus.

Amniotic fluid PCR for VZV DNA has high sensitivity but low specificity for FVS. Ultrasound abnormalities may not always detect FVS. Neonatal risks of varicella infection in pregnancy can be prevented by delaying delivery after maternal rash onset. Varicella infection in newborns can result from maternal infection near delivery. Prophylaxis with VZIG is vital for newborns exposed to chickenpox around delivery. Breastfeeding is safe for women with chickenpox. Future research recommendations include randomized trials for screening and treatment. Auditable topics include referrals to specialists for pregnant women with chickenpox and informing neonatologists of affected births. Useful links and support groups are available for further information.

Varicella-zoster contact –  
clarify significance of the contact
Presents with chickenpox –  
initial contact should be  
with the woman’s GP
Uncertain or no past history of 
chickenpox, or woman from a 
tropical or subtropical country 
Check blood  
(booking sample if available)   
for VZV IgG
No action needed. 
Reassure and return to 
normal antenatal care
VZV IgG 
presentVZV IgG not 
presentPast history of 
chickenpox
•  Give VZIG if less than 10 days since contact or, for 
continuous exposure, less than 10 days since the 
appearance of the rash in the index case
•  Advise the woman that she is potentially infectious 
from 8–28 days after contact
• Discuss postpartum varicella immunisation
•  Women who develop severe infection and women 
at high risk of complicated chickenpox should be 
referred to hospital
• Intravenous aciclovir should be given
•  Inform women that infection at < 28+0 weeks is 
associated with a small (~1%) risk of FVS
•  Refer to a fetal medicine specialist at 16–20 weeks 
or 5 weeks after infection
•  Amniocentesis to detect varicella DNA may be 
considered
•  Avoid contact with potentially 
susceptible individuals  
(e.g. neonates and other  
pregnant women)
•  Symptomatic treatment and 
hygiene should be advised
•  If the woman presents < 24 hours 
of the appearance of the rash  
and she is ≥ 20+0 weeks of 
gestation, prescribe aciclovir
•  If the woman presents < 24 hours 
of the appearance of the rash  
and she is < 20+0 weeks of 
gestation, consider aciclovir
•  Avoid delivery of the baby  
until at least 7 days since the  
rash appeared
Woman 
develops 
chickenpox 
despite VZIG
Severe 
infection
Infection at 
less than  
28 weeks  
of gestation
Abbreviations:   FVS fetal varicella syndrome; GP general practitioner; IgG immunoglobulin G;  
 VZIG varicella-zoster immunoglobulin; VZV varicella-zoster virus