Post-Hysterectomy 
Vaginal Vault Prolapse
Green-top Guideline No. 46
RCOG/BSUG Joint Guideline | July 2015
RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists2 of 21Post-Hysterectomy Vaginal Vault Prolapse
This is the second edition of this guideline, previously published in 2007 as a joint guideline with the 
British Society of Urogynaecology as ‘The Management of Post Hysterectomy Vaginal Vault Prolapse’.
Executive summary of recommendations 
Diagnosis and investigation
What is the preferred classification for vault/pelvic organ prolapse? 
Standardised classification systems should be used for the assessment and documentation of 
pelvic organ prolapse (POP), including vault prolapse.
When is urodynamic testing required? 
Routine urodynamic assessment is not recommended in women with post-hysterectomy vaginal 
vault prolapse (PHVP). [ New 2015 ]
In what setting should a patient with PHVP be assessed?
Clinicians should work as part of a pelvic floor multidisciplinary team (MDT). [ New 2015 ]
Are quality of life (QoL) measures of value?
Patient assessment should address QoL issues using standardised tools.
Prevention
What preventive techniques are of value at hysterectomy?
McCall culdoplasty at the time of vaginal hysterectomy is effective in preventing subsequent PHVP. 
Suturing the cardinal and uterosacral ligaments to the vaginal cuff at the time of hysterectomy is 
effective in preventing PHVP following both abdominal and vaginal hysterectomies.
Sacrospinous fixation (SSF) at the time of vaginal hysterectomy should be considered when the 
vault descends to the introitus during closure.
Does subtotal hysterectomy have a place in the prevention of PHVP?
Subtotal hysterectomy is not recommended for the prevention of PHVP. [ New 2015 ]
Are there preferred suture materials for vault support at the time of hysterectomy?
There is inadequate and conflicting evidence over the use of permanent sutures in the short term 
and no evidence of benefit in the long term; they can be associated with high suture exposure 
rates. [ New 2015 ]
Conservative management
Is pelvic floor therapy of value in the management of PHVP?
Pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) is an effective treatment option for women with stage I–II 
vaginal prolapse, including PHVP. [ New 2015 ]P
A
BCD
B
C
B
B
CRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists3 of 21What is the place of vaginal devices?
Vaginal pessaries are an alternative treatment option for women with stage II–IV PHVP. [ New 2015 ]
Surgical management
What are the indications for surgery?
Surgical treatment should be offered to women with symptomatic PHVP after appropriate 
counselling. [ New 2015 ]
Who should undertake surgery?
PHVP surgery should be performed by an RCOG-accredited subspecialist urogynaecologist, or 
gynaecologists who can demonstrate an equivalent level of training or experience. [ New 2015 ]
What is an acceptable successful result after surgical treatment?
Patient-reported outcomes, including patient-reported success rates and relief of presenting 
symptoms, should be the primary assessment outcomes. [ New 2015 ]
Objective cure is important as it correlates to symptoms of vaginal bulge; a Pelvic Organ Prolapse 
Quantification (POP-Q) stage of I or O in the apical compartment seems to be acceptable and widely 
used as the optimum postoperative result. [ New 2015 ]
What surgical procedures are available for the treatment of PHVP?
The type of operation performed should be tailored to the individual patient’s circumstances.
A comparison of surgical procedures 
Open abdominal sacrocolpopexy (ASC) versus vaginal SSF
Women should be aware that both ASC and SSF are effective treatments for primary PHVP. 
ASC is associated with significantly lower rates of recurrent vault prolapse, dyspareunia and 
postoperative stress urinary incontinence (SUI) when compared with SSF. However, this is not 
reflected in significantly lower reoperation rates or higher patient satisfaction.
SSF is associated with earlier recovery compared with ASC.
SSF may not be appropriate in women with short vaginal length and should be carefully considered 
in women with pre-existing dyspareunia.
Laparoscopic and robotic sacrocolpopexy (LSC and RSC)
LSC can be equally effective as ASC in selected women with primary PHVP. LSC can include mesh 
extension or be combined with other vaginal procedures to correct other compartment prolapse.
There is limited evidence on the effectiveness of RSC; therefore, it should only be performed in the 
context of research or prospective audit following local governance procedures. [ New 2015 ]
High uterosacral ligament suspension (HUSLS)
HUSLS should only be offered as first-line management in women with PHVP within the context of 
research or prospective audit following local governance procedures.
Clinicians should be aware of the risk of ureteric injury, especially in the laparoscopic approach.P
P
CB
A
PPC
A
A
B
C
B
CRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists4 of 21Under what circumstances would transvaginal mesh (TVM) kits/grafts be considered? 
The limited evidence on TVM kits does not support their use as first-line treatment of PHVP.
If TVM is considered, women should be fully informed of the permanent nature of the mesh and 
potential mesh complications, some of which are serious and have long-term effects that can be 
difficult to treat. [ New 2015 ]
If TVM is considered, women should be fully informed of alternative surgical and nonsurgical 
options and referral to other surgeons/units arranged as appropriate. [ New 2015 ]
TVM should only be performed by an appropriately trained urogynaecologist, after discussion of 
each individual case in an MDT meeting. [ New 2015 ]
The results of all surgical procedures involving mesh should be prospectively audited and 
submitted to a national surgical database (e.g. British Society of Urogynaecology [BSUG]) and 
any mesh complications reported to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency 
(MHRA). [ New 2015 ]
When should colpocleisis be used?
Colpocleisis is a safe and effective procedure that can be considered for frail women and/or women 
who do not wish to retain sexual function.
Is there an indication for concomitant surgery for occult SUI?
Colposuspension performed at the time of sacrocolpopexy is an effective measure to reduce 
postoperative symptomatic SUI in previously continent women. [ New 2015 ]
Is there an indication for concomitant surgery for PHVP and overt SUI? 
Colposuspension at the time of ASC does not appear to be effective treatment for SUI. [ New 2015 ]
Concomitant mid-urethral sling surgery may be considered when vaginal surgical approaches are 
used for the treatment of PHVP. [ New 2015 ]
What is the optimal treatment of recurrent vault prolapse? 
The management of recurrent vault prolapse should be through a specialist MDT with experience 
and training in this field. [ New 2015 ]
Clinical governance
National databases, such as the BSUG surgical database, should be used to document surgical 
outcomes and complications. [ New 2015 ]
The International Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/International Continence Society (ICS) 
terminology and classification of complications should be used for the documentation of graft-
related complications. [ New 2015 ]
All complications related to the use of devices and mesh should be reported to the MHRA. [ New 2015 ]P
P
P
P
P
P
PPB
C
C
B
BRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists5 of 211. Purpose and scope
This guideline aims to assist generalist and subspecialist gynaecologists in the management of post-
hysterectomy vaginal vault prolapse (PHVP). The management of urinary incontinence is not covered in 
this guideline; however, the role of concomitant continence procedures at the time of surgery for vault 
prolapse is addressed. 
2. Introduction and background epidemiology 
There is no precise definition of PHVP; however, the International Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/
International Continence Society (ICS) joint report on female pelvic floor dysfunction defines it as 
‘descent of … the apex of the vagina (vaginal vault or cuff scar after hysterectomy)’.1 The vaginal cuff 
scar corresponds to point C on the Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification (POP-Q) grid (Appendix I).2 
Prolapse of the vaginal vault after hysterectomy may occur when the structures that support the top of 
the vagina and uterus are not reattached at the time of the initial procedure or due to weakening of these 
supports over time. 
Case series dating back to 1960 have identified the incidence of PHVP as ranging from 0.2% to 43%.3–5 
More recently, PHVP has been reported to follow 11.6% of hysterectomies performed for prolapse and 
1.8% for other benign diseases.6 A large study from Austria estimated the frequency of PHVP requiring 
surgical repair to be between 6% and 8%.7
3. Identification and assessment of evidence
A search of MEDLINE, EMBASE and The Cochrane Library from 2006–2013 for relevant systematic 
reviews, meta-analyses, randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and other clinical trials was conducted. 
A top-up search was performed in January 2015 for more recent evidence. The main Medical Subject 
Headings (MeSH) and non-MeSH terms used included ‘uterine prolapse’, ‘vault prolapse’, ‘pelvic organ 
prolapse’ and ‘hysterectomy’ with text words: ‘sacrocolpopexy’, ‘sacrospinous fixation/suspension’, 
‘intravaginal slingplasty (IVS)’, ‘posterior IVS’, ‘infracoccygeal sacropexy’, ‘colpocleisis’, ‘uterosacral 
ligament suspension/plication’, ‘prolift’, ‘perigee’, ‘apogee’, ‘elevate’, ‘capio’, ‘i-stitch’ and ‘avaulta’. 
4. Diagnosis and investigation
4.1 What is the preferred classification for vault/pelvic organ prolapse? 
Standardised classification systems should be used for the assessment and documentation of 
pelvic organ prolapse (POP), including vault prolapse.
A number of classification systems for POP are used in both research and clinical settings.1,2,8,9 
The use of standardised terminology is recommended as it enables assessment of outcomes for 
individual women and facilitates the comparison of results for audit and research purposes.
The ICS POP-Q system is the most comprehensive and widely used.2
4.2 When is urodynamic testing required? 
Routine urodynamic assessment is not recommended in women with PHVP.
Performing preoperative urodynamic testing with and without prolapse reduction in continent women 
undergoing POP surgery does not always predict postoperative stress incontinence. Prophylactic 
treatment for women thought to have occult stress urinary incontinence (SUI) will result in unnecessary 
treatment for some women. Clinical assessment remains the most important assessment tool.D
Evidence 
level 4
BRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists6 of 21In the Colpopexy and Urinary Reduction Efforts (CARE) trial,10–12 patients undergoing 
sacrocolpopexy, who were asymptomatic for SUI, were randomised to undergo either a 
concomitant Burch colposuspension or no Burch colposuspension (control group). The group 
demonstrated that the preoperative incidence of urodynamic stress incontinence (USI) increased 
from 3.7% to 19% following manual prolapse reduction, while using pessaries or speculum 
reduction for prolapse was associated with detection rates of 6% and 30% respectively.13 
Women who demonstrated preoperative USI were at higher risk of postoperative SUI, even if 
they underwent a concomitant Burch colposuspension. Preoperative urodynamic testing did 
not, however, accurately predict USI in all cases, with 38% of women with negative testing in 
the control group and 21% in the Burch group still developing symptomatic postoperative SUI. 
The role of concomitant assessment and management of symptomatic SUI in women with POP, including 
PHVP, is outwith the scope of this guideline. 
4.3 In what setting should a patient with PHVP be assessed?
Clinicians should work as part of a pelvic floor multidisciplinary team (MDT).
Clinicians involved in the management of patients with PHVP should demonstrate an 
appropriate level of training and clinical practice. Involvement of other specialties (e.g. 
coloproctology or urology) or allied health professionals may be useful in the management of 
PHVP in patients with concomitant bladder/bowel symptoms.14
4.4 Are quality of life (QoL) measures of value?
Patient assessment should address QoL issues using standardised tools.
Many standardised and validated QoL assessment tools exist for use in women with vaginal 
prolapse, but not specifically for use in women with PHVP. Some QoL tools are condition 
specific and address symptom complexes (e.g. Pelvic Organ Prolapse/Urinary Incontinence 
Sexual Questionnaire -12, International Consultation on Incontinence Modular Questionnaire 
[ICIQ]-Vaginal Symptoms, ICIQ-Urinary Incontinence)15,16 while others look at the impact of 
the condition on patients’ activities (e.g. Pelvic Floor Distress Inventory, Pelvic Floor Impact 
Questionnaire, Colorectal–Anal Distress Inventory, Incontinence Impact Questionnaire, 
Urogenital Distress Inventory).17–19 Using these will require time and resources, such as 
preprinted questionnaires and/or the availability of computers in clinics.
QoL questionnaires are useful audit and research tools that help with patient-centred assessment 
and goals,20 but their use can be time consuming and may require additional resources that 
may not alter patient outcomes.
5. Prevention
5.1 What preventive techniques are of value at hysterectomy?
McCall culdoplasty at the time of vaginal hysterectomy is effective in preventing subsequent PHVP.
Suturing the cardinal and uterosacral ligaments to the vaginal cuff at the time of hysterectomy is 
effective in preventing PHVP following both abdominal and vaginal hysterectomies.
Sacrospinous fixation (SSF) at the time of vaginal hysterectomy should be considered when the 
vault descends to the introitus during closure.
A small RCT compared vaginal Moschcowitz-type operation, McCall culdoplasty and peritoneal 
closure of the cul-de-sac as preventive measures against the development of enterocele. It Evidence 
level 1+
CEvidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 4
B
B
C
Evidence 
level 1+PRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists7 of 21showed that McCall culdoplasty was more effective than vaginal Moschcowitz or simple 
closure of the peritoneum in preventing enterocele at 3 years’ follow-up.21
McCall culdoplasty involves approximating the uterosacral ligaments using continuous 
sutures, so as to obliterate the peritoneum of the posterior cul-de-sac as high as possible.22 A 
similar approach has been described for abdominal hysterectomy.23,24 No comparative studies 
are available to assess the value of such a step at the time of abdominal hysterectomy, which 
is often carried out for indications other than prolapse.
A retrospective study evaluated the anatomical and functional results of the McCall culdoplasty 
in a total of 185 patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy for mild or moderate uterine 
prolapse. At 24 months’ follow-up, the vaginal vault was well supported in 99.2%, with 89.2% 
showing stage 0 vaginal vault prolapse and 10% showing stage I prolapse that did not require 
revision surgery. Functional analysis showed satisfactory sexual function at 24 months post 
surgery for 81.2% of patients.25
Attaching the uterosacral and cardinal ligaments to the vaginal cuff and high circumferential 
obliteration of the pouch of Douglas have been shown to prevent PHVP and subsequent 
enterocele formation.26 No cases of vault prolapse or enterocele were recorded among 112 
patients over a follow-up period extending from 7–42 months.
One observational study showed that incorporation of the cardinal–uterosacral ligaments into 
the vaginal cuff margins at the time of total abdominal hysterectomy may help to minimise 
subsequent apical vault prolapse.27
A systematic review28 of vaginal uterosacral ligament suspension provided a meta-analysis of 
anatomical outcomes and a summary of subjective outcomes. In the apical compartment, the 
pooled rates for a successful outcome were 98.3%.
Prophylactic SSF has been suggested at the time of vaginal hysterectomy for marked uterovaginal 
prolapse,29 when the vault (point C on the POP-Q system) could be pulled to the introitus at 
the end of anterior vaginal wall closure. A small retrospective study reported only one case of 
recurrent PHVP in 48 patients with a mean follow-up of 2 years.29 In this series, twenty women 
complained of right buttock pain; all resolved spontaneously by 6 weeks’ follow-up, while five 
women subsequently developed de novo anterior vaginal wall prolapse. No information was 
provided about sexual dysfunction in this study.
5.2 Does subtotal hysterectomy have a place in the prevention of PHVP?
Subtotal hysterectomy is not recommended for the prevention of PHVP.
There is no evidence to support the role of subtotal hysterectomy in preventing PHVP. A meta-
analysis showed that although subtotal hysterectomy is quicker to perform and there are fewer 
intra- and postoperative complications, more women suffered with urinary incontinence and 
prolapse compared with women who had a total hysterectomy.30
5.3 Are there preferred suture materials for vault support at the time of hysterectomy?
There is inadequate and conflicting evidence over the use of permanent sutures in the short term 
and no evidence of benefit in the long term; they can be associated with high suture exposure rates.
In a retrospective analysis of 248 patients who underwent uterosacral ligament suspension, 
permanent (2-0 Ti-Cron®, Covidien, Dublin, Ireland) and delayed absorbable polydioxanone Evidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 1++
Evidence 
level 2+
A
Evidence 
level 1+
C
Evidence 
level 2+RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists8 of 21(0-Maxon®, Covidien, Dublin, Ireland) sutures were compared for failure of anatomical 
support. In the short term, the use of permanent sutures for uterosacral ligament suspension 
of the vaginal apex was associated with a lower failure rate than delayed absorbable sutures, 
but there were 16 cases of permanent suture exposure that required removal.31 Another study 
found that permanent sutures do not offer significantly better apical support at short-term 
follow-up and are also associated with a high rate of suture erosion.32
6. Conservative management
6.1 Is pelvic floor therapy of value in the management of PHVP?
Pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) is an effective treatment option for women with stage I–II 
vaginal prolapse, including PHVP.
No trials looking specifically at the role of PFMT in women with PHVP were identified.
A large multicentre RCT (the Pelvic Organ Prolapse PhysiotherapY [POPPY] trial)33 showed 
that one-to-one PFMT for prolapse is effective for the improvement of prolapse symptoms. 
This study included, but did not exclusively address, women with PHVP.
There is growing evidence, including a small number of RCTs, to indicate that PFMT has a 
positive effect on prolapse symptoms and severity34–36 in women with POP-Q stage I–II vaginal 
prolapse compared with no treatment. These trials included, but were not specific to, PHVP.
Both the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence and the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists list PFMT as a treatment option in women with all types of 
vaginal prolapse.37–40
6.2 What is the place of vaginal devices?
Vaginal pessaries are an alternative treatment option for women with stage II–IV PHVP.
A randomised crossover trial (the PESSRI study) compared two different vaginal pessaries 
(Gellhorn versus ring) in women with stage II–IV prolapse and showed clinically significant 
improvements in prolapse symptoms with both types of pessaries, but no significant differences 
between pessary groups.41
Pessaries should be considered in all women with POP, including PHVP.37–40 Consideration 
needs to be given to sexual function, regular pessary changes and possible complications such 
as ulceration, vaginal bleeding and a small risk of fistula formation.
7. Surgical management
7.1 What are the indications for surgery?
Surgical treatment should be offered to women with symptomatic PHVP after appropriate 
counselling.
The decision to offer surgical treatment for PHVP should primarily be determined by the woman’s 
symptoms, her response to conservative treatment, the impact of PHVP on her QoL and daily activities 
and also on her fitness for surgery. The planned procedure should be fully discussed, including success 
rates, recurrence, potential complications, and the impact of treatment and potential complications on 
women’s QoL and sexual function. Evidence 
level 4Evidence 
level 1+Evidence 
level 1+
PEvidence 
level 2+
B
Evidence 
level 1–
Evidence 
level 4
BRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists9 of 217.2 Who should undertake surgery?
PHVP surgery should be performed by an RCOG-accredited subspecialist urogynaecologist, or 
gynaecologists who can demonstrate an equivalent level of training or experience.
No studies were identified that evaluated the level of training and/or experience that a surgeon is 
required to achieve prior to undertaking PHVP surgery, nor the workload per year that is required to 
maintain skills. In the UK at the present time, PHVP surgery is not part of the urogynaecology Advanced 
Training Skills Module, but is part of subspecialty training in urogynaecology. There will of course be 
established consultants who completed their training prior to the creation of such programmes who will 
be able to demonstrate equivalent training and experience if they undertake such surgery. 
For all surgeons, an adequate workload of each procedure per year is required to maintain skills; 
however, there is no robust evidence to advise on the volume of such workload. A clear referral pathway 
should be in place to refer the patient to the appropriate surgeon to undertake the required procedure. 
7.3 What is an acceptable successful result after surgical treatment?
Patient-reported outcomes, including patient-reported success rates and relief of presenting 
symptoms, should be the primary assessment outcomes.
Objective cure is important as it correlates to symptoms of vaginal bulge; a POP-Q stage of I or O in 
the apical compartment seems to be acceptable and widely used as the optimum postoperative result.
The primary aims of surgical treatment are the restoration of normal vaginal anatomy, 
improvement in vaginal bulge symptoms and the restoration/maintenance of normal bladder, 
bowel and sexual function. Most of the studies in the literature, however, have used the 
anatomical outcome as the primary outcome, with POP-Q stages I or 0 defined as the anatomical 
cure.42 A recent qualitative study based on patient interviews showed that women are most 
affected by the actual physical symptoms of prolapse (bulge, pain and bowel problems) as 
well as by the impact that prolapse has on their sexual function.43 The prevalence of pelvic 
floor dysfunction symptoms was found to be quite high 6 years after primary POP surgery: 
urinary leakage (once or more/week, 41%), vaginal bulge (18%), faecal incontinence (15%) and 
refraining from sexual intercourse (15%).44
A number of studies have showed that vaginal descent distal to the hymen (point C greater 
than 0 cm) accurately predicts the symptoms of prolapse bulging/protrusion; however, these 
studies failed to identify a threshold of prolapse severity that predicted other pelvic floor 
symptoms.45–47 An updated definition of objective failure was therefore proposed in the long-
term outcome of a large RCT;48 which defined failure as point C greater than (−two-thirds x 
total vaginal length), i.e. the vaginal apex descending below the upper third of the vagina, or 
one of points Ba or Bp being greater than 0 cm, i.e. the anterior (Ba) or posterior (Bp) vaginal 
wall prolapsing beyond the hymen.
The outcome reporting scheme proposed by IUGA/ICS is recommended.49
7.4 What surgical procedures are available for the treatment of PHVP?
The type of operation performed should be tailored to the individual patient’s circumstances.
A variety of procedures exist for surgical treatment of PHVP in women who are deemed fit for 
surgery. There is no robust evidence to guide the clinician as to the best surgical technique 
for a particular patient. The type of operation performed should be tailored to the individual 
patient’s circumstances, such as concomitant prolapse in other compartment(s), sexual Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 4Evidence 
level 2+P
C
C
PRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists10 of 21activity, previous abdominal surgery, previous prolapse surgery, the total vaginal length, 
and associated comorbidities. Women with multiple compartment prolapse and/or a history 
of extensive abdominal surgery can be quite challenging with the abdominal/laparoscopic 
approach and a vaginal approach may be appropriate. An abdominal approach would be 
more appropriate in women with short vaginal length50 and those undergoing concomitant 
abdominal surgery. An elderly, sexually inactive woman or a woman unfit for a long surgical 
operation would be a candidate for colpocleisis.
7.4.1 A comparison of surgical procedures 
7.4.1.1 Open abdominal sacrocolpopexy (ASC) versus vaginal sacrospinous fixation (SSF)
Women should be aware that both ASC and SSF are effective treatments for primary PHVP.
ASC is associated with significantly lower rates of recurrent vault prolapse, dyspareunia and 
postoperative SUI when compared with SSF. However, this is not reflected in significantly lower 
reoperation rates or higher patient satisfaction.
SSF is associated with earlier recovery compared with ASC.
SSF may not be appropriate in women with short vaginal length and should be carefully considered 
in women with pre-existing dyspareunia.
The Cochrane review42 included three RCTs that compared ASC versus SSF (also known as 
vaginal sacrospinous colpopexy [VSC]). Its meta-analysis showed that ASC was associated with 
significantly (i) lower rates of recurrent vault prolapse (risk ratio [RR] 0.23, 95% CI 0.07–0.77), 
(ii) less postoperative SUI (RR 0.55, 95% CI 0.32–0.95) and (iii) less postoperative dyspareunia 
(RR 0.39, 95% CI 0.18–0.86). There were no statistically significant differences in patient 
satisfaction, the number of women reporting prolapse symptoms, objective failure at any site, 
reoperation rates for SUI and reoperation rates for prolapse. SSF resulted in a reduction in operative 
time, it was less expensive to perform and women had an earlier return to their daily activities.
ASC involves apical suspension of the vault with a permanent mesh fixed to the longitudinal 
ligament of the sacrum; typically, the mesh is attached to the anterior and posterior aspects 
of the vault with possible ‘mesh extension’ to correct prolapse in other compartments.51 A 
systematic review of observational studies reported long-term success rates of 78–100%. Mesh 
erosion was observed in 2–11%.52,53 Serious complications such as bowel injury, sacral myelitis 
and severe bleeding have an estimated incidence of 2% (range 0–8%).
A recent high quality RCT with 7 years’ follow-up after ASC48 showed that POP and SUI failure 
rates gradually increased over the follow-up period; however, of the 10% anatomical POP 
failures, one-half of the women were asymptomatic and were not retreated. Conversely, 9% 
were symptomatic failures, of which one-half did not meet the anatomical failure criteria. 
The estimated probability of mesh erosion was 10.5% and the reoperation rate was 16.7% 
divided almost equally into one-third for POP, one-third for SUI and one-third for mesh-related 
complications. Surgery for SUI was doubled in women who did not undergo concomitant 
colposuspension. The authors of the trial concluded that ‘as a gold standard for the surgical 
treatment of POP, abdominal sacrocolpopexy is less effective than desired’, with nearly one-
third of women meeting their composite failure definition by 5 years. They also highlighted 
that although 95% had no retreatment for POP, one explanation may be related to other health 
issues taking priority over the vaginal bulge as patients grow older.
SSF involves unilateral anchoring of the vaginal vault to the sacrospinous ligament (usually the 
right side) using either absorbable or non-absorbable sutures and can be done bilaterally.54,55 Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 2++PA
A
A
Evidence 
level 1+RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists11 of 21Several systematic reviews have shown that SSF is a highly effective therapy for vault prolapse, 
with low recurrence and complication rates and good patient satisfaction. One concern is the 
high incidence (8–30%) of postoperative anterior compartment prolapse and SUI, presumably 
due to posterior fixation of the upper vagina which predisposes the anterior compartment to 
excess intra-abdominal pressure.56–60 Postoperative buttock pain has an estimated incidence of 
18%,61,62 although this usually resolves within 2–3 months and rarely requires any additional 
treatment apart from analgesics and anti-inflammatory agents. There are case reports of 
pudendal nerve injury with SSF,63 primarily owing to the anatomical variations in the course of 
the pudendal nerve on crossing the ischial spine. However, placing the SSF sutures 1.5–2 cm 
medial to the ischial spines is recommended.63,64 One large study showed temporary irritation of 
the sciatic nerve in 7.5% and temporary partial ureteral obstruction in 5.5% of 200 women who 
underwent SSF.65 There is no evidence that bilateral SSF or using permanent suture material 
is associated with better success rates. Long-term follow-up studies showed patient-reported 
prolapse symptoms in 16% of women at 2–15 years’ follow-up.66
7.4.1.2 Laparoscopic and robotic sacrocolpopexy (LSC and RSC)
LSC can be equally effective as ASC in selected women with primary PHVP. LSC can include mesh 
extension or be combined with other vaginal procedures to correct other compartment prolapse.
There is limited evidence on the effectiveness of RSC; therefore, it should only be performed in the 
context of research or prospective audit following local governance procedures.
A number of observational studies have shown good anatomical cure rates (more than 90%) in 
women undergoing LSC at 1–2 years’ follow-up.67–71 However, one study showed an 8% recurrence 
of vault prolapse and a 42% recurrence/persistence of other compartment prolapse at 5 years’ 
follow-up. In this study, 70% reported their symptoms to be cured or improved; however, 38% 
still had symptoms of prolapse. The authors concluded that, for every two women who were 
cured of their urinary or bowel symptoms, one woman developed worse symptoms.72
One relatively small multicentre RCT73 compared ASC versus LSC in women with PHVP with 
or without other compartment prolapse. The results showed significant improvement in 
the objective outcome in both groups with no significant difference between groups. At 12 
months, 67% of the ASC group and 54% of the LSC group reported themselves to be ‘very much 
better’. The potential advantages of LSC were ascertained with significantly less intraoperative 
blood loss ( P < 0.01) and shorter hospital stays ( P = 0.02).
The robotic approach is available in only a limited number of centres in the UK, being expensive 
to set up. A recent prospective cohort study of 90 women with POP-Q stage III undergoing 
RSC, with an additional procedure in 71 cases (either subtotal hysterectomy, adnexectomy, 
adhesiolysis or rectopexy), showed a mean operative time of 246 minutes (180–415 minutes) 
and a mean hospital stay of 3.48 days (2–11 days). Surgical complications were rare: one case 
of sigmoidal perforation and two cases of bowel hernia through port sites. At a mean follow-up 
of 15 months, six patients (6%) had persistent stage II prolapse.74
One prospective single-blinded RCT75 compared the outcomes of LSC (n = 33) versus RSC 
(n = 35) in patients with stages II–IV PHVP. The primary outcome measure was operative 
time from incision to closure. Results showed that LSC had a shorter operating time (199 ± 
46 minutes versus 265 ± 50 minutes) and less use of postoperative analgesia and that it was 
significantly less expensive compared with RSC. At 1 year, both groups reported significant 
and similar improvements in objective assessment and functional outcomes; however, the 
study was not powered to show significant differences in cure rates.CBEvidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 1–
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 1–RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists12 of 217.4.1.3 High uterosacral ligament suspension (HUSLS)
HUSLS should only be offered as first-line management in women with PHVP within the context of 
research or prospective audit following local governance procedures.
Clinicians should be aware of the risk of ureteric injury, especially in the laparoscopic approach.
HUSLS can be done vaginally, abdominally or laparoscopically and involves bilateral suspension of the 
vaginal vault, using sutures, to the uterosacral ligaments near the level of the ischial spine. 
The evidence regarding the value of HUSLS as first-line management in women with vault 
prolapse is limited and contradictory. One small prospective RCT76 compared ASC (n = 54) 
versus HUSLS (n = 56) in women with point C greater than 1 cm beyond the introitus. With a 
loose definition of objective success at 1 year (point C less than –1 cm), they reported 100% 
versus 82.5% success in ASC and HUSLS respectively. Recurrence in the anterior or posterior 
compartments (5.3% versus 33.3% and 0% versus 6.2% respectively) and the reoperation rate 
for prolapse were significantly lower in the ASC versus HUSLS groups. Both intraoperative 
complications and postoperative complications were higher in the HUSLS versus ASC groups 
(3.7% versus 0%, P = 0.15 and 20.4% versus 7.3%, P = 0.047 respectively).
An RCT (the Operations and Pelvic Muscle Training in the Management of Apical Support Loss 
[OPTIMAL] trial)77 has compared HUSLS versus SSF (both with mid-urethral slings) in women 
with PHVP and USI. The 2-year results showed no difference in success rates (HUSLS 59.2% 
versus SSF 60.5%), serious adverse event rates (HUSLS 16.5% versus SSF 16.7%) or prolapse 
scores at 24 months. This well-designed RCT concluded that neither HUSLS nor SSF was 
significantly superior to the other for anatomical, functional or adverse event outcomes.
 
In a systematic review and meta-analysis28 of transvaginal uterosacral ligament suspension, the 
pooled rates for a successful outcome in the anterior, apical and posterior compartments were 
81.2%, 98.3% and 87.4% respectively. Outcomes, with respect to subjective symptoms, were 
reassuring; however, it was not possible to pool data because of methodological differences 
between studies.
Complications of HUSLS include ureteric injury, the incidence of which can be as high as 
10.9%, bladder injury, urinary tract infection, blood transfusion and small bowel injury.78–80 
Placing the sutures into the deep dorsal aspect of the ligament is reported to reduce the 
incidence of ureteric injury,81 especially in the laparoscopic approach. Suture erosion was 
noted with permanent sutures; a similar risk has been reported with laparoscopic HUSLS.82 
7.5 Under what circumstances would transvaginal mesh (TVM) kits/grafts be considered? 
The limited evidence on TVM kits does not support their use as first-line treatment of PHVP.
If TVM is considered, women should be fully informed of the permanent nature of the mesh and 
potential mesh complications, some of which are serious and have long-term effects that can be 
difficult to treat.
If TVM is considered, women should be fully informed of alternative surgical and nonsurgical 
options and referral to other surgeons/units arranged as appropriate.
TVM should only be performed by an appropriately trained urogynaecologist, after discussion of 
each individual case in an MDT meeting.Evidence 
level 2+
PEvidence 
level 1+CB
Evidence 
level 1++
B
C
PRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists13 of 21The results of all surgical procedures involving mesh should be prospectively audited and submitted 
to a national surgical database (e.g. British Society of Urogynaecology [BSUG]) and any mesh 
complications reported to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).
TVM has mesh arms that bilaterally anchor the vaginal vault to both sacrospinous ligaments, achieving 
level I support. These were originally delivered with trocars through anatomical landmarks via the 
obturator membrane/ischiorectal fossa; however, more recently they have been anchored through 
single vaginal incisions. 
A systematic review and meta-analysis83 evaluated the efficacy and safety of TVM in the 
treatment of apical vaginal prolapse in 30 observational studies with a total of 2653 women; 
they showed objective success rates of 87–95% with short-term follow-up (6–18 months). Mesh 
erosion occurred in 4.6–10.7% and reoperation rates were 0.4–6.0%.
One RCT84 compared LSC versus TVM in women with PHVP with 2 years’ follow-up. The 
results showed that the women in the LSC group had a longer operating time, a shorter 
hospital stay and a quicker return to daily activities compared with the TVM group. At 2 years’ 
follow-up, the objective success rate and mean patient satisfaction were significantly higher in 
the LSC group. Women in the TVM group had a shorter postoperative total vaginal length, a 
trend towards higher vaginal mesh erosions (13% versus 2%, P = 0.07) and higher reoperation 
rates (22% versus 5%, P = 0.006).
One RCT85 compared TVM versus SSF with 12 months’ follow-up and showed POP recurrence 
rates of 16.9% versus 39.4% respectively ( P = 0.002). The mesh exposure rate was 20.8%. 
There was no significant difference in QoL improvement, de novo SUI and overactive bladder 
between the two groups.
A large study has reported concerns on the safety and potentially serious complications (1%) 
associated with TVM, including serious infection and major haemorrhage.86
Similar concerns were voiced by the US Food and Drug Administration87 who proposed to 
reclassify these devices to class III (high-risk devices).88 The MHRA has produced a report on 
TVM in prolapse and urinary incontinence.89,90
7.6 When should colpocleisis be used?
Colpocleisis is a safe and effective procedure that can be considered for frail women and/or women 
who do not wish to retain sexual function.
Colpocleisis entails closure of the vagina. The outcomes and complications of colpocleisis 
have been reviewed elsewhere.91 Different techniques have been described, including 
vaginectomy,92 purse-string closure,93 colpocleisis after performing standard anterior and 
posterior vaginal wall repair,94 purse-string closure of enterocele followed by approximation 
of perivesical and rectovaginal fascia and high levator plication95 and LeFort colpocleisis,96 
where a bridge of tissue is created between the anterior and posterior vaginal wall to stop the 
vault prolapse from protruding.
Colpocleisis has a short operating time and a low incidence of complications.93–95 One published 
study included 33 women and a second included 92 women. Success rates of 97% and above 
have been reported.93–97 The procedure can also be performed under local anaesthesia, which 
suits frail women who may be difficult to anaesthetise, as demonstrated in a study that included 
30 women having tension-free vaginal tape sling insertion carried out under local anaesthetic.98 Evidence 
level 2+CP
Evidence 
level 2++
Evidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 4RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists14 of 217.7 Is there an indication for concomitant surgery for occult SUI?
Colposuspension performed at the time of sacrocolpopexy is an effective measure to reduce 
postoperative symptomatic SUI in previously continent women.
A large RCT of 322 women11 comparing ASC versus ASC and colposuspension in women 
with occult SUI stopped recruitment at the first interim analysis due to the significantly 
low incidence of postoperative SUI in the group of women who underwent concomitant 
colposuspension (44.1% versus 23.8%, P < 0.01). The results were maintained at 7 years’ 
follow-up, with the incidence of continence surgery almost halved in the group of women 
who underwent concomitant colposuspension. A meta-analysis that included two RCTs11,99 
confirmed the benefit of concomitant colposuspension.42
There have been no clinical trials to assess delayed minimally invasive mid-urethral sling surgery, when 
required, after ASC and whether that would have led to higher overall continence rates.
There are no trials that evaluated performing prophylactic mid-urethral sling surgery at the time of SSF 
or ASC/LSC for occult SUI. 
7.8 Is there an indication for concomitant surgery for PHVP and overt SUI? 
Colposuspension at the time of ASC does not appear to be effective treatment for SUI.
Concomitant mid-urethral sling surgery may be considered when vaginal surgical approaches are 
used for the treatment of PHVP. [ New 2015 ]
In a small RCT of women with PHVP and concomitant SUI, 54.2% were still incontinent after 
combined ASC and Burch colposuspension, compared with 39.1% following ASC alone. Burch 
colposuspension does not provide any additional benefit in PHVP repair in patients with pre-
existing SUI.100
A 2013 Cochrane review assessed 16 RCTs, not specific to PHVP, which included data on 
bladder symptoms and concluded that ‘Women undergoing prolapse surgery may have 
benefited from having continence surgery performed concomitantly, especially if they had 
[overt] stress urinary incontinence (RR 7.4, 95% CI 4.0 to 14)’.42
A single RCT evaluated concomitant mid-urethral sling at the time of vaginal prolapse surgery 
(not specifically PHVP); combination surgery signi ficantly reduced the risk of postoperative 
SUI at 1 year of follow-up (21% versus 59%).101
7.9 What is the optimal treatment of recurrent vault prolapse? 
The management of recurrent vault prolapse should be through a specialist MDT with experience 
and training in this field.
A number of case series have reported good outcomes after vaginal HUSLS102 and LSC103 for 
recurrent vault prolapse. Evidence in relation to other management options, including PFMT 
and the use of pessaries, is very limited.104 Patients should be counselled about the likely 
benefits and potential risks of each management option.
These patients should be assessed by those with expertise in the management of recurrent vaginal 
vault prolapse, ideally a subspecialist urogynaecologist (or those with equivalent experience) working 
within MDTs.PPEvidence 
level 1+B
B
Evidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 1++
Evidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 3RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists15 of 218. Clinical governance
National databases, such as the BSUG surgical database, should be used to document surgical 
outcomes and complications.
The IUGA/ICS terminology and classification of complications should be used for the documentation 
of graft-related complications.
All complications related to the use of devices and mesh should be reported to the MHRA.
Reporting of the complications of surgery for PHVP should describe the nature of the complication in 
terms of category, time and site. It should also describe any involvement of adjacent structures, such as 
the urinary tract or bowel, as well as any systemic effect. 
The use of a standard method to report the outcome of surgery, including complications, for 
POP enables comparison for audit and research. Utilising the schemes proposed by IUGA/
ICS facilitates the standardisation of terminology and the comparison of results for audit and 
research purposes.105,106
The BSUG registry (https://nww.bsug.nhs.uk) allows the use of these schemes and enables 
personal audit. Reporting can be made through medical device liaison officers or directly to 
the MHRA online (https://yellowcard.mhra.gov.uk/).
9. Recommendations for future research
l The role of concomitant continence surgery in patients with PHVP.
l The correlation of surgical workload and outcome.
l Robotic versus other abdominal and vaginal procedures for the treatment of PHVP.
l The use of mesh in the treatment of PHVP. 
10. Auditable topics
l Documentation of management options offered including provision of patient information (100%).
l Documentation of the discussion of conservative measures (PFMT/pessaries) prior to surgery (100%).
l Compliance with relevant database, e.g. BSUG (100%).
l Documentation of the MDT discussion prior to surgery for recurrent prolapse (100%).
l Outcome following various surgical procedures for PHVP.
l Development of SUI following surgery for PHVP.
11. Useful links and support groups
l Association for Pelvic Organ Prolapse Support (APOPS) 
[http://www.pelvicorganprolapsesupport.org/].
l British Society of Urogynaecology. Patient Information 
[http://www.bsug.org.uk/patient-information.php].
l International Continence Society [http://www.ics.org/].
l International Urogynecological Association [http://www.iuga.org/].Evidence 
level 4P
P
PRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists16 of 21References
1. Haylen BT, de Ridder D, Freeman RM, Swift SE, Berghmans 
B, Lee J, et al.; International Urogynecological Association; 
International Continence Society. An International 
Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/International 
Continence Society (ICS) joint report on the terminology 
for female pelvic floor dysfunction. Neurourol Urodyn 
2010;29:4–20. 
2. Bump RC, Mattiasson A, Bø K, Brubaker LP, DeLancey JO, 
Klarskov P, et al. The standardization of terminology of 
female pelvic organ prolapse and pelvic floor dysfunction. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:10–7.
3. Symmonds RE, Pratt JH. Vaginal prolapse following 
hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1960;79:899–909.
4. Barrington JW, Edwards G. Posthysterectomy vault prolapse. 
Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2000;11:241–5.
5. Toozs-Hobson P, Boos K, Cardozo L. Management of vaginal 
vault prolapse. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:13–7.
6. Marchionni M, Bracco GL, Checcucci V, Carabaneanu A, 
Coccia EM, Mecacci F, et al. True incidence of vaginal vault 
prolapse. Thirteen years of experience. J Reprod Med 
1999;44:679–84.
7. Aigmueller T, Dungl A, Hinterholzer S, Geiss I, Riss P. An 
estimation of the frequency of surgery for posthysterectomy 
vault prolapse. Int Urogynecol J 2010;21:299–302.
8. Baden WF, Walker TA, Lindsey JH. The vaginal profile. Tex 
Med 1968;64:56–8.
9. Baden WF, Walker TA. Genesis of the vaginal profile: a 
correlated classification of vaginal relaxation. Clin Obstet 
Gynecol 1972;15:1048–54.
10. Brubaker L, Cundiff G, Fine P, Nygaard I, Richter H, Visco 
A, et al.; Pelvic Floor Disorders Network. A randomized 
trial of colpopexy and urinary reduction efforts (CARE): 
design and methods. Control Clin Trials 2003;24:629–42.
11. Brubaker L, Cundiff GW, Fine P, Nygaard I, Richter HE, 
Visco AG, et al.; Pelvic Floor Disorders Network. Abdominal 
sacrocolpopexy with Burch colposuspension to reduce 
urinary stress incontinence. N Engl J Med 2006;354:1557–66.
12. Burgio KL, Nygaard IE, Richter HE, Brubaker L, Gutman 
RE, Leng W, et al.; Pelvic Floor Disorders Network. Bladder 
symptoms 1 year after abdominal sacrocolpopexy with 
and without Burch colposuspension in women without 
preoperative stress incontinence symptoms. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2007;197:647.e1–6.
13. Visco AG, Brubaker L, Nygaard I, Richter HE, Cundiff G, 
Fine P, et al.; Pelvic Floor Disorders Network. The role 
of preoperative urodynamic testing in stress-continent 
women undergoing sacrocolpopexy: the Colpopexy and 
Urinary Reduction Efforts (CARE) randomized surgical trial. 
Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2008;19:607–14.
14. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Urinary 
incontinence: The management of urinary incontinence 
in women . NICE clinical guideline 171. [Manchester]: 
NICE; 2013.
15. Rogers RG, Coates KW, Kammerer-Doak D, Khalsa S, 
Qualls C. A short form of the Pelvic Organ Prolapse/
Urinary Incontinence Sexual Questionnaire (PISQ-12). Int 
Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2003;14:164–8.
16. Price N, Jackson SR, Avery K, Brookes ST, Abrams P. 
Development and psychometric evaluation of the ICIQ 
Vaginal Symptoms Questionnaire: the ICIQ-VS. BJOG 
2006;113:700–12.
17. Barber MD, Kuchibhatla MN, Pieper CF, Bump RC. 
Psychometric evaluation of 2 comprehensive condition-
specific quality of life instruments for women with pelvic 
floor disorders. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;185:1388–95.
18. Wren PA, Janz NK, Brubaker L, Fitzgerald MP, Weber 
AM, LaPorte FB, et al.; Pelvic Floor Disorders Network. 
Reliability of health-related quality-of-life measures 1 year 
after surgical procedures for pelvic floor disorders. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2005;192:780–8.19. Uebersax JS, Wyman JF, Shumaker SA, McClish DK, Fantl 
JA. Short forms to assess life quality and symptom distress 
for urinary incontinence in women: the Incontinence 
Impact Questionnaire and the Urogenital Distress 
Inventory. Continence Program for Women Research 
Group. Neurourol Urodyn 1995;14:131–9.
20. Lowenstein L, FitzGerald MP, Kenton K, Dooley Y, 
Templehof M, Mueller ER, et al. Patient-selected goals: the 
fourth dimension in assessment of pelvic floor disorders. 
Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2008;19:81–4.
21. Cruikshank SH, Kovac SR. Randomized comparison 
of three surgical methods used at the time of vaginal 
hysterectomy to prevent posterior enterocele. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;180:859–65.
22. McCall ML. Posterior culdeplasty; surgical correction of 
enterocele during vaginal hysterectomy; a preliminary 
report. Obstet Gynecol 1957;10:595–602.
23. Wall LL. A technique for modified McCall culdeplasty 
at the time of abdominal hysterectomy. J Am Coll Surg 
1994;178:507–9.
24. Ostrzenski A. A new, simplified posterior culdoplasty and 
vaginal vault suspension during abdominal hysterectomy. 
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1995;49:25–34.
25. Chene G, Tardieu AS, Savary D, Krief M, Boda C, Anton-
Bousquet MC, et al. Anatomical and functional results of 
McCall culdoplasty in the prevention of enteroceles and 
vaginal vault prolapse after vaginal hysterectomy. Int 
Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2008;19:1007–11.
26. Cruikshank SH. Preventing posthysterectomy vaginal vault 
prolapse and enterocele during vaginal hysterectomy. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:1433–40.
27. Rahn DD, Stone RJ, Vu AK, White AB, Wai CY. Abdominal 
hysterectomy with or without angle stitch: correlation with 
subsequent vaginal vault prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2008;199:669.e1–4.
28. Margulies RU, Rogers MA, Morgan DM. Outcomes of 
transvaginal uterosacral ligament suspension: systematic 
review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2010;202:124–34.
29. Cruikshank SH, Cox DW. Sacrospinous ligament fixation 
at the time of transvaginal hysterectomy. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1990;162:1611–5; discussion 1615–9.
30. Gimbel H. Total or subtotal hysterectomy for benign 
uterine diseases? A meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand 2007;86:133–44.
31. Chung CP, Miskimins R, Kuehl TJ, Yandell PM, Shull BL. 
Permanent suture used in uterosacral ligament suspension 
offers better anatomical support than delayed absorbable 
suture. Int Urogynecol J 2012;23:223–7.
32. Kasturi S, Bentley-Taylor M, Woodman PJ, Terry CL, Hale 
DS. High uterosacral ligament vaginal vault suspension: 
comparison of absorbable vs. permanent suture for apical 
fixation. Int Urogynecol J 2012;23:941–5.
33. Hagen S, Stark D, Glazener C, Dickson S, Barry S, Elders 
A, et al.; POPPY Trial Collaborators. Individualised pelvic 
floor muscle training in women with pelvic organ prolapse 
(POPPY): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
2014;383:796–806.
34. Hagen S, Stark D. Conservative prevention and management 
of pelvic organ prolapse in women. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2011;(12):CD003882.
35. Hagen S, Stark D, Glazener C, Sinclair L, Ramsay I. A 
randomized controlled trial of pelvic floor muscle training 
for stages I and II pelvic organ prolapse. Int Urogynecol J 
Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2009;20:45–51.
36. Bernardes BT, Resende AP, Stüpp L, Oliveira E, Castro RA, 
Bella ZI, et al. Efficacy of pelvic floor muscle training and 
hypopressive exercises for treating pelvic organ prolapse 
in women: randomized controlled trial. Sao Paulo Med J 
2012;130:5–9.RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists17 of 2137. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
Surgical repair of vaginal wall prolapse using mesh . 
NICE interventional procedure guidance 267. Manchester: 
NICE; 2008.
38. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
Sacrocolpopexy using mesh for vaginal vault prolapse 
repair . NICE interventional procedure guidance 283. 
Manchester: NICE; 2009.
39. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
Infracoccygeal sacropexy using mesh for vaginal vault 
prolapse repair . NICE interventional procedure guidance 
281. Manchester: NICE; 2009.
40. Committee on Practice Bulletins-Gynecology, American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG Practice 
Bulletin No. 79: Pelvic organ prolapse. Obstet Gynecol 
2007;109:461–73.
41. Cundiff GW, Amundsen CL, Bent AE, Coates KW, 
Schaffer JI, Strohbehn K, et al. The PESSRI study: 
symptom relief outcomes of a randomized crossover trial 
of the ring and Gellhorn pessaries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2007;196:405.e1–8.
42. Maher C, Feiner B, Baessler K, Schmid C. Surgical 
management of pelvic organ prolapse in women. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2013;(4):CD004014.
43. Srikrishna S, Robinson D, Cardozo L, Cartwright R. 
Experiences and expectations of women with urogenital 
prolapse: a quantitative and qualitative exploration. BJOG 
2008;115:1362–8.
44. Crafoord K, Sydsjö A, Johansson T, Brynhildsen J, Kjølhede 
P. Factors associated with symptoms of pelvic floor 
dysfunction six years after primary operation of genital 
prolapse. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2008;87:910–5.
45. Slieker-ten Hove MC, Pool-Goudzwaard AL, Eijkemans 
MJ, Steegers-Theunissen RP, Burger CW, Vierhout ME. 
Prediction model and prognostic index to estimate 
clinically relevant pelvic organ prolapse in a general 
female population. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 
2009;20:1013–21.
46. Bradley CS, Nygaard IE. Vaginal wall descensus and 
pelvic floor symptoms in older women. Obstet Gynecol 
2005;106:759–66.
47. Gutman RE, Ford DE, Quiroz LH, Shippey SH, Handa 
VL. Is there a pelvic organ prolapse threshold that 
predicts pelvic floor symptoms? Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2008;199:683.e1–7.
48. Nygaard I, Brubaker L, Zyczynski HM, Cundiff G, 
Richter H, Gantz M, et al. Long-term outcomes following 
abdominal sacrocolpopexy for pelvic organ prolapse. 
JAMA 2013;309:2016–24.
49. Toozs-Hobson P, Freeman R, Barber M, Maher C, Haylen 
B, Athanasiou S, et al. An International Urogynecological 
Association (IUGA)/International Continence Society (ICS) 
joint report on the terminology for reporting outcomes 
of surgical procedures for pelvic organ prolapse. Int 
Urogynecol J 2012;23:527–35.
50. Randall CL, Nichols DH. Surgical treatment of vaginal 
inversion. Obstet Gynecol 1971;38:327–32.
51. Marinkovic SP, Stanton SL. Triple compartment prolapse: 
sacrocolpopexy with anterior and posterior mesh 
extensions. BJOG 2003;110:323–6.
52. Brubaker L, Glazener C, Jacquetin B, Maher C, Melgrem A, 
Norton P, et al. Surgery for pelvic organ prolapse. In: Abrams 
P, Cardozo L, Khoury S, Wein A, editors. Incontinence: 4th 
International Consultation on Incontinence, Paris July 
5-8, 2008 . 4th ed. [Paris]: Health Publication Ltd; 2009. p. 
1273–1320.
53. Nygaard IE, McCreery R, Brubaker L, Connolly A, Cundiff 
G, Weber AM, et al.; Pelvic Floor Disorders Network. 
Abdominal sacrocolpopexy: a comprehensive review. 
Obstet Gynecol 2004;104:805–23.
54. Sederl J. [Surgery in prolapse of a blind-end vagina]. 
Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd 1958;18:824–8. German.55. Richter K. [The surgical treatment of the prolapsed 
vaginal fundus after uterine extirpation. A contribution on 
Amreich’s the sacrotuberal vaginal fixation]. Geburtshilfe 
Frauenheilkd 1967;27:941–54. German.
56. Sze EH, Karram MM. Transvaginal repair of vault prolapse: 
a review. Obstet Gynecol 1997;89:466–75.
57. Beer M, Kuhn A. Surgical techniques for vault prolapse: a 
review of the literature. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 
2005;119:144–55.
58. Morgan DM, Rogers MA, Huebner M, Wei JT, Delancey 
JO. Heterogeneity in anatomic outcome of sacrospinous 
ligament fixation for prolapse: a systematic review. Obstet 
Gynecol 2007;109:1424–33.
59. Cvach K, Dwyer P. Surgical management of pelvic organ 
prolapse: abdominal and vaginal approaches. World J Urol 
2012;30:471–7.
60. Holley RL, Varner RE, Gleason BP, Apffel LA, Scott S. Recurrent 
pelvic support defects after sacrospinous ligament fixation 
for vaginal vault prolapse. J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:444–8.
61. Dietz V, Huisman M, de Jong JM, Heintz PM, van der Vaart 
CH. Functional outcome after sacrospinous hysteropexy 
for uterine descensus. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor 
Dysfunct 2008;19:747–52. 
62. Faber VJ, van der Vaart HC, Heggelman BG, Schraffordt 
Koops SE. Serious complication 1 year after sacrospinous 
ligament fixation. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 
2008;19:1311–3. 
63. Possover M, Lemos N. Risks, symptoms, and management 
of pelvic nerve damage secondary to surgery for pelvic 
organ prolapse: a report of 95 cases. Int Urogynecol J 
2011;22:1485–90.
64. Alevizon SJ, Finan MA. Sacrospinous colpopexy: 
management of postoperative pudendal nerve entrapment. 
Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:713–5.
65. Lantzsch T, Goepel C, Wolters M, Koelbl H, Methfessel HD. 
Sacrospinous ligament fixation for vaginal vault prolapse. 
Arch Gynecol Obstet 2001;265:21–5.
66. Aigmueller T, Riss P, Dungl A, Bauer H. Long-term follow-
up after vaginal sacrospinous fixation: patient satisfaction, 
anatomical results and quality of life. Int Urogynecol J 
Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2008;19:965–9.
67. Claerhout F, De Ridder D, Roovers JP, Rommens H, Spelzini 
F, Vandenbroucke V, et al. Medium-term anatomic and 
functional results of laparoscopic sacrocolpopexy beyond 
the learning curve. Eur Urol 2009;55:1459–67.
68. Ganatra AM, Rozet F, Sanchez-Salas R, Barret E, Galiano 
M, Cathelineau X, et al. The current status of laparoscopic 
sacrocolpopexy: a review. Eur Urol 2009;55:1089–103.
69. Klauschie JL, Suozzi BA, O’Brien MM, McBride AW. A 
comparison of laparoscopic and abdominal sacral colpopexy: 
objective outcome and perioperative differences. Int 
Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2009;20:273–9.
70. Price N, Slack A, Jackson SR. Laparoscopic sacrocolpopexy: 
an observational study of functional and anatomical 
outcomes. Int Urogynecol J 2011;22:77–82.
71. Ross JW, Preston M. Laparoscopic sacrocolpopexy for 
severe vaginal vault prolapse: five-year outcome. J Minim 
Invasive Gynecol 2005;12:221–6.
72. Higgs PJ, Chua HL, Smith AR. Long term review of 
laparoscopic sacrocolpopexy. BJOG 2005;112:1134–8.
73. Freeman RM, Pantazis K, Thomson A, Frappell J, Bombieri L, 
Moran P, et al. A randomised controlled trial of abdominal 
versus laparoscopic sacrocolpopexy for the treatment of 
post-hysterectomy vaginal vault prolapse: LAS study. Int 
Urogynecol J 2013;24:377–84.
74. Louis-Sylvestre C, Herry M. Robotic-assisted laparoscopic 
sacrocolpopexy for stage III pelvic organ prolapse. Int 
Urogynecol J 2013;24:731–3.
75. Paraiso MF, Jelovsek JE, Frick A, Chen CC, Barber MD. 
Laparoscopic compared with robotic sacrocolpopexy for 
vaginal prolapse: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet 
Gynecol 2011;118:1005–13.RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists18 of 2176. Rondini C, Braun HF, Alvarez J, Urzua M, Villegas R, 
Escobar M, et al. Prospective-randomized study comparing 
high uterosacral vault suspension vs. abdominal sacral 
colpopexy for the correction of apical defects and vaginal 
vault prolapse. Int Urogynecol J 2011;22 Suppl 1:S87–8.
77. Barber MD, Brubaker L, Burgio KL, Richter HE, Nygaard 
I, Weidner AC, et al.; Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development Pelvic 
Floor Disorders Network. Comparison of 2 transvaginal 
surgical approaches and perioperative behavioral therapy 
for apical vaginal prolapse: the OPTIMAL randomized trial. 
JAMA 2014;311:1023–34.
78. Barber MD, Visco AG, Weidner AC, Amundsen CL, Bump 
RC. Bilateral uterosacral ligament vaginal vault suspension 
with site-specific endopelvic fascia defect repair for 
treatment of pelvic organ prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2000;183:1402–10; discussion 1410–1.
79. Shull BL, Bachofen C, Coates KW, Kuehl TJ. A transvaginal 
approach to repair of apical and other associated sites of 
pelvic organ prolapse with uterosacral ligaments. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:1365–73; discussion 1373–4.
80. Webb MJ, Aronson MP, Ferguson LK, Lee RA. 
Posthysterectomy vaginal vault prolapse: primary repair in 
693 patients. Obstet Gynecol 1998;92:281–5.
81. Aronson MP, Aronson PK, Howard AE, Morse AN, Baker 
SP, Young SB. Low risk of ureteral obstruction with “deep” 
(dorsal/posterior) uterosacral ligament suture placement 
for transvaginal apical suspension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2005;192:1530–6.
82. Carter JE, Winter M, Mendehlsohn S, Saye W, Richardson 
AC. Vaginal vault suspension and enterocele repair by 
Richardson-Saye laparoscopic technique: description of 
training technique and results. JSLS 2001;5:29–36.
83. Feiner B, Jelovsek JE, Maher C. Efficacy and safety of 
transvaginal mesh kits in the treatment of prolapse of the 
vaginal apex: a systematic review. BJOG 2009;116:15–24.
84. Maher CF, Feiner B, DeCuyper EM, Nichlos CJ, Hickey KV, 
O’Rourke P. Laparoscopic sacral colpopexy versus total 
vaginal mesh for vaginal vault prolapse: a randomized trial. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2011;204:360.e1–7.
85. Halaska M, Maxova K, Sottner O, Svabik K, Mlcoch M, Kolarik 
D, et al. A multicenter, randomized, prospective, controlled 
study comparing sacrospinous fixation and transvaginal 
mesh in the treatment of posthysterectomy vaginal vault 
prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2012;207:301.e1–7.
86. Abdel-Fattah M, Ramsay I; West of Scotland Study Group. 
Retrospective multicentre study of the new minimally 
invasive mesh repair devices for pelvic organ prolapse. 
BJOG 2008;115:22–30.
87. U.S Food and Drug Administration. Concerns about Surgical 
Mesh for POP [http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
ProductsandMedicalProcedures/ImplantsandProsthetics/
UroGynSurgicalMesh/ucm345201.htm]. Accessed 2015 Apr 14. 
88. Department of Health and Human Services, Food 
and Drug Administration. Reclassification of surgical 
mesh for transvaginal pelvic organ prolapse repair and 
surgical instrumentation for urogynecologic surgical 
mesh procedures; designation of special controls for 
urogynecologic surgical mesh instrumentation. Proposed 
rules. Fed Regist 2014;79:24634–5.
89. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. 
A summary of the evidence on the benefits and risks of 
vaginal mesh implants . [London]: MHRA; 2014. 
90. Department of Health. Better guidance and support 
for NHS surgeons on vaginal tape and mesh implants . 
London: Department of Health; 2012 [https://www.gov.uk/
government/news/better-guidance-and-support-for-nhs-
surgeons-on-vaginal-tape-and-mesh-implants]. Accessed 
2015 Jun 22.91. FitzGerald MP, Richter HE, Siddique S, Thompson P, 
Zyczynski H; Ann Weber for the Pelvic Floor Disorders 
Network. Colpocleisis: a review. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic 
Floor Dysfunct 2006;17:261–71.
92. Hoffman MS, Cardosi RJ, Lockhart J, Hall DC, Murphy SJ. 
Vaginectomy with pelvic herniorrhaphy for prolapse. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2003;189:364–70; discussion 370–1.
93. DeLancey JO, Morley GW. Total colpocleisis for vaginal 
eversion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:1228–32; 
discussion 1232–5.
94. Harmanli OH, Dandolu V, Chatwani AJ, Grody MT. Total 
colpocleisis for severe pelvic organ prolapse. J Reprod Med 
2003;48:703–6.
95. von Pechmann WS, Mutone M, Fyffe J, Hale DS. Total 
colpocleisis with high levator plication for the treatment 
of advanced pelvic organ prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2003;189:121–6.
96. Pelosi MA 3rd, Pelosi MA. Transvaginal needle suspension 
with LeFort colpocleisis for stress incontinence and 
advanced uterovaginal prolapse in a high-risk patient. J Am 
Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 1998;5:207–11.
97. Cespedes RD, Winters JC, Ferguson KH. Colpocleisis 
for the treatment of vaginal vault prolapse. Tech Urol 
2001;7:152–60.
98. Moore RD, Miklos JR. Colpocleisis and tension-free vaginal 
tape sling for severe uterine and vaginal prolapse and stress 
urinary incontinence under local anaesthesia. J Am Assoc 
Gynecol Laparosc 2003;10:276–80.
99. Costantini E, Lazzeri M, Bini V, Del Zingaro M, Zucchi A, 
Porena M. Pelvic organ prolapse repair with and without 
prophylactic concomitant Burch colposuspension in 
continent women: a randomized, controlled trial with 
8-year followup. J Urol 2011;185:2236–40.
100. Costantini E, Lazzeri M, Bini V, Del Zingaro M, Frumenzio 
E, Porena M. Pelvic organ prolapse repair with and without 
concomitant Burch colposuspension in incontinent 
women: a randomised controlled trial with at least 5-year 
followup. Obstet Gynecol Int 2012;2012:967923.
101. van der Ploeg JM, van der Steen A, Oude Rengerink K, van 
der Vaart CH, Roovers J. Multicentre randomised trial of 
vaginal prolapse repair versus vaginal prolapse repair with 
a midurethral sling in patients with pelvic organ prolapse 
and co-existing stress urinary incontinence. International 
Continence Society Annual Meeting, 26–30 August 2013, 
Barcelona, Spain. Abstract 210 [http://www.ics.org/
Abstracts/Publish/180/000210.pdf]. Accessed 2015 Apr 14.
102. Bracken JN, Tran DH, Kuehl TJ, Larsen W, Yandell PM, Shull 
BL. A novel transvaginal approach to correct recurrent 
apical prolapse after failed sacral colpopexy: case series. 
Int Urogynecol J 2012;23:1429–33.
103. Schmid C, O’Rourke P, Maher C. Laparoscopic 
sacrocolpopexy for recurrent pelvic organ prolapse 
after failed transvaginal polypropylene mesh surgery. Int 
Urogynecol J 2013;24:763–7.
104. Toh VV, Bogne V, Bako A. Management of recurrent vault 
prolapse. Int Urogynecol J 2012;23:29–34.
105. Haylen BT, Freeman RM, Swift SE, Cosson M, Davila 
GW, Deprest J, et al. An International Urogynecological 
Association (IUGA) / International Continence Society (ICS) 
joint terminology and classification of the complications 
related directly to the insertion of prostheses (meshes, 
implants, tapes) & grafts in female pelvic floor surgery. Int 
Urogynecol J 2011;22:3–15.
106. Haylen BT, Freeman RM, Lee J, Swift SE, Cosson M, Deprest 
J, et al. An International Urogynecological Association 
(IUGA)/International Continence Society (ICS) joint 
terminology and classification of the complications related 
to native tissue female pelvic floor surgery. Int Urogynecol 
J 2012;23:515–26.RCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists19 of 21Appendix I: POP-Q exam – reference guide 
The pelvic organ prolapse quantification (POP-Q) exam is used to quantify, describe and stage pelvic support.
l There are 6 points measured at the vagina with respect to the hymen.
l Points above the hymen are negative numbers; points below the hymen are positive numbers.
l All measurements except tvl are measured at maximum valsalva.
Point Description Range of values
Aa Anterior vaginal wall 3 cm proximal to the hymen –3 cm to +3 cm
Ba Most distal position of the remaining upper anterior vaginal wall –3 cm to +tvl
C Most distal edge of cervix or vaginal cuff scar
D Posterior fornix (N/A if post hysterectomy)
Ap Posterior vaginal wall 3 cm proximal to the hymen –3 cm to +3 cm
Bp Most distal position of the remaining upper posterior vaginal wall –3 cm to +tvl
Genital hiatus (gh) – measured from middle of external urethral meatus to posterior midline hymen 
Perineal body (pb) – measured from posterior margin of gh to middle of anal opening 
Total vaginal length (tvl) – depth of vagina when point D or C is reduced to normal position
POP-Q staging criteria
Stage O Aa, Ap, Ba, Bp = –3 cm and C or D ≤ – (tvl – 2) cm
Stage I Stage O criteria not met and leading edge < –1 cm
Stage II Leading edge ≥ –1 but ≤ +1 cm
Stage III Leading edge > +1 cm but < + (tvl – 2) cm
Stage IV Leading edge ≥ + (tvl – 2) cm
Reference: Bump RC, Mattiasson A, Bø K, Brubaker LP, DeLancey JO, Klarskov P, et al. The standardization of terminology of 
female pelvic organ prolapse and pelvic floor dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:10 –7.CD
BaBp
Aptvl
pb ghAaRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists20 of 21Appendix II: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in 
making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. Each guideline is systematically 
developed using a standardised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical 
Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website 
at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These recommendations are not intended to dictate 
an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individual 
patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. 
It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into routine 
practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated. 
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations 
formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or 
randomised controlled trial rated as 1++, and 
directly applicable to the target population; or 
A systematic review of randomised controlled 
trials or a body of evidence consisting 
principally of studies rated as 1+, directly 
applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results
A body of evidence including studies rated 
as 2++ directly applicable to the target 
population, and demonstrating overall 
consistency of results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
1++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2+ directly applicable to the target population, 
and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a very 
low risk of bias
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
low risk of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of 
randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a high 
risk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of 
case–control or cohort studies or high-
quality case–control or cohort studies 
with a very low risk of confounding, bias 
or chance and a high probability that the 
relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort 
studies with a low risk of confounding, 
bias or chance and a moderate 
probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a 
high risk of confounding, bias or chance 
and a significant risk that the 
relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, 
case series
4 Expert opinionClassification of evidence levels Grades of recommendations
Good practice point
Recommended best practice based on the 
clinical experience of the guideline 
development groupDCBA
PRCOG/BSUG Green-top Guideline No. 46 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists21 of 21This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and the British 
Society of Urogynaecology by: 
Mr AM El Naqa FRCOG, Wolverhampton; Miss KL Guerrero FRCOG, Glasgow; and Mr MS Abdel Fattah FRCOG, 
Aberdeen
and peer reviewed by: 
British Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy; Mr DCY Chou MRCOG, Australia; Mrs AHD Diyaf MRCOG, Barnstaple; 
Dr LM Dolan FRCOG, Belfast; Dr AA Elkady FRCOG, Greater Cairo, Egypt; Professor CMA Glazener FRCOG, 
Aberdeen; Mr P Hilton FRCOG, Newcastle upon Tyne; Dr A Khunda FRCOG, Middlesbrough; Mr CJ Mayne FRCOG, 
Leicester; Professor A Ostrzenski, USA; Mrs CMA Ramage FRCOG, Bradford; RCOG Women’s Network; 
Dr JR Scott FRCOG, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA; Dr JA Short MRCOG, Christchurch, New Zealand; Mrs P Sinha FRCOG, 
St Leonards-on-Sea; Dr B Thomas MRCOG, Thrissur, India; and Mr PM Toozs-Hobson FRCOG, Birmingham. 
RCOG Guidelines Committee lead reviewers were: Dr CJ Crowe MRCOG, London and Dr M Gupta MRCOG, London.
The chairs of the RCOG Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta1 MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen2 FRCOG, Glasgow; 
and Dr AJ Thomson1 MRCOG, Paisley. 
1 co-chairs from June 2014 2 until May 2014. 
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising any 
conflicts of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/
guidelines/gtg46/ .
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. 
The review process will commence in 2018, unless otherwise indicated.
DISCLAIMER 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical 
practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for 
consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement 
regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light 
of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to 
be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols 
or guidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.