The prevention of malaria in pregnancy
1. Purpose and scope
The aim of this guideline is to provide clinicians with evidence-based information about the prevention of malaria in pregnancy for UK-based residents visiting malaria endemic areas. This guideline covers malaria prevention recommendations for women planning a pregnancy and those already pregnant or breastfeeding.
2. Background
Malaria can be life-threatening and is caused by the bite of the female Anopheles mosquito. The species of malaria can determine the pattern of the disease. The majority of imported malaria cases in the UK are caused by P. falciparum. Pregnant women are at increased risk of malaria complications.
4. Medical complications of malaria in pregnancy
Malaria infection in pregnancy can result in maternal mortality, pregnancy loss, reduced birth weight, and other complications. Pregnant women are at higher risk of contracting and dying from malaria compared to non-pregnant individuals.
5. Prevention of malaria infection in pregnancy
Pregnant women should consider postponing travel to malaria endemic areas if possible. If travel is unavoidable, they should seek guidance on malaria risks and prevention strategies. Awareness of risk, bite prevention, chemoprophylaxis, and prompt diagnosis and treatment are important in preventing malaria. Pregnant women should be educated on malaria prevention measures and provided with written information. The risk of contracting malaria varies depending on the destination.
5.4. Chemoprophylaxis for pregnant or breastfeeding women
Mefloquine is recommended for prophylaxis in the second and third trimesters in chloroquine-resistant areas. Pregnant women should be cautious about drug choices and seek advice from specialists if needed. Atovaquone-proguanil and proguanil plus chloroquine are also options for prophylaxis in certain areas. Waiting times before becoming pregnant after taking prophylactic drugs should be considered to avoid potential adverse effects.

In pregnancy, chloroquine and proguanil are safe but not effective in areas of chloroquine resistance. Mefloquine can be considered if necessary, and atovaquone and proguanil can be used in consultation with a specialist. Doxycycline and primaquine are contraindicated. Emergency standby treatment instructions should be given to pregnant travelers for suspected malaria without access to medical care. Quinine and clindamycin are recommended treatments for pregnant women. Standby treatment should be started if malaria is suspected with a fever, and medical treatment should be sought as soon as possible. Quinine, Co-artem, or atovaquone-proguanil can be used as standby emergency treatment.

Gambian multigravidae. Prevention of anaemia in pregnancy using insecticide-treated bednets and sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in highly malarious areas. Impact of insecticide–treated bednets on malaria and anaemia in pregnancy. Randomised trial of alternative malaria chemoprophylaxis strategies among pregnant women. Community randomized controlled trial of insecticide–treated bednets for the prevention of malaria and anaemia among primigravid women. Insecticide-treated nets for preventing malaria in pregnancy. Use of insecticide-treated clothes for personal protection against malaria. Efficacy of permethrin-treated uniforms in combination with DEET topical repellent for protection. Challenges in the development of antimalarial drugs with causal prophylactic activity. Eradicating malaria. Use of botanicals during pregnancy and lactation. Avoidance of herbal medicines during pregnancy. Use of over-the-counter medications and herbal remedies in pregnancy. Comparative efficacy of insect repellents against mosquito bites. Problem pathogens: prevention of malaria in travellers. Quality control of active ingredients in antimalarials within Kenya and DR Congo. Manslaughter by fake artesunate in Asia. A collaborative epidemiological investigation into the criminal fake artesunate trade in South-East Asia. Atovaquone-proguanil versus chloroquine-proguanil for malaria prophylaxis in non-immune travellers. Opsonization of Anaplasma marginale mediated by bovine antibody. Safety of mefloquine and other antimalarial agents in the first trimester of pregnancy. The effects of inadvertent exposure of mefloquine chemoprophylaxis on pregnancy outcomes and infants. Post-marketing surveillance of prophylactic mefloquine use in pregnancy. Teratogenic agents and congenital malformations. Anemia, cataracts, and seizures in patient with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Malarone. Artesunate-atovaquone-proguanil rescue treatment of multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria in pregnancy. The safety of antimalarial drugs in pregnancy. Antifertility effects of biguanides. Effects of chloroquine and its enantiomers on the development of rat embryos in vitro. Chloroquine embryotoxicity in the post-implantation rat conceptus in vitro. Chloroquine accumulation and alterations in the rat conceptus in vitro. Plasmodium falciparum malaria mimicking autoimmune hemolytic anemia during pregnancy. The ototoxicity of chloroquine phosphate. Pregnancy outcome following first trimester exposure to chloroquine. Effects of Plasmodium vivax malaria in pregnancy. Malaria during pregnancy and infancy in an area of intense malaria transmission. Malaria treatment and prevention in pregnancy. Chloroquine prophylaxis against vivax malaria in pregnancy. Safety of chloroquine in chemosuppression of malaria during pregnancy. Mefloquine prophylaxis prevents malaria during pregnancy. Malaria parasite infection during pregnancy and at delivery in mother, placenta, and newborn. Effects of mefloquine treatment in pregnancy. Intermittent treatment for the prevention of malaria during pregnancy. A clinical trial of mefloquine on multi-resistant falciparum malaria in pregnant women. Randomized comparison of mefloquine-artesunate versus quinine in the treatment of multidrug-resistant falciparum malaria in pregnancy. Quinine and mefloquine in the treatment of multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria in pregnancy. Atovaquone-proguanil. The pharmacokinetics of atovaquone and proguanil in pregnant women with acute falciparum malaria. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of atovaquone and proguanil for the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in third-trimester pregnant women. Artesunate-atovaquone-proguanil versus quinine in treatment for uncomplicated falciparum malaria during pregnancy. Sensitivity of Plasmodium falciparum to reduced dose of mefloquine in pregnant women. Growth inhibition of prematures receiving tetracycline. Tetracyclines and the teeth. Congenital cataract due to tetracycline. Special groups: pregnant women, infants and young children. Use of Mefloquine During Breastfeeding.

Clinical guidelines are systematically developed statements to assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions. These recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment and must be evaluated with reference to individual patient needs and resources. The evidence used in this guideline was graded using a standardised scheme. Once adapted for local use, these guidelines are no longer representative of the RCOG.