The Management of Ovarian Cysts 
in Postmenopausal Women 
Green-top Guideline No. 34 
July 2016 
The Management of Ovarian Cysts in Postmenopausal
Women 
This is the second edition of this guideline, which was previously published in 2003, and reviewed in 
2010, under the title ‘Ovarian Cysts in Postmenopausal Women’.
Executive summary of recommendations 
Diagnosis and significance of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women 
How are ovarian cysts diagnosed in postmenopausal women and what initial investigations should be 
performed?
Clinicians should be aware of the different presentations and significance of ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women. [New 2016 ]
In postmenopausal women presenting with acute abdominal pain, the diagnosis of an ovarian cyst 
accident should be considered (e.g. torsion, rupture, haemorrhage). [New 2016 ]
It is recommended that ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women should be initially assessed by 
measuring serum cancer antigen 125 (CA125) level and transvaginal ultrasound scan (see sections 4.3.1 
and 4.4.1).
What is the role of history and clinical examination in postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts?
A thorough medical history should be taken from the woman, with specific attention to risk factors and 
symptoms suggestive of ovarian malignancy, and a family history of ovarian, bowel or breast cancer.
[New 2016 ] 
Where family history is significant, referral to the Regional Cancer Genetics service should be 
considered. [New 2016 ]
Appropriate tests should be carried out in any postmenopausal woman who has developed symptoms 
within the last 12 months that suggest irritable bowel syndrome, particularly in women over 50 years 
of age or those with a significant family history of ovarian, bowel or breast cancer. [New 2016 ]
A full physical examination of the woman is essential and should include body mass index, abdominal
examination to detect ascites and characterise any palpable mass, and vaginal examination. 
[New 2016 ]
What blood tests should be performed in postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts?
CA125 
CA125 should be the only serum tumour marker used for primary evaluation as it allows the Risk of
Malignancy Index (RMI) of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women to be calculated. [New 2016 ]
CA125 levels should not be used in isolation to determine if a cyst is malignant. While a very high value 
may assist in reaching the diagnosis, a normal value does not exclude ovarian cancer due to the 
nonspecific nature of the test. [New 2016 ] 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 2of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists P
P
A
D
C
C
B
BPOther tumour markers 
There is currently not enough evidence to support the routine clinical use of other tumour markers,
such as human epididymis protein 4 (HE4), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CDX2, cancer antigen 
72 -4 (CA72-4), cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), alphafetoprotein ( /H9251-FP), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or 
beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin ( /H9252-hCG), to assess the risk of malignancy in postmenopausal
ovarian cysts. [New 2016 ]
What imaging should be employed in the assessment of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women?
What is the role of ultrasound scanning in categorising cysts?
A transvaginal pelvic ultrasound is the single most effective way of evaluating ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women. [New 2016 ]
Transabdominal ultrasound should not be used in isolation. It should be used to provide supplementary 
information to transvaginal ultrasound particularly when an ovarian cyst is large or beyond the field 
of view of transvaginal ultrasound. [New 2016 ]
On transvaginal scanning, the morphological description and subjective assessment of the ultrasound 
features should be clearly documented to allow calculation of the risk of malignancy. [New 2016 ] 
Transvaginal ultrasound scans should be performed using multifrequency probes by trained clinicians 
with expertise in gynaecological imaging. [New 2016 ]
What is the role of Doppler and three-dimensional ultrasound studies?
Colour flow Doppler studies are not essential for the routine initial assessment of ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women.
Spectral and pulse Doppler indices should not be used routinely (resistive index, pulsatility index,
peak systolic velocity, time-averaged maximum velocity) to differentiate benign from malignant ovarian 
cysts, as their use has not been associated with significant improvement in diagnostic accuracy over 
morphologic assessment by ultrasound scan.
Three-dimensional ultrasound morphologic assessment does not appear to improve the diagnosis of
complex ovarian cysts and its routine use is not recommended in the assessment of postmenopausal
ovarian cysts. [New 2016 ]
What is the role of computed tomography (CT) scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and other 
cross-sectional imaging?
CT, MRI and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scans are not recommended for the initial
evaluation of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women.
CT scan 
CT should not be used routinely as the primary imaging tool for the initial assessment of ovarian cysts 
in postmenopausal women because of its low specificity, its limited assessment of ovarian internal
morphology and its use of ionising radiation. [New 2016 ] 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 3of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 B
A
A
C
C
C
B
B
B
BIf, from the clinical picture, ultrasonographic findings and tumour markers, malignant disease is 
suspected, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis should be arranged, with onward referral to a 
gynaecological oncology multidisciplinary team. [New 2016 ]
MRI
MRI should not be used routinely as the primary imaging tool for the initial assessment of ovarian 
cysts in postmenopausal women.
MRI should be used as the second-line imaging modality for the characterisation of indeterminate 
ovarian cysts when ultrasound is inconclusive. [New 2016 ]
PET-CT scan 
Current data do not support the routine use of PET-CT scanning in the initial assessment of
postmenopausal ovarian cysts. Data suggest there is no clear advantage over transvaginal
ultrasonography. 
Initial assessment and estimation of the risk of malignancy 
Which RMI should be used?
The ‘RMI I’ is the most utilised, widely available and validated effective triaging system for women 
with suspected ovarian cancer. [New 2016 ]
Although a RMI I score with a threshold of 200 (sensitivity 78%, specificity 87%) is recommended to 
predict the likelihood of ovarian cancer and to plan further management, some centres utilise an 
equally acceptable threshold of 250 with a lower sensitivity (70%) but higher specificity (90%).
[New 2016 ] 
CT of the abdomen and pelvis should be performed for all postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts 
who have a RMI I score greater than or equal to 200, with onward referral to a gynaecological oncology 
multidisciplinary team. [New 2016 ] 
What other scoring systems are available and when should they be used?
Other scoring systems are described. OVA1 ®and Risk of Malignancy Algorithm require specific assays 
which may make routine use impractical. The International Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) 
classification, which is based on specific ultrasound expertise, has comparable sensitivity and 
specificity to RMI and forms an alternative for those experienced in this technique. [New 2016 ] 
How do you manage ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women? 
Do all postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts require surgical evaluation and is there a role for 
conservative management?
Asymptomatic, simple, unilateral, unilocular ovarian cysts, less than 5 cm in diameter, have a low risk 
of malignancy. In the presence of normal serum CA125 levels, these cysts can be managed 
conservatively, with a repeat evaluation in 4–6 months. It is reasonable to discharge these women from 
follow-up after 1 year if the cyst remains unchanged or reduces in size, with normal CA125, taking into 
consideration a woman’s wishes and surgical fitness.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 4of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists B
B
B
C
A
A
B
A
DIf a woman is symptomatic, further surgical evaluation is necessary (see section 6.1.2). [New 2016 ] 
A woman with a suspicious or persistent complex adnexal mass needs surgical evaluation (see section 
6.1.2). [New 2016 ] 
What is the role of aspiration of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women?
Aspiration is not recommended for the management of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women except 
for the purposes of symptom control in women with advanced malignancy who are unfit to undergo 
surgery or further intervention.
Could postmenopausal ovarian cysts be managed by laparoscopy?
Women with a RMI I of less than 200 (i.e. at low risk of malignancy) are suitable for laparoscopic 
management. [New 2016 ]
Laparoscopic management of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women should be undertaken by a 
surgeon with suitable experience. 
Laparoscopic management of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women should comprise bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy rather than cystectomy.
Women undergoing laparoscopic salpingo-oophorectomy should be counselled preoperatively that a 
full staging laparotomy will be required if evidence of malignancy is revealed. [New 2016 ]
Where possible, the surgical specimen should be removed without intraperitoneal spillage in a 
laparoscopic retrieval bag via the umbilical port. This results in less postoperative pain and a quicker 
retrieval time than when using lateral ports of the same size. Transvaginal extraction of the specimen 
is also acceptable, if the surgeon has the available expertise. [New 2016 ]
When should laparotomy be undertaken?
All ovarian cysts that are suspicious of malignancy in a postmenopausal woman, as indicated by a 
RMI I greater than or equal to 200, CT findings, clinical assessment or findings at laparoscopy, 
require a full laparotomy and staging procedure.
If a malignancy is revealed during laparoscopy or from subsequent histology, it is recommended that 
the woman be referred to a cancer centre for further management.
Where should postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts be managed?
The appropriate location for the management should reflect the structure of cancer care in the UK.
[New 2016 ] 
Who should manage ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women?
While a general gynaecologist might manage women with a low risk of malignancy (RMI I less than 
200) in a general gynaecology or cancer unit, women who are at higher risk should be managed in a 
cancer centre by a trained gynaecological oncologist, unless the multidisciplinary team review is not 
supportive of a high probability of ovarian malignancy. [New 2016 ] 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 5of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 P
P
P
P
PB
B
C
B
D
D
DRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 6of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Postmenopausal ovarian cyst 
(cystic lesion 1 cm or more) 
Measure CA125 
TVS ± TAS 
Calculate RMI I
RMI I <200 
(low risk of malignancy) RMI I >200 
(increased risk of malignancy) 
Cysts fulfilling ALL of the 
following criteria:
asymptomatic, simple 
cyst, < 5 cm, unilocular,
unilateralCysts with ANY of the 
following features:
symptomatic, non-simple 
features, >5 cm, 
multilocular, bilateralCT scan (abdomen and pelvis) 
Referral for gynaecological
oncology MDT review 
Consider conservative 
management Consider surgery 
salpingo-oophorectomy 
(usually bilateral) 
Repeat assessment 
in 4 –6 months 
CA125, TVS ± TAS 
Persistent 
unchanged Resolve Change 
in features 
Discharge Consider 
intervention MDT review 
High likelihood of 
ovarian malignancy MDT review 
Low likelihood of 
ovarian malignancy 
Laparotomy 
Full staging procedure 
by a trained 
gynaecological 
oncologist Laparotomy 
Pelvic clearance (TAH + 
BSO + omentectomy 
+ peritoneal cytology) 
by a suitably trained 
gynaecologist 
Individualise 
treatment after 
discussion with 
woman Repeat 
assessment 
in another 
4–6 months CALCULATION OF THE RMI I
The RMI I combines three presurgical features. It is a product of the serum CA125 level 
(iu/ml); the menopausal status (M); and an ultrasound score (U) as follows:
RMI = U x M x CA125 
•The ultrasound result is scored 1 point for 
each of the following characteristics: multilocular cysts, solid areas, metastases,
ascites and bilateral lesions.
U = 0 (for an ultrasound score of 0) 
U = 1 (for an ultrasound score of 1) 
U = 3 (for an ultrasound score of 2 –5) 
•The menopausal status is scored as:
1 = premenopausal
3 = postmenopausal
This guideline is directed at postmenopausal women and therefore all will be 
allocated the same score of 3 for menopausal status.
•Serum CA125 is measured in iu/ml and can vary between zero and hundreds or even 
thousands of units.Abbreviations 
BSO bilateral salingo-oophorectomy 
CT computed tomography 
MDT multidisciplinary team 
RMIrisk of malignancy index 
TAH total abdominal hysterectomy 
TAS transabdominal scanning 
TVS transvaginal scanning 1.Purpose and scope 
Ovarian cysts are diagnosed with increasing frequency in postmenopausal women as more patients are 
undergoing imaging in connection with medical care. An ovarian cyst inevitably raises the question of its 
relevance to the woman’s symptoms and concerns for the possibility of ovarian cancer. The understandable 
fear of malignancy has driven many patients and their care providers to pursue further testing and surgical
investigation. 
The large numbers of ovarian cysts now being discovered by ultrasound and the low risk of malignancy 
of many of these cysts suggest that they need not all be managed surgically. The further investigation and 
management of these women has implications for morbidity, mortality, resource allocation and tertiary 
referral patterns.
This guideline aims to clarify when ovarian masses can be managed within a general gynaecological service 
or when referral to a specialist gynaecological oncology service is appropriate. This should help in 
determining whether surgical or expectant management is more appropriate. It should also help in 
avoiding unnecessary surgery or invasive or costly testing in the vast majority of patients in whom simple 
cysts are benign.
The management of confirmed ovarian malignancy is outside the remit of this guideline. Further 
information can be sought from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) clinical
guideline 122 1and the more recent Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) guideline no. 135.2
2.Introduction and background epidemiology 
Ovarian cysts are common in postmenopausal women. The exact prevalence is unknown given the limited 
amount of published data and the lack of established screening programmes for ovarian cancer.3,4 However,
studies 4–7 have estimated the incidence to be anywhere between 5% and 17%.
The greater use of ultrasound in gynaecological practice and the widespread generalised use of other 
imaging techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) mean 
that an increasing proportion of these cysts will be found incidentally. However, cystic lesions in the 
postmenopausal ovary should only be reported as ovarian cysts, and considered significant, if they are 
1cm or more in size. Cystic lesions smaller than 1 cm are clinically inconsequential and it is at the 
discretion of the reporting clinician whether or not to describe them in the imaging report as they do not
need follow-up.8,9 
The vast majority of these identified cysts are benign. Therefore, the underlying management rationale is 
to distinguish between those cysts that are benign and those that are potentially malignant. The morbidity 
and outcomes can be improved by:10–15 
Gusing conservative management where possible 
Gthe use of laparoscopic techniques where appropriate, thus avoiding laparotomy where possible 
Greferral to a gynaecological oncologist when appropriate.
3.Identification and assessment of evidence 
This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) Green-top Guidelines. MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane 
Library were searched. The search was restricted to articles published between 2001 and August 2015 in 
the English language. The databases were searched using all relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) 
terms including all subheadings and this was combined with a keyword search. Search terms included 
‘ovarian cysts’, ‘pelvic mass’, ‘adnexal mass’, ‘ovarian mass’, ‘ovarian neoplasms’ and ‘postmenopause’. The 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 7of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 National Guideline Clearinghouse, NICE Evidence Search, Trip and Guidelines International Network were 
also searched for relevant guidelines. 
Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. Areas lacking evidence are highlighted 
and annotated as ‘good practice points’. Further information about the assessment of evidence and the 
grading of recommendations may be found in Appendix I.
4.Diagnosis and significance of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women 
4.1 How are ovarian cysts diagnosed in postmenopausal women and what initial 
investigations should be performed? 
Clinicians should be aware of the different presentations and significance of ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women. 
In postmenopausal women presenting with acute abdominal pain, the diagnosis of an ovarian cyst 
accident should be considered (e.g. torsion, rupture, haemorrhage). 
It is recommended that ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women should be initially assessed by 
measuring serum cancer antigen 125 (CA125) level and transvaginal ultrasound scan (see sections 4.3.1 
and 4.4.1). 
Ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women could present in one of three ways. Some women 
present with acute pain (e.g. torsion or rupture of a cyst) requiring immediate evaluation. Other 
women have their ovarian cysts identified during gynaecological investigations (e.g. for 
postmenopausal bleeding). Finally, some ovarian cysts are found incidentally in postmenopausal
women undergoing investigations by other specialties for nongynaecological conditions (e.g.
cross-sectional imaging for general surgical or medical indications).16–18 
We did not identify any literature that would allow an estimate of the proportions of women with adnexal
masses presenting by each route. The proportions are likely to vary by setting (primary or secondary health 
care), clinical referral patterns, patients’ thresholds for seeking care, clinicians’ thresholds for diagnostic 
tests, and many other factors.
In order to triage women and guide further management, an estimate needs to be made as to 
the risk that the ovarian cyst is malignant. At present, the recommended tests are serum CA125 
measurement19–22 and pelvic ultrasound 8,23–27 (see sections 4.3.1 and 4.4.1).8,28–31 The anxiety 
and concerns for the possibility of ovarian cancer, and the women’s understandable fear of
malignancy should not be underestimated. The rationale behind and the limitations of any 
recommended test should be clearly and sensitively communicated to the woman, with an 
explanation of the results.32–49 
Where the initial imaging modality was a CT scan, unless this clearly indicated ovarian malignancy and 
widespread intra-abdominal disease, an ultrasound scan should be obtained in order to calculate the Risk 
of Malignancy Index (RMI).
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 8of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists P
P
A
Evidence 
level 4 
Evidence 
level 1+ 4.2 What is the role of history and clinical examination in postmenopausal women with 
ovarian cysts? 
A thorough medical history should be taken from the woman, with specific attention to risk factors and 
symptoms suggestive of ovarian malignancy, and a family history of ovarian, bowel or breast cancer.
Where family history is significant, referral to the Regional Cancer Genetics service should be 
considered. 
Appropriate tests should be carried out in any postmenopausal woman who has developed symptoms 
within the last 12 months that suggest irritable bowel syndrome, particularly in women over 50 years 
of age or those with a significant family history of ovarian, bowel or breast cancer.
A full physical examination of the woman is essential and should include body mass index (BMI),
abdominal examination to detect ascites and characterise any palpable mass, and vaginal examination. 
Family history can be used to define women who are at increased risk of ovarian cancer. A woman is 
defined as being at high risk of ovarian cancer if she has a first-degree relative (mother, father, sister, brother,
daughter or son) affected by cancer within a family with: 
Gtwo or more individuals with ovarian cancer, who are first-degree relatives of each other 
Gone individual with ovarian cancer at any age and one with breast cancer diagnosed under age 
50 years who are first-degree relatives of each other 
Gone relative with ovarian cancer at any age and two with breast cancer diagnosed under age 60 years 
who are connected by first-degree relationships 
Gthree or more family members with colon cancer, or two with colon cancer and one with stomach,
ovarian, endometrial, urinary tract or small bowel cancer in two generations. One of these cancers must
be diagnosed under age 50 years and affected relatives should be first-degree relatives of each other 
Gone individual with both breast and ovarian cancer.
A woman is also considered at increased risk of ovarian cancer if she is a known carrier of
relevant cancer gene mutations (e.g. BRCA1 , BRCA2 , mismatch repair genes), she is an untested 
first-degree relative of an individual with a relevant cancer gene mutation, or she is an untested 
second-degree relative, through an unaffected man, of an individual with a relevant cancer gene 
mutation.2
Where family history is significant, referring the woman to the Regional Cancer Genetics service should 
be considered.
Ovarian cancer often presents with vague abdominal symptoms that are widely experienced 
among the general population (persistent abdominal distension, feeling full and/or loss of
appetite, pelvic or abdominal pain, increased urinary urgency and/or frequency). Therefore, the 
challenge is to make the correct diagnosis as early as possible despite the nonspecific nature of
symptoms and signs, and various indices have been developed to triage women for further 
investigations and correlate symptoms to the likelihood of ovarian cancer (e.g. Goff symptom 
index).50,51 These indices are beyond the scope of this guideline. However, the symptoms 
described have greater significance in postmenopausal women, particularly over 50 years of
age, if experienced persistently or on a frequent basis, or in those with a significant family history 
(two or more cases of ovarian or breast cancer diagnosed at an early age in first-degree 
relatives).16–18,52 
Although clinical examination has poor sensitivity in the detection of ovarian masses 
(15–51%),53 its importance lies in the evaluation of any palpable mass for tenderness, mobility,
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 9of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 P
C
C
Evidence 
level 2+ 
Evidence 
level 2+ Dnodularity and ascites. Pelvic examinations, including a rectal exam, even under anaesthesia,
have shown limited ability to identify an adnexal mass, especially with increasing patient BMI
greater than 30. Nevertheless, features most consistently associated with an adnexal malignancy 
include a mass that is irregular, has a solid consistency, is fixed, nodular, or bilateral, or is 
associated with ascites. Postmenopausal women should be urgently referred to specialist
services if physical examination identifies ascites and/or a pelvic or abdominal mass.53–55 
4.3 What blood tests should be performed in postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts? 
4.3.1 CA125 
CA125 should be the only serum tumour marker used for primary evaluation as it allows the RMI of
ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women to be calculated.
CA125 levels should not be used in isolation to determine if a cyst is malignant. While a very high value 
may assist in reaching the diagnosis, a normal value does not exclude ovarian cancer due to the 
nonspecific nature of the test.
CA125 was first described by Bast in 1981.19 CA125 is widely distributed in adult tissues. A 
routinely used cut-off value of 35 iu/ml is based upon the distribution of values in 99% of 888 
healthy men and women.20 
The use of serum CA125 is well established, being raised in over 80% of epithelial ovarian cancer 
cases, but not in most primary mucinous ovarian cancers.20,56–59 If a cut-off of 30 iu/ml is used,
the test has a sensitivity of 81% and specificity of 75%.28 
However, CA125 values can show wide variation, with lower levels (20 iu/ml) found in healthy 
postmenopausal women.21,22,33,34 
Non-malignant gynaecological conditions such as pelvic inflammatory disease, fibroids, acute 
events in benign cysts (e.g. torsion or haemorrhage) and endometriosis can all result in an 
increased CA125 level.35,36 Higher values are reported in Caucasian compared with African or 
Asian women.37 
Caffeine intake, hysterectomy and smoking have been associated with lower CA125 levels in 
some reports.35,37 
Numerous benign nongynaecological conditions that cause peritoneal irritation (tuberculosis,
cirrhosis, ascites, hepatitis, pancreatitis, peritonitis, pleuritis) and other primary tumours that
metastasise to the peritoneum (breast, pancreas, lung, and colon cancer) can also cause an 
elevated CA125.38,39 
CA125 alone has a pooled sensitivity and specificity of 78% for differentiating benign from 
malignant adnexal masses, with higher values noted in postmenopausal women.30 
4.3.2 Ot her tumour markers 
There is currently not enough evidence to support the routine clinical use of other tumour markers,
such as human epididymis protein 4 (HE4), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CDX2, cancer antigen 72-4 
(CA72-4), cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), alphafetoprotein ( /H9251-FP), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or 
beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin ( /H9252-hCG), to assess the risk of malignancy in postmenopausal
ovarian cysts. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 10 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists B
B
Evidence 
level 1+ 
Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
Evidence 
level 1 –
Evidence 
level 2+ 
BEvidence 
level 2+ HE4 
HE4 is a glycoprotein found in epididymal epithelium. Increased serum HE4 levels and 
expression of the HE4 (WFDC2 ) gene occurs in ovarian cancer, as well as in lung, pancreas,
breast, bladder/ureteral transitional cell and endometrial cancers.60–63 
HE4 is not increased in endometriosis and has fewer false-positive results with benign disease 
compared with CA125.63–65 
There are some preliminary data suggesting that HE4 is more sensitive and specific than serum 
CA125 for the diagnosis of ovarian cancer.66,67 A retrospective report66 (67 invasive and 166 
benign masses) found HE4 to have a higher sensitivity (73%) compared with CA125 (43.3%) for 
95% specificity in distinguishing between benign and malignant ovarian masses, and addition 
of HE4 to CA125 further improved sensitivity to 76.4%.
It is estimated that using HE4 instead of serum CA125 would identify an additional seven patients 
with cancer, with 81 fewer false-positives (assuming a 10% prevalence of undiagnosed ovarian 
cancer in this population) for every 1000 women referred for diagnosis of a pelvic mass.68 
There is some evidence to suggest that the combination of HE4 and serum CA125 is more 
specific but less sensitive than either marker in isolation. A prospective study 69 of 531 patients 
evaluated separate logistic regression algorithms for premenopausal and postmenopausal
women incorporating measurement of serum CA125 and HE4 levels for the differential
diagnosis of adnexal masses. The sensitivity and specificity in the postmenopausal group were 
92.3% (95% CI 85.9–96.4) and 75% (95% CI 66.9–81.4) respectively. 
However, HE4 is not in routine clinical use and the data on HE4 are not substantial enough to enable it to 
be recommended routinely instead of, or in addition to, serum CA125 at the time of writing of this 
guideline. 
CEA, CDX2, CA72-4, CA19-9, /H9251-FP , LDH and /H9252-hCG 
There is not enough evidence to suggest that panels including multiple tumour markers offer 
any further advantage in the initial assessment of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women. All
of these markers show low sensitivity and wide variation in specificity when used in isolation 
or in combination with CA125. The routine use of any of these tumour markers in the initial
clinical setting is not recommended.30,70–72 
4.4 What imaging should be employed in the assessment of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal 
women? 
4.4.1 What is the role of ultrasound scanning in categorising cysts? 
A transvaginal pelvic ultrasound is the single most effective way of evaluating ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women.
Transabdominal ultrasound should not be used in isolation. It should be used to provide supplementary 
information to transvaginal ultrasound particularly when an ovarian cyst is large or beyond the field 
of view of transvaginal ultrasound.
On transvaginal scanning, the morphological description and subjective assessment of the ultrasound 
features should be clearly documented to allow calculation of the risk of malignancy.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 11 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
A
A
CEvidence 
level 2++ Transvaginal ultrasound scans should be performed using multifrequency probes by trained clinicians 
with expertise in gynaecological imaging.
On transvaginal ultrasound, a ‘simple cyst’ is associated with five features: 
1.round or oval shape 
2.thin or imperceptible wall
3.posterior acoustic enhancement
4.anechoic fluid, and 
5.absence of septations or nodules.
Characterisation of an adnexal mass as a simple cyst is important for management. Ultrasound 
identification of a simple cyst establishes a benign process in 95–99% of postmenopausal
women.4,24,25 
An ovarian cyst is defined as complex in the presence of one or more features:
Gcomplete septation (i.e. multilocular cyst) 
Gsolid nodules 
Gpapillary projections.
These are worrying features associated with an increased incidence of malignancy (8% for multilocular and 
36–39% for lesions with solid elements) .73 A detailed ovarian cyst classification system has been developed 
by the consensus group from the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) group.74 It is worth noting 
that this group included in their definition of a ‘unilocular cyst’, minor inner abnormalities such as an 
incomplete septum or less than 3 mm papilla. This is contrary to other North American studies including 
the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial.5,75,76 
Transabdominal and transvaginal scanning are complementary and in some facilities patients are 
scanned using both techniques. Most of the literature regarding ultrasound assessment of
postmenopausal ovarian cysts refers to the use of transvaginal ultrasound. Because of the 
improved resolution of transvaginal ultrasound, it should be used whenever possible and is 
recommended as the first-line imaging modality for assessing ovarian cysts in postmenopausal
women. When an ovarian cyst is large or beyond the field of view of transvaginal sonography,
transabdominal ultrasound is recommended.40,41 
In the UK, gynaecological pelvic ultrasound is performed by trained clinicians of various clinical
backgrounds: gynaecologists, radiologists and sonographers. Pelvic ultrasound scanning is part of the RCOG 
curriculum in the ‘Intermediate ultrasound in gynaecology’ module and in radiology training curricula. In 
the UK, trained sonographers should have a Postgraduate Certificate or Diploma in Medical Ultrasound (or 
the older Diploma of Medical Ultrasound awarded by the College of Radiographers). 
Subjective assessment by ultrasound remains valuable in discriminating malignant from benign 
ovarian masses. ‘Pattern recognition’ of specific ultrasound findings with more complex scoring 
systems can produce sensitivity and specificity equivalent to logistic regression models,
especially when performed by more experienced clinicians specialising in gynaecological
imaging. This could potentially reduce the number of ‘unnecessary’ surgical interventions.
However, this evidence derives from centres with particular expertise in this field and might not
be universally achievable in all clinical settings with variable expertise.26,27,42 
A study 23 has shown that transvaginal ultrasound may help characterise benign and malignant
cysts, with a sensitivity of 89% and a specificity of 73% when using a morphology index. The 
findings, however, should be correlated with the history and laboratory tests. A more recent
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 12 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Evidence 
level 1+ 
Evidence 
level 2 –
Evidence 
level 2++ Evidence 
level 1 –Cstudy 43 has shown that use of a more specific Gynaecologic Imaging Reporting and Data System 
(GI-RADS) scoring may increase the sensitivity to 99.1% and specificity to 85.9%. 
In postmenopausal women, simple cysts are seen with a frequency of 5–17% and are not related 
to hormonal therapy or time since onset of menopause, although some have observed 
decreasing frequency with time after the onset of menopause.4–7 
In a 2-year follow-up study 5of asymptomatic postmenopausal women with simple cysts smaller 
than 5 cm, these cysts were shown to disappear (53%), remain static (28%), enlarge (11%),
decrease (3%) or fluctuate in size (6%). Evidence from larger screening studies 8,24,31,45 found a 
higher rate of resolution of unilocular cysts at 70%, with only complex cysts having an increased 
risk of malignancy. Adnexal cysts 5 cm or smaller in postmenopausal women are rarely 
malignant. 
Postmenopausal ovarian cysts with a solid component include benign ovarian tumours such as 
some teratomas, cystadenomas, cystadenofibromas, malignant ovarian tumours (primary and 
metastatic), or a torted ovary. Although ultrasound may not unequivocally distinguish malignant
from benign cysts, it provides useful information. Various authors 46–49 have devised morphologic 
scoring systems for pelvic masses to predict ovarian malignancy based on size, internal borders,
and the presence of septa, papillary projections, and echogenicity. The presence of mural
nodules or septations (especially with vascular flow) suggests that the ovarian cyst is malignant.
However, it is important to note that no single ultrasound finding differentiates categorically 
between benign and malignant ovarian masses. 
4.4.2 What is the role of Doppler and three-dimensional ultrasound studies? 
Colour flow Doppler studies are not essential for the routine initial assessment of ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women.
Spectral and pulse Doppler indices should not be used routinely (resistive index, pulsatility index,
peak systolic velocity, time-averaged maximum velocity) to differentiate benign from malignant ovarian 
cysts, as their use has not been associated with significant improvement in diagnostic accuracy over 
morphologic assessment by ultrasound scan.
Three-dimensional ultrasound morphologic assessment does not appear to improve the diagnosis of
complex ovarian cysts and its routine use is not recommended in the assessment of postmenopausal
ovarian cysts. 
Malignant masses generally demonstrate neovascularity, with abnormal branching patterns or 
vessel morphology. These neovessels have lower resistance flow than native ovarian vessels.
Hence, sonographic evaluation using a combination of morphologic assessment and colour 
flow or power Doppler imaging to detect abnormal blood flow has been proposed to assess 
suspicious ovarian cysts for their risk of malignancy in some studies.77–80 
However, other studies 81–84 have not consistently confirmed this. In particular, they found that
any small decrease in the false-positive rate (i.e. increased specificity) over ultrasonography was 
at the cost of a large drop in sensitivity (i.e. increased false-negative rates). 
Studies 78,79,85 evaluating the use of spectral and pulse Doppler indices (i.e. resistive index,
pulsatility index, peak systolic velocity, time-averaged maximum velocity) have generally not
demonstrated any significant improvement in diagnostic accuracy over morphologic assessment
by ultrasound scan. Therefore, the value of spectral Doppler analysis is very limited. 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 13 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 Evidence 
level 2 –
Evidence 
level 2+ 
C
B
B
Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
Evidence 
level 2++ Evidence 
level 2++ However, the combined use of transvaginal ultrasound with power Doppler flow mapping has 
been shown in the research setting to improve sensitivity and specificity compared with the use 
of transvaginal ultrasound alone, particularly in complex cases.86–91 Such tests are not universally 
available and cannot be recommended for the routine initial assessment of ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women. 
There is currently insufficient evidence to support the use of three-dimensional ultrasound 
scans in the assessment of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women. The use of
three-dimensional power Doppler may contribute to the differentiation between benign and 
malignant masses because it improves detection of central blood vessels in papillary projections 
or solid areas, as discussed earlier.86–88,92,93 
4.4.3 What is the role of CT scan, MRI and other cross-sectional imaging? 
CT, MRI and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scans are not recommended for the initial
evaluation of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women. 
There is no clear consensus regarding the need for further imaging beyond transvaginal
ultrasound in the presence of apparently benign disease. At the present time, the routine use of
CT and MRI for the initial assessment of postmenopausal ovarian cysts does not improve the 
sensitivity or specificity obtained by transvaginal sonography in the differentiation between 
benign and malignant cysts. The lack of clear evidence of benefit, the relative expense, the 
resource limitations of these modalities, and the delay in referral and surgery that can result,
mean that their initial routine use cannot yet be recommended. However, these additional
imaging modalities may have a place in the evaluation of more complex lesions or in the setting 
of suspected metastatic spread.94,95 
4.4.3.1 CT scan 
CT should not be used routinely as the primary imaging tool for the initial assessment of ovarian cysts 
in postmenopausal women because of its low specificity, its limited assessment of ovarian internal
morphology and its use of ionising radiation.
If, from the clinical picture, ultrasonographic findings and tumour markers, malignant disease is 
suspected, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis should be arranged, with onward referral to a 
gynaecological oncology multidisciplinary team.
Currently, the best use of CT imaging is not to detect and characterise pelvic masses but to 
evaluate the abdomen for metastases when a malignant cyst is suspected based on transvaginal
ultrasound images, examination and serum markers. CT is useful in selected cases when a 
nongynaecologic origin of an adnexal cyst is suspected, e.g. other nongynaecological
retroperitoneal cystic masses. A CT scan can detect omental metastases, peritoneal implants,
pelvic or para-aortic lymph node enlargement, hepatic metastases, obstructive uropathy and 
possibly an alternate primary cancer site, including pancreas or colon.96–98 
Hence, there is little reason presently to obtain a CT scan for the initial assessment of
postmenopausal ovarian cysts other than for cancer staging if the cyst is thought to be 
malignant. Then, CT scan may be indicated to stage a suspected primary ovarian cancer or to 
identify the primary intra-abdominal cancer (e.g. colon, gastric, pancreatic) with suspected 
ovarian metastases.96–98 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 14 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Evidence 
level 2++ 
B
Evidence 
level 2++ 
B
B
Evidence 
level 2++ 4.4.3.2 MRI 
MRI should not be used routinely as the primary imaging tool for the initial assessment of ovarian 
cysts in postmenopausal women. 
MRI should be used as the second-line imaging modality for the characterisation of indeterminate 
ovarian cysts when ultrasound is inconclusive. 
While assessment with MRI can improve overall sensitivity and specificity of ovarian cyst
characterisation, there are inherent limitations to the more widespread use of MRI, which 
preclude its routine use over transvaginal ultrasonography. These are both institutional (e.g. high 
cost, more restricted availability) and patient-related restrictions; MRI is contraindicated in 
certain patients (e.g. cardiac pacemaker, cochlear implants) and can have reduced acceptance 
by some patients (e.g. those with claustrophobia).94,96,99–110 
MRI should be considered for characterisation of indeterminate adnexal cysts, with 
identification of enhancing vegetations in cystic masses and the presence of ascites being the 
best indicators of malignancy. Further characterisation by MRI is also of value where an 
alternative diagnosis to an ovarian neoplasm is thought more likely or if, anatomically, 
the ovarian origin of a pelvic cyst is in doubt.96–98 
MRI is a valuable problem-solving tool when ultrasound is inconclusive or limited due to body habitus. 
MRI of the sonographically indeterminate adnexal mass can be used to guide patient care and reduce 
the costs of further management. 
Women who clinically have a low risk of malignancy but have complex lesions on ultrasound 
scan are the ones who will most likely benefit from contrast-enhanced MRI. A meta-analysis,111 
which compared the incremental value of a second test to evaluate an indeterminate adnexal
mass on ultrasound, found that contrast-enhanced MRI provided a greater certainty of ovarian 
cancer diagnosis compared with CT, Doppler ultrasound or MRI without contrast. The 
documented major contribution of MRI in adnexal mass evaluation is its specificity as it can 
provide a confident diagnosis of many benign adnexal lesions.94,96,98–100,111–113 
Functional MR sequences such as diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), together with its 
quantitative derivative (an apparent diffusion coefficient – or ADC – map) and dynamic contrast
enhanced imaging can be added to conventional sequences. DWI adds information regarding 
motion of water molecules within various tissues and can aid differentiation between benign 
and malignant pathology, with an improved accuracy rate of 95% with the combined technique 
in some hands. However, its ability to definitively differentiate benign from malignant adnexal
masses still remains controversial, as many benign adnexal lesions can also have marked 
restricted diffusion. It also has more variable results in predominantly cystic lesions with small
solid components/low cellularity or more well-differentiated tumours with lower cell turnover.
Dynamic contrast enhanced imaging is still mostly limited to research studies and not yet
applicable to widespread clinical usage in ovarian cyst characterisation.99–110 
4.4.3.3 PET-CT scan 
Current data do not support the routine use of PET-CT scanning in the initial assessment of
postmenopausal ovarian cysts. Data suggest there is no clear advantage over transvaginal
ultrasonography. 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 15 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 B
B
Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 2++ 
CPET-CT scanning is currently not recommended in the assessment of ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women. It is equally not advocated in the diagnosis or initial staging of
suspected ovarian cancer. One study 114 showed the sensitivity and specificity of PET-CT in 
evaluating suspicious ovarian cysts in asymptomatic females at only 58% and 76% respectively.
However, PET-CT may play a role in women with a known history of malignancy who present
for evaluation of an adnexal mass to identify other sites of disease, but this is outwith the scope 
of this guideline.114–116 
5.Initial assessment and estimation of the risk of malignancy 
5.1 Which RMI should be used? 
The ‘RMI I’ is the most utilised, widely available and validated effective triaging system for women 
with suspected ovarian cancer.
Although a RMI I score with a threshold of 200 (sensitivity 78%, specificity 87%) is recommended to 
predict the likelihood of ovarian cancer and to plan further management, some centres utilise an 
equally acceptable threshold of 250 with a lower sensitivity (70%) but higher specificity (90%).
CT of the abdomen and pelvis should be performed for all postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts 
who have a RMI I score greater than or equal to 200, with onward referral to a gynaecological oncology 
multidisciplinary team. 
It is recommended that a ‘risk of malignancy index’ should be used to guide the management
of postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts, as an effective way of triaging these women into 
those who are at low or high risk of malignancy, and who hence may be managed by a general
gynaecologist, or in a cancer unit or cancer centre.117,118 
The original RMI I was first described by Jacobs et al. in 1990.28 Modifications have since been 
attempted into RMI II,117 RMI III118 and RMI IV,119 but with no clinical benefit. The original 
RMI I remains the most utilised, widely available and validated effective scoring system.
5.1.1 Calculation of the RMI I 
The RMI I combines three presurgical features. It is a product of the serum CA125 level (iu/ml); the 
menopausal status (M); and an ultrasound score (U) as follows: RMI = U × M × CA125.
GThe ultrasound result is scored 1 point for each of the following characteristics: multilocular cysts,
solid areas, metastases, ascites and bilateral lesions. U = 0 (for an ultrasound score of 0), U = 1 (for an 
ultrasound score of 1), U = 3 (for an ultrasound score of 2–5). 
GThe menopausal status is scored as 1 = premenopausal and 3 = postmenopausal. This guideline is 
directed at postmenopausal women and therefore all will be allocated the same score of 3 for 
menopausal status. 
GSerum CA125 is measured in iu/ml and can vary between zero and hundreds or even thousands of
units.
A systematic review 120 of diagnostic studies concluded that the RMI I was the most effective for 
women with suspected ovarian malignancy. The pooled sensitivity and specificity in the 
prediction of ovarian malignancies was 78% (95% CI 71–85%) and 87% (95% CI 83–91%) 
respectively for a RMI I cut-off of 200.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 16 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Evidence 
level 2+ 
A
A
B
Evidence 
level 1+ 
Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 1++ Although a RMI threshold of 200 is recommended, benign conditions may cause elevation of the RMI
score and early malignancy may not. Those women who are at low risk of malignancy also need to be 
triaged into those where the risk of malignancy is sufficiently low to allow conservative management and 
those who still require intervention of some form. 
When ovarian malignancy is considered likely based on clinical assessment and a RMI I score 
greater than or equal to the threshold of 200, cross-sectional imaging in secondary care, in the 
form of a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, is indicated to help assess the extent of disease 
and to help exclude alternative diagnoses, with onward referral to a gynaecological oncology 
multidisciplinary team. Clinical acumen has to be used to decide on further appropriate 
management of the woman, including the location of prospective surgery.121 
It should be appreciated, however, that no currently available tests are perfect, offering 100% 
specificity and sensitivity. It is also difficult to correlate a particular RMI I score to an absolute 
risk of malignancy. However, women could be counselled that RMI scores of less than 25,
between 25 and 250, and greater than 250 carry a risk of cancer of less than 3%, around 20%,
and around 75% respectively, based on historical validation data.122 
The NICE guideline 1on ovarian cancer recommends that the RMI I score should be calculated 
for women with suspected ovarian malignancy and used to guide the woman’s management. The 
NICE Guideline Development Group 68 felt that a RMI I cut-off of 250 should be used because 
‘this would ensure access to specialist centres while not overburdening them with benign 
disease (and the additional costs associated with this)’. Using a cut-off point of 250, a sensitivity 
of 70% and specificity of 90% can be achieved. Thus, the great majority of women with ovarian 
cancer will be dealt with by gynaecological oncologists in cancer centres, with only a small
number of referrals of women with benign conditions. As most of the cysts are likely to be 
benign, gynaecologists in units at a more local level will perform the majority of surgery. 
The more recent SIGN guideline 2on the management of epithelial ovarian cancer endorsed 
the use of the originally described cut-off value of 200 to guide further management. The pooled 
sensitivity and specificity in the prediction of ovarian malignancies was 78% and 87% 
respectively for a RMI I score of 200. It was felt that the value of the cut-off score used affected 
the sensitivity of RMI I relative to the specificity; a low cut-off score (i.e. 200) could mean that
some women who did not have ovarian cancer would be unnecessarily referred for specialist
consultation and treatment in a gynaecological oncology setting. Although most ovarian cysts 
in postmenopausal women will be benign, a higher cut-off score (i.e. 250) could mean that
some women who did have ovarian cancer would not be identified nor referred for specialist
treatment under a gynaecological oncologist’s care, possibly compromising their outcomes. 
In light of the existing best evidence and literature, a RMI I cut-off value of 200 to initiate a CT scan and 
onward referral to a gynaecological oncology multidisciplinary team meeting for further evaluation should 
be recommended. Although a RMI cut-off of 200 has been used for the production of this guideline and 
to produce the clinical pathways and guidance, the RCOG acknowledge the fact that some centres will use 
a different cut-off of 250 in their local protocols from an organisational point of view and in agreement
with national guidelines, and recognise the pros and cons of each cut-off used. 
5.2 What other scoring systems are available and when should they be used? 
Other scoring systems are described. OVA1 ®and Risk of Malignancy Algorithm (ROMA) require specific 
assays which may make routine use impractical. The IOTA classification, which is based on specific 
ultrasound expertise, has comparable sensitivity and specificity to RMI and forms an alternative for 
those experienced in this technique. 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 17 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 Evidence 
level 1+ 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
Evidence 
level 1++ 
A5.2.1 IOTA group simple ultrasound rules and logistic regression model LR2 
Simple ultrasound rules were derived from the IOTA group data to help classify masses as benign 
(B-rules) or malignant (M-rules). Using these morphological rules, the reported sensitivity was 
95% and the specificity was 91%, with a positive likelihood ratio of 10.37 and a negative 
likelihood ratio of 0.06. Women with an ovarian mass with any of the M-rules ultrasound findings 
should be referred to a gynaecological oncology service. If the ovarian cysts are not clearly 
classifiable from these rules, further investigation by a specialist in gynaecological ultrasound 
is appropriate. Triaging women using the IOTA logistic regression model LR2 (a six-variable 
prediction model) has been proposed as an alternative to RMI-based protocols, with the 
suggestion that the IOTA protocol may avoid major surgery for more women with benign cysts,
while still appropriately referring more women with a malignant cyst to a gynaecological
oncologist. Data about the use of LR2 are still emerging and it cannot be recommended for 
routine clinical use as yet.74,123–129 
Table 1.IOTA group simple ultrasound rules 124 
B-rules M-rules 
Unilocular cysts Irregular solid tumour 
Presence of solid components where the largest Ascites 
solid component <7 mm 
Presence of acoustic shadowing At least four papillary structures 
Smooth multilocular tumour with largest Irregular multilocular solid tumour with largest diameter 
diameter <100 mm ≥ 100 mm 
No blood flow on colour Doppler Prominent blood flow on colour Doppler 
5.2.2 ROMA 
ROMA is a quantitative test using CA125, HE4 concentration and menopausal status to calculate 
the risk of ovarian cancer. A numerical score is obtained based on an algorithmic equation 
calculation, with a cut-off value of 2.27 representing a high risk of malignancy. ROMA must be 
interpreted in conjunction with an independent clinical and radiological assessment and is 
not intended to be a screening or a standalone diagnostic assay. ROMA calculation requires the 
use of special assays for CA125 and HE4. Overall, it has a sensitivity of 89% and a specificity 
of 75%. Although ROMA is promising for distinguishing epithelial ovarian cancer from benign 
ovarian cysts, HE4 is not in routine clinical use and the data on HE4 are not substantial enough 
to recommend its routine use instead of, or in addition to, serum CA125 at the time of writing 
of this guideline. Thus, ROMA utilisation in routine clinical setting requires further 
evaluation.69,130–133 
5.2.3 OVA1 ®
OVA1 ®(Vermillion, Inc., Austin, Texas) is a quantitative assay measuring five serum proteins 
(CA125, transthyretin [prealbumin], apolipoprotein A1, beta-2-microglobulin and transferrin) 
and combining them into a numerical score. It requires the use of specific assays and special
software (OvaCalc ®) to enter the results manually. Using a special algorithm, a numerical score 
is calculated (range 0.0–10.0), with a value higher than 4.4 being indicative of a high risk of
malignancy in postmenopausal women.Although OVA1 ®has a high sensitivity, it shows a lower 
specificity and positive predictive value than the RMI.134–137 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 18 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Evidence 
level 1+ 
Evidence 
level 1+ 
Evidence 
level 1+ 6.How do you manage ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women? 
6.1 What are the different management options and eligibility criteria? 
The clinician must try to differentiate cysts that are most likely to be benign from those that are likely to 
be malignant based on the clinical assessment and RMI. A decision can then be made regarding the most
appropriate management options. Cysts with a low likelihood of malignancy can often be managed 
conservatively. Selected cases with a RMI of less than 200 can be managed surgically by laparoscopic 
salpingo-oophorectomy after discussion with the patient. Conversely, those cysts that are likely to be 
malignant are best managed with further imaging in the form of a CT scan and referral to a gynaecological
oncologist.
6.1.1 Do all postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts require surgical evaluation and is 
there a role for conservative management? 
Asymptomatic, simple, unilateral, unilocular ovarian cysts, less than 5 cm in diameter, have a low risk 
of malignancy. In the presence of normal serum CA125 levels, these cysts can be managed 
conservatively, with a repeat evaluation in 4–6 months. It is reasonable to discharge these women from 
follow-up after 1 year if the cyst remains unchanged or reduces in size, with normal CA125, taking into 
consideration a woman’s wishes and surgical fitness. 
If a woman is symptomatic, further surgical evaluation is necessary (see section 6.1.2). 
A woman with a suspicious or persistent complex adnexal mass needs surgical evaluation (see section 
6.1.2). 
Clinicians should discuss the pros and cons of conservative versus surgical management in women at low 
risk of malignancy (RMI I less than 200).
Numerous studies 45,76,84,138–149 have looked at the risk of malignancy in ovarian cysts, comparing 
ultrasound morphology with either histology at subsequent surgery or by close follow-up of
those women managed conservatively. The risk of malignancy in these studies of simple cysts 
that are less than 5 cm, unilateral, unilocular and echo-free with no solid parts or papillary 
formations is less than 1%. In addition, a study 45 reported that more than 50% of these simple 
cysts might resolve spontaneously within 3 months.
Of a cohort of 15 735 postmenopausal women from the intervention arm of the PLCO Cancer 
Screening Trial5through 4 years of transvaginal ultrasound screening, simple cysts were seen in 
14% of women the first time that their ovaries were visualised. The 1-year incidence of new 
simple cysts was 8%. Among ovaries with one simple cyst at the first screen, 54% retained one 
simple cyst and 32% had no cyst 1 year later. Simple cysts did not increase the risk of subsequent
invasive ovarian cancer. Most cysts appeared stable or resolved by the next annual examination. 
Thus, it is reasonable to manage these simple cysts conservatively: with a follow-up assessment
of serum CA125 and a repeat ultrasound scan. The ideal frequency of repeat imaging is yet to 
be determined. A reasonable proposed interval is 4–6 months. This, of course, depends upon the 
views and symptoms of the woman, her surgical fitness and on the clinical assessment. It is 
reasonable to discharge these women from follow-up after 1 year if the cyst remains unchanged 
or reduces in size, with normal CA125.111,150,151 
Some women requiring surgical intervention are at substantial risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality.
In such instances, repeat imaging often is safer than immediate operative intervention, although the 
frequency of repeat imaging has not been determined.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 19 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 PD
P
Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 2 –6.1.2 What are the available surgical options? 
Women who do not fit the criteria for conservative management should be offered surgical treatment in 
the most suitable location and set-up and by the most suitable surgeon as determined by the RMI. Initial
surgical management options that have been assessed include imaging-guided aspiration of the cyst,
laparoscopy and laparotomy.
6.1.2.1 What is the role of aspiration of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women? 
Aspiration is not recommended for the management of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women except 
for the purposes of symptom control in women with advanced malignancy who are unfit to undergo 
surgery or further intervention. 
Aspiration of an ovarian cyst in a postmenopausal woman is not recommended. Firstly,
diagnostic cytological examination of ovarian cyst fluid is poor at distinguishing between benign 
and malignant tumours, with sensitivities in most studies of around 25%.152–157 
In addition, even when a benign cyst is aspirated, the procedure is often not therapeutic.
Approximately 25% of cysts in postmenopausal women will recur within 1 year of the 
procedure.158 
Finally, aspiration of a malignant cyst may induce spillage and seeding of cancer cells into the 
peritoneal cavity, thereby adversely affecting the stage and prognosis. There have been many 
cases of aspirated malignant masses recurring along the needle track through which the 
aspiration was done. Furthermore, there is strong evidence that spillage from a malignant cyst
has an unfavourable impact on overall and disease-free survival of stage I cancer patients 
compared with patients from whom tumours have been removed intact.159–163 
Aspiration, therefore, has no role in the management of asymptomatic ovarian cysts in 
postmenopausal women. An exception exists for those symptomatic women who are medically 
unfit to undergo surgery or further intervention. In these women, aspiration will provide relief
of their symptoms, albeit temporarily.164,165 
6.1.2.2 Could postmenopausal ovarian cysts be managed by laparoscopy? 
Women with a RMI I of less than 200 (i.e. at low risk of malignancy) are suitable for laparoscopic 
management. 
Laparoscopic management of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women should be undertaken by a 
surgeon with suitable experience. 
Laparoscopic management of ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women should comprise bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy rather than cystectomy. 
Women undergoing laparoscopic salpingo-oophorectomy should be counselled preoperatively that a 
full staging laparotomy will be required if evidence of malignancy is revealed. 
Where possible, the surgical specimen should be removed without intraperitoneal spillage in a 
laparoscopic retrieval bag via the umbilical port. This results in less postoperative pain and a quicker 
retrieval time than when using lateral ports of the same size. Transvaginal extraction of the specimen 
is also acceptable, if the surgeon has the available expertise. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 20 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists B
Evidence 
level 1+ 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
B
BCP
PThe laparoscopic management of benign adnexal masses is well established. However, when 
managing ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women, it should be remembered that the main 
reason for operating is to exclude or to assess a suspected ovarian malignancy. If an ovarian 
malignancy is present, then the appropriate management in the postmenopausal woman is to 
perform a laparotomy and a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and 
full staging procedure. The laparoscopic approach should therefore be reserved for those 
women who are not eligible for conservative management but still have a relatively low risk of
malignancy. A suitably experienced surgeon may operate laparoscopically on women who fall
below the RMI I cut-off of less than 200.1,2,68 
In postmenopausal women, the appropriate laparoscopic treatment for an ovarian cyst that is 
not suited for conservative management is salpingo-oophorectomy, with removal of the ovary 
intact in a retrieval bag without cyst rupture into the peritoneal cavity. This is the case even 
when the risk of malignancy is low. In most cases this is likely to be a bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, but this will be determined by the wishes of the woman. The decision 
to remove both ovaries should be undertaken following discussion with the woman. There is 
the risk of cyst rupture during cystectomy and, as described above, cyst rupture into the 
peritoneal cavity may have an unfavourable impact on disease-free survival in the small
proportion of cases with an ovarian cancer.1,2,68 
If evidence of malignancy is revealed during the operation, or at final histology, women should be made 
aware that a full staging laparotomy will be required.
Removing tissue in a laparoscopic retrieval bag via the umbilical port has been investigated in 
a randomised and large prospective trial.166 Removal of benign ovarian masses via the umbilical
port should be utilised where possible as this results in less postoperative pain and a quicker 
retrieval time. Avoidance of extending accessory ports is beneficial in reducing postoperative 
pain, as well as reducing incidence of incisional hernia and incidence of epigastric vessel injury.
It also leads to improved cosmesis.166–168 
Although not widespread practice in the UK, a transvaginal approach for specimen removal
after laparoscopic resection of adnexal masses has been found to offer some advantage in terms 
of postoperative pain compared with transumbilical retrieval.169,170 In experienced hands,
transvaginal specimen retrieval after operative laparoscopy represents a safe, feasible, and 
applicable technique. Further research is needed to assess the real advantages of this natural
orifice extraction procedure. 
6.1.2.3 When should laparotomy be undertaken? 
All ovarian cysts that are suspicious of malignancy in a postmenopausal woman, as indicated by a 
RMI I greater than or equal to 200, CT findings, clinical assessment or findings at laparoscopy, 
require a full laparotomy and staging procedure.
If a malignancy is revealed during laparoscopy or from subsequent histology, it is recommended that 
the woman be referred to a cancer centre for further management. 
Women who are at high risk of malignancy, as calculated using the RMI (greater than or equal
to 200), are likely to need a laparotomy and full staging procedure as their primary surgery. In 
addition to the calculated risk of malignancy, other factors such as any other medical conditions 
affecting the risk of surgery will affect the decision as to whether a woman is able to undergo 
surgery, what type of surgery is performed and where this takes place.1,2 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 21 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 Evidence 
level 1 –
Evidence 
level 2++ 
D
P
Evidence 
level 4 If an ovarian cancer is discovered during laparoscopic surgery or on histology, a subsequent
full staging procedure is likely to be required. Secondary surgery should be performed as soon 
as feasible. It is important to consider borderline ovarian tumours as a histological diagnosis 
when undertaking any surgery for ovarian masses. When such a histological diagnosis is made 
or strongly suspected, referral to a gynaecological oncology centre is recommended.
Preoperative diagnosis can be difficult with radiological and serum markers being relatively 
insensitive, especially in their differentiation from stage I ovarian epithelial cancers. Although up 
to 20% of borderline ovarian tumours appear as simple cysts on ultrasonography, the majority 
of such tumours will have suspicious ultrasonographic finding.2,162,171 
The staging laparotomy should ideally be performed through a midline incision by an 
appropriately trained surgeon working as part of a multidisciplinary team in a cancer centre and 
should include:2,171 
Glaparotomy with clear documentation 
Gcytology – ascites or washings 
Gtotal abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omentectomy 
Gbiopsies from any suspicious areas.
Some centres may make decisions about the extent of surgery on the basis of frozen section,
according to local cancer centre protocol, and others may alter the timing of surgery in relation 
to chemotherapy in advanced cases, particularly with the advent of neoadjuvant chemotherapy.2
The laparotomy and staging procedure may include bilateral selective pelvic and para-aortic 
lymphadenectomy. Further details of the surgical management of ovarian cancer are beyond 
the scope of this guideline. 
6.2 Where should postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts be managed? 
The appropriate location for the management should reflect the structure of cancer care in the UK.
Mean survival time for women with ovarian malignancy is significantly improved when managed 
within a specialist gynaecological oncology service. Hence early diagnosis and referral is 
important. As the risk of malignancy increases, the appropriate location for management changes.
Therefore, while women with a low risk of malignancy (RMI I less than 200) may be managed 
in a general gynaecology or cancer unit, those who are at higher risk (RMI I greater than or equal
to 200 and suspicious CT findings) should be discussed by a multidisciplinary team.15,172–174 
6.3 Who should manage ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women? 
While a general gynaecologist might manage women with a low risk of malignancy (RMI I less than 
200) in a general gynaecology or cancer unit, women who are at higher risk should be managed in a 
cancer centre by a trained gynaecological oncologist, unless the multidisciplinary team review is not 
supportive of a high probability of ovarian malignancy. 
The prognosis for women with ovarian cancer is improved when the entire tumour is removed at surgery.
Optimal surgical cytoreduction and appropriate staging is more likely to be achieved by a trained 
gynaecological oncologist in a cancer centre setting. However, the prevalence of ovarian cysts in the 
postmenopausal population and the increase in their diagnosis means that it would not be feasible for all
women with ovarian cysts that require surgery to be referred to a cancer centre.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 22 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 2 –
Evidence 
level 2+ 
D
DEvidence 
level 2+ Women need to be triaged so that a gynaecological oncologist in a cancer centre operates on 
those women with an elevated RMI where the multidisciplinary team review is supportive of
a high risk of ovarian malignancy. When the RMI is elevated but the multidisciplinary team 
review is not suggestive of ovarian malignancy, a lead clinician in a cancer unit can perform the 
surgery. Women at low risk may be operated on by a general gynaecologist or offered 
conservative management. The high specificity and sensitivity of the RMI I (see section 5.1) 
makes it an ideal and simple way of triaging women for this purpose.15,172–175 
7.Recommendations for future research 
GDetermine the optimum RMI I threshold that should be applied in secondary care to guide the 
management of women with suspected ovarian cancer.
GDefine the Minimum Data Sets for postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts.
GNew tumour markers should continue to undergo evaluation as diagnostic tests as they are identified,
using appropriate methodological standards, with more direct comparisons of alternative tests.
GAdditional external validation of scoring systems in new populations is required before widespread 
adaptation can be recommended, with attention paid to adequate sample size. 
GFollow-up studies, with clear definitions for ‘benign’ lesions, clear protocols for follow-up and 
documentation of loss to follow-up, are needed. 
GData on adverse outcomes from various surgical settings are needed. The risks of diagnostic laparoscopy 
or laparotomy, particularly in asymptomatic women who ultimately prove to have a benign lesion, are 
unclear.
8.Auditable topics 
GProportion of women with a RMI I score of 200 or greater referred to a specialist gynaecological cancer 
multidisciplinary team (100%).
GProportion of women with a RMI I score greater than or equal to 200 who, following ultrasound scan,
receive a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis as the initial staging investigation and are subsequently 
offered staging surgery (100%).
GProportion of women who, following surgery for a presumed benign cyst in a general gynaecology 
setting (RMI I less than 200), turn out to have a diagnosis of malignant disease (i.e. false-negative rate) 
(less than 25%).
GProportion of women who, following surgery for a presumed high risk of malignancy cyst in a 
specialised gynaecology oncology setting (RMI I greater than or equal to 200), turn out to have a 
diagnosis of benign disease (i.e. false-positive rate) (less than 15%).
9.Useful links and support groups 
GCancer Research UK. Can ovarian cysts become cancerous? http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/ 
about-cancer/cancers-in-general/cancer-questions/can-ovarian-cysts-become-cancerous.
GNHS Choices. Ovarian cyst http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/ovarian-cyst/Pages/Introduction.aspx.
GWomen’s Health Concern. Ovarian cysts http://www.womens-health-concern.org/help-and-advice/ 
factsheets/ovarian-cysts/.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 23 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 Evidence 
level 2+ 1.National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Ovarian 
cancer: The recognition and initial management of 
ovarian cancer . NICE clinical guideline 122. Manchester:
NICE; 2011.
2.Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management 
of epithelial ovarian cancer . SIGN publication no. 135.
Edinburgh: SIGN; 2013.
3.Hartge P, Hayes R, Reding D, Sherman ME, Prorok P, Schiffman 
M, et al. Complex ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women 
are not associated with ovarian cancer risk factors:
preliminary data from the Prostate, Lung, Colon, and Ovarian 
Cancer Screening Trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:
1232–7.
4.Dørum A, Blom GP, Ekerhovd E, Granberg S. Prevalence and 
histologic diagnosis of adnexal cysts in postmenopausal
women: an autopsy study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;192:
48–54.
5.Greenlee RT, Kessel B, Williams CR, Riley TL, Ragard LR, 
Hartge P, et al. Prevalence, incidence, and natural history of
simple ovarian cysts among women >55 years old in a large 
cancer screening trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010;202:
373.e1–9.
6.Zalud I, Busse R, Kurjak BF. Asymptomatic simple ovarian cyst
in postmenopausal women: syndrome of ‘visible ovary’.
Donald School J Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2013;7:182–6.
7.Healy DL, Bell R, Robertson DM, Jobling T, Oehler MK,
Edwards A, et al. Ovarian status in healthy postmenopausal
women. Menopause 2008;15:1109–14.
8.Levine D, Brown DL, Andreotti RF, Benacerraf B, Benson CB,
Brewster WR, et al.; Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound.
Management of asymptomatic ovarian and other adnexal
cysts imaged at US: Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound 
consensus conference statement. Ultrasound Q 2010;26:
121–31.
9.Sharma A, Apostolidou S, Burnell M, Campbell S, Habib M,
Gentry-Maharaj A, et al. Risk of epithelial ovarian cancer in 
asymptomatic women with ultrasound-detected ovarian 
masses: a prospective cohort study within the UK 
collaborative trial of ovarian cancer screening (UKCTOCS).
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2012;40:338–44.
10.Canis M, Botchorishvili R, Manhes H, Wattiez A, Mage G, 
Pouly JL, et al. Management of adnexal masses: role and risk 
of laparoscopy. Semin Surg Oncol 2000;19:28–35.
11.Yuen PM, Yu KM, Yip SK, Lau WC, Rogers MS, Chang A. 
A randomized prospective study of laparoscopy and 
laparotomy in the management of benign ovarian masses. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:109–14.
12.Panici PB, Muzii L, Palaia I, Manci N, Bellati F, Plotti F, et al.
Minilaparotomy versus laparoscopy in the treatment of
benign adnexal cysts: a randomized clinical study. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2007;133:218–22.
13.Fanfani F, Fagotti A, Ercoli A, Bifulco G, Longo R, Mancuso S, 
et al. A prospective randomized study of laparoscopy and 
minilaparotomy in the management of benign adnexal
masses. Hum Reprod 2004;19:2367–71.
14.Quinlan DJ, Townsend DE, Johnson GH. Safe and 
cost-effective laparoscopic removal of adnexal masses. J Am 
Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 1997;4:215–18.
15.Vernooij F, Heintz P, Witteveen E, van der Graaf Y. The 
outcomes of ovarian cancer treatment are better when 
provided by gynecologic oncologists and in specialized 
hospitals: a systematic review. Gynecol Oncol 2007;105:
801–12.
16.Bankhead CR, Kehoe ST, Austoker J. Symptoms associated 
with diagnosis of ovarian cancer: a systematic review. BJOG 
2005;112:857–65.17.Bankhead CR, Collins C, Stokes-Lampard H, Rose P, Wilson S,
Clements A, et al. Identifying symptoms of ovarian cancer: a 
qualitative and quantitative study. BJOG 2008;115:1008–14.
18.Bell R, Petticrew M, Luengo S, Sheldon TA. Screening for 
ovarian cancer: a systematic review. Health Technol Assess 
1998;2(2).
19.Bast RC Jr, Feeney M, Lazarus H, Nadler LM, Colvin RB, 
Knapp RC. Reactivity of a monoclonal antibody with human 
ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Invest 1981;68:1331–7.
20.Bast RC Jr, Klug TL, St John E, Jenison E, Niloff JM, Lazarus H,
et al. A radioimmunoassay using a monoclonal antibody to 
monitor the course of epithelial ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 
1983;309:883–7.
21.Bon GG, Kenemans P, Verstraeten R, van Kamp GJ, Hilgers J.
Serum tumor marker immunoassays in gynecologic 
oncology: establishment of reference values. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1996;174:107–14.
22.Alagoz T, Buller RE, Berman M, Anderson B, Manetta A, DiSaia 
P. What is a normal CA125 level? Gynecol Oncol 1994;
53:93–7.
23.DePriest PD, Varner E, Powell J, Fried A, Puls L, Higgins R, et al.
The efficacy of a sonographic morphology index in 
identifying ovarian cancer: a multi-institutional investigation.
Gynecol Oncol 1994;55:174–8.
24.Modesitt SC, Pavlik EJ, Ueland FR, DePriest PD, Kryscio RJ, 
van Nagell JR Jr. Risk of malignancy in unilocular ovarian 
cystic tumors less than 10 centimeters in diameter. Obstet 
Gynecol 2003;102:594–9.
25.Brown DL, Dudiak KM, Laing FC. Adnexal masses: US 
characterization and reporting. Radiology 2010;254:342–54.
26.Yazbek J, Raju SK, Ben-Nagi J, Holland TK, Hillaby K, 
Jurkovic D. Effect of quality of gynaecological ultra-
sonography on management of patients with suspected 
ovarian cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 
2008;9:124–31.
27.Van Gorp T, Veldman J, Van Calster B, Cadron I, Leunen K,
Amant F, et al. Subjective assessment by ultrasound is superior 
to the risk of malignancy index (RMI) or the risk of ovarian 
malignancy algorithm (ROMA) in discriminating benign□from 
malignant adnexal masses. Eur J Cancer 2012;48:1649–56.
28.Jacobs I, Oram D, Fairbanks J, Turner J, Frost C, Grudzinskas JG.
A risk of malignancy index incorporating CA 125, ultrasound 
and menopausal status for the accurate preoperative diagnosis 
of ovarian cancer. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:922–9. 
29.Dodge JE, Covens AL, Lacchetti C, Elit LM, Le T, Devries-Aboud 
M, et al.; Gynecology Cancer Disease Site Group. Preoperative 
identification of a suspicious adnexal mass: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Gynecol Oncol 2012;126:157–66.
30.Myers ER, Bastian LA, Havrilesky LJ, Kulasingam SL, 
Terplan MS, Cline KE, et al. Management of adnexal mass.
Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep) 2006;(130):1–145.
31.Stany MP, Maxwell GL, Rose GS. Clinical decision making 
using ovarian cancer risk assessment. AJR Am J Roentgenol 
2010;194:337–42.
32.Pérez-López FR, Chedraui P, Troyano-Luque JM. Peri- and 
post-menopausal incidental adnexal masses and the risk of
sporadic ovarian malignancy: new insights and clinical
management. Gynecol Endocrinol 2010;26:631–43.
33.Bonfrer JM, Korse CM, Verstraeten RA, van Kamp GJ, Hart GA,
Kenemans P. Clinical evaluation of the Byk LIA-mat CA125 II
assay: discussion of a reference value. Clin Chem 1997;43:
491–7.
34.Zurawski VR Jr, Orjaseter H, Andersen A, Jellum E. Elevated 
serum CA 125 levels prior to diagnosis of ovarian neoplasia:
relevance for early detection of ovarian cancer. Int J Cancer 
1988;42:677–80.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 24 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists References 35.Green PJ, Ballas SK, Westkaemper P, Schwartz HG, Klug TL,
Zurawski VR Jr. CA 19-9 and CA 125 levels in the sera of
normal blood donors in relation to smoking history. J Natl 
Cancer Inst 1986;77:337–41.
36.Tuxen MK, Sölétormos G, Petersen PH, Schiøler V,
Dombernowsky P. Assessment of biological variation and 
analytical imprecision of CA 125, CEA, and TPA in relation to 
monitoring of ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1999;74:12–22.
37.Pauler DK, Menon U, McIntosh M, Symecko HL, Skates SJ,
Jacobs IJ. Factors influencing serum CA125II levels in healthy 
postmenopausal women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers 
Prev 2001;10:489–93.
38.Jacobs I, Bast RC Jr. The CA 125 tumour-associated antigen: a 
review of the literature. Hum Reprod 1989;4:1–12.
39.Grover S, Koh H, Weideman P, Quinn MA. The effect of the 
menstrual cycle on serum CA 125 levels: a population study.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:1379–81.
40.Leibman AJ, Kruse B, McSweeney MB. Transvaginal
sonography: comparison with transabdominal sonography in 
the diagnosis of pelvic masses. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1988;
151:89–92.
41.American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
Management of adnexal masses. ACOG Practice Bulletin No.
83. Obstet Gynecol 2007;110:201–14.
42.Levine D, Asch E, Mehta TS, Broder J, O’Donnell C, Hecht JL.
Assessment of factors that affect the quality of performance 
and interpretation of sonography of adnexal masses. J
Ultrasound Med 2008;27:721–8.
43.Amor F, Alcázar JL, Vaccaro H, León M, Iturra A. GI-RADS 
reporting system for ultrasound evaluation of adnexal masses 
in clinical practice: a prospective multicenter study.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2011;38:450–5.
44.Valentin L, Ameye L, Savelli L, Fruscio R, Leone FP,
Czekierdowski A, et al. Adnexal masses difficult to classify as 
benign or malignant using subjective assessment of gray-
scale and Doppler ultrasound findings: logistic regression 
models do not help. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2011;38:
456–65.
45.Levine D, Gosink BB, Wolf SI, Feldesman MR, Pretorius DH.
Simple adnexal cysts: the natural history in postmenopausal
women. Radiology 1992;184:653–9.
46.Kurjak A, Predani□ M. New scoring system for prediction of
ovarian malignancy based on transvaginal color Doppler 
sonography. J Ultrasound Med 1992;11:631–8.
47.Timor-Tritsch IE, Lerner JP, Monteagudo A, Santos R.
Transvaginal ultrasonographic characterization of ovarian 
masses by means of color flow-directed Doppler 
measurements and a morphologic scoring system. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:909–13.
48.Amor F, Vaccaro H, Alcázar JL, León M, Craig JM, Martinez J.
Gynecologic imaging reporting and data system: a new 
proposal for classifying adnexal masses on the basis of
sonographic findings. J Ultrasound Med 2009;28:285–91. 
49.Lucidarme O, Akakpo JP, Granberg S, Sideri M, Levavi H,
Schneider A, et al.; Ovarian HistoScanning Clinical Study 
Group. A new computer-aided diagnostic tool for 
non-invasive characterisation of malignant ovarian masses:
results of a multicentre validation study. Eur Radiol 2010;
20:1822–30.
50.Goff BA, Mandel LS, Melancon CH, Muntz HG. Frequency of
symptoms of ovarian cancer in women presenting to primary 
care clinics. JAMA 2004:291:2705–12.
51.Goff BA, Lowe KA, Kane JC, Robertson MD, Gaul MA,
Andersen MR. Symptom triggered screening for ovarian 
cancer: a pilot study of feasibility and acceptability. 
Gynecol Oncol 2012;124:230–5.
52.Department of Health. Key messages for ovarian cancer for 
health professionals . [London]: DH; 2009.
53.Padilla LA, Radosevich DM, Milad MP. Accuracy of the pelvic examination in detecting adnexal masses. Obstet Gynecol 
2000;96:593–8.
54.Ueland FR, DePriest PD, DeSimone CP, Pavlik EJ, Lele SM,
Kryscio RJ, et al. The accuracy of examination under 
anesthesia and transvaginal sonography in evaluating ovarian 
size. Gynecol Oncol 2005;99:400–3.
55.Padilla LA, Radosevich DM, Milad MP. Limitations of the pelvic 
examination for evaluation of the female pelvic organs. Int J 
Gynaecol Obstet 2005;88:84–8.
56.Gadducci A, Ferdeghini M, Prontera C, Moretti L, Mariani G,
Bianchi R, et al. The concomitant determination of different
tumor markers in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer and 
benign ovarian masses: relevance for differential diagnosis.
Gynecol Oncol 1992;44:147–54.
57.Zorn KK, Tian C, McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Markman M, 
Muggia FM, et al. The prognostic value of pretreatment CA 125 
in patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma: a Gynecologic 
Oncology Group study. Cancer 2009;115:1028–35.
58.Lu D, Kuhn E, Bristow RE, Giuntoli RL II, Kjær SK, Shih Ie-M,
et al. Comparison of candidate serologic markers for type I
and type II ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 2011;122:560–6.
59.Donaldson ES, van Nagell JR Jr, Pursell S, Gay EC, Meeker WR,
Kashmiri R, et al. Multiple biochemical markers in patients 
with gynecologic malignancies. Cancer 1980;45:948–53.
60.Drapkin R, von Horsten HH, Lin Y, Mok SC, Crum CP, 
Welch WR, et al. Human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) is a 
secreted glycoprotein that is overexpressed by serous 
and endometrioid ovarian carcinomas. Cancer Res 2005;
65:2162–9.
61.Galgano MT, Hampton GM, Frierson HF Jr. Comprehensive 
analysis of HE4 expression in normal and malignant human 
tissues. Mod Pathol 2006;19:847–53.
62.Grisaru D, Hauspy J, Prasad M, Albert M, Murphy KJ, Covens A,
et al. Microarray expression identification of differentially 
expressed genes in serous epithelial ovarian cancer 
compared with bulk normal ovarian tissue and ovarian 
surface scrapings. Oncol Rep 2007;18:1347–56.
63.Huhtinen K, Suvitie P, Hiissa J, Junnila J, Huvila J, Kujari H, 
et al. Serum HE4 concentration differentiates malignant
ovarian tumours from ovarian endometriotic cysts. Br J 
Cancer 2009;100:1315–19.
64.Hellström I, Raycraft J, Hayden-Ledbetter M, Ledbetter JA,
Schummer M, McIntosh M, et al. The HE4 (WFDC2) protein is 
a biomarker for ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Res 2003;
63:3695–700.
65.Montagnana M, Lippi G, Danese E, Franchi M, Guidi GC.
Usefulness of serum HE4 in endometriotic cysts. Br J Cancer 
2009;101:548.
66.Moore RG, Brown AK, Miller MC, Skates S, Allard WJ, Verch T,
et al. The use of multiple novel tumor biomarkers for the 
detection of ovarian carcinoma in patients with a pelvic mass.
Gynecol Oncol 2008;108:402–8.
67.Urban N, Thorpe J, Karlan BY, McIntosh MW, Palomares MR,
Daly MB, et al. Interpretation of single and serial measures of
HE4 and CA125 in asymptomatic women at high risk for 
ovarian cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 
2012;21:2087–94.
68.National Collaborating Centre for Cancer. Ovarian cancer:
the recognition and initial management of ovarian cancer .
Cardiff: National Collaborating Centre for Cancer; 2011. 
69.Moore RG, McMeekin DS, Brown AK, DiSilvestro P, Miller MC,
Allard WJ, et al. A novel multiple marker bioassay utilizing HE4 
and CA125 for the prediction of ovarian cancer in patients 
with a pelvic mass. Gynecol Oncol 2009;112:40–6.
70.Shah CA, Lowe KA, Paley P, Wallace E, Anderson GL, 
McIntosh MW, et al. Influence of ovarian cancer risk status 
on the diagnostic performance of the serum biomarkers 
mesothelin, HE4, and CA125. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers 
Prev 2009;18:1365–72.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 25 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 71.Abdel-Azeez HA, Labib HA, Sharaf SM, Refaie AN. HE4 and 
mesothelin: novel biomarkers of ovarian carcinoma in 
patients with pelvic masses. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 
2010;11:111–16.
72.Nolen B, Velikokhatnaya L, Marrangoni A, De Geest K,
Lomakin A, Bast RC Jr, et al. Serum biomarker panels for the 
discrimination of benign from malignant cases in patients 
with an adnexal mass. Gynecol Oncol 2010;117:440–5.
73.Granberg S, Norén H, Friberg LG. Ovarian cancer stages I and 
II: predictions and 5-year survival in two decades. Gynecol 
Oncol 1989;35:204–8.
74.Timmerman D, Valentin L, Bourne TH, Collins WP, Verrelst H,
Vergote I; International Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) group.
Terms, definitions and measurements to describe the 
sonographic features of adnexal tumors: a consensus opinion 
from the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) group.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;16:500–5.
75.Partridge EE, Greenlee RT, Riley TL, Commins J, Ragard L, 
Xu JL, et al. Assessing the risk of ovarian malignancy in 
asymptomatic women with abnormal CA 125 and trans -
vaginal ultrasound scans in the prostate, lung, colorectal, and 
ovarian screening trial. Obstet Gynecol 2013;121:25–31.
76.Goldstein SR, Subramanyam B, Snyder JR, Beller U,
Raghavendra BN, Beckman EM. The postmenopausal 
cystic adnexal mass: the potential □role of ultrasound in 
conservative management. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:8–10.
77.Bourne T, Campbell S, Steer C, Whitehead MI, Collins WP.
Transvaginal colour flow imaging: a possible new screening 
technique for ovarian cancer. BMJ 1989;299:1367–70.
78.Brown DL, Doubilet PM, Miller FH, Frates MC, Laing FC,
DiSalvo DN, et al. Benign and malignant ovarian masses:
selection of the most discriminating gray-scale and Doppler 
sonographic features. Radiology 1998;208:103–10.
79.Guerriero S, Ajossa S, Risalvato A, Lai MP, Mais V, Angiolucci M,
et al. Diagnosis of adnexal malignancies by using color 
Doppler energy imaging as a secondary test in persistent
masses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:277–82.
80.Schelling M, Braun M, Kuhn W, Bogner G, Gruber R, Gnirs J, 
et al. Combined transvaginal B-mode and color Doppler 
sonography for differential diagnosis of ovarian tumors:
results of a multivariate logistic regression analysis. Gynecol 
Oncol 2000;77:78–86.
81.Sassone AM, Timor-Tritsch IE, Artner A, Westhoff C, Warren WB.
Transvaginal sonographic characterization of ovarian disease:
evaluation of a new scoring system to predict ovarian 
malignancy. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:70–6.
82.Vuento MH, Pirhonen JP, Mäkinen JI, Laippala PJ, Grönroos M,
Salmi TA. Evaluation of ovarian findings in asymptomatic 
postmenopausal women with color Doppler ultrasound.
Cancer 1995;76:1214–18.
83.Stein SM, Laifer-Narin S, Johnson MB, Roman LD, Muderspach 
LI, Tyszka JM, et al. Differentiation of benign and malignant
adnexal masses: relative value of gray-scale, color Doppler,
and spectral Doppler sonography. AJR Am J Roentgenol 
1995;164:381–6.
84.Roman LD, Muderspach LI, Stein SM, Laifer-Narin S, 
Groshen S, Morrow CP. Pelvic examination, tumor marker 
level, and gray-scale and Doppler sonography in the 
prediction of pelvic cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1997;89:493–500.
85.Kinkel K, Hricak H, Lu Y, Tsuda K, Filly RA. US characterization 
of ovarian masses: a meta-analysis. Radiology 2000;217:
803–11.
86.Guerriero S, Ajossa S, Piras S, Gerada M, Floris S, Garau N, et al.
Three-dimensional quantification of tumor vascularity as a 
tertiary test after B-mode and power Doppler evaluation for 
detection of ovarian cancer. J Ultrasound Med 2007;26:1271–8.
87.Dai SY, Hata K, Inubashiri E, Kanenishi K, Shiota A, Ohno M, 
et al. Does three-dimensional power Doppler ultrasound 
improve the diagnostic accuracy for the prediction ofadnexal malignancy? J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2008;34:
364–70.
88.Alcázar JL, Rodriguez D. Three-dimensional power Doppler 
vascular sonographic sampling for predicting ovarian cancer 
in cystic-solid and solid vascularized masses. J Ultrasound 
Med 2009;28:275–81.
89.Mansour GM, El-Lamie IK, El-Sayed HM, Ibrahim AM, Laban M,
Abou-Louz SK, et al. Adnexal mass vascularity assessed by 
3-dimensional power Doppler: does it add to the risk of
malignancy index in prediction of ovarian malignancy?:
four hundred-case study. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2009;19:
867–72.
90.Guerriero S, Alcazar JL, Ajossa S, Galvan R, Laparte C,
García-Manero M, et al. Transvaginal color Doppler imaging in 
the detection of ovarian cancer in a large study population.
Int J Gynecol Cancer 2010;20:781–6.
91.Alcázar JL, Guerriero S, Laparte C, Ajossa S, Jurado M.
Contribution of power Doppler blood flow mapping to 
gray-scale ultrasound for predicting malignancy of adnexal
masses in symptomatic and asymptomatic women. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2011;155:99–105.
92.Geomini PM, Kluivers KB, Moret E, Bremer GL, Kruitwagen RF,
Mol BW. Evaluation of adnexal masses with three-dimensional
ultrasonography. Obstet Gynecol 2006;108:1167–75.
93.Alcázar JL, Jurado M. Three-dimensional ultrasound for 
assessing women with gynecological cancer: a systematic 
review. Gynecol Oncol 2011;120:340–6.
94.Grab D, Flock F, Stöhr I, Nüssle K, Rieber A, Fenchel S, et al.
Classification of asymptomatic adnexal masses by ultrasound,
magnetic resonance imaging, and positron emission 
tomography. Gynecol Oncol 2000;77:454–9.
95.van Trappen PO, Rufford BD, Mills TD, Sohaib SA, Webb JA,
Sahdev A, et al. Differential diagnosis of adnexal masses: risk 
of malignancy index, ultrasonography, magnetic resonance 
imaging, and radioimmunoscintigraphy. Int J Gynecol Cancer 
2007;17:61–7.
96.Buist MR, Golding RP, Burger CW, Vermorken JB, Kenemans P,
Schutter EM, et al. Comparative evaluation of diagnostic 
methods in ovarian carcinoma with emphasis on CT and MRI.
Gynecol Oncol 1994;52:191–8.
97.Togashi K. Ovarian cancer: the clinical role of US, CT, and MRI.
Eur Radiol 2003;13 Suppl 5:L87–104.
98.Solnik MJ, Alexander C. Ovarian incidentaloma. Best Pract Res 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;26:105–16.
99.Komatsu T, Konishi I, Mandai M, Togashi K, Kawakami S,
Konishi J, et al. Adnexal masses: transvaginal US and 
gadolinium-enhanced MR imaging assessment of intra-
tumoral structure. Radiology 1996;198:109–15.
100.Sohaib SA, Mills TD, Sahdev A, Webb JA, VanTrappen PO, 
Jacobs IJ, et al. The role of magnetic resonance imaging and 
ultrasound in patients with adnexal masses. Clin Radiol 
2005;60:340–8.
101.Yamashita Y, Torashima M, Hatanaka Y, Harada M, Higashida Y,
Takahashi M, et al. Adnexal masses: accuracy of
characterization with transvaginal US and precontrast and 
postcontrast MR imaging. Radiology 1995;194:557–65.
102.Hricak H, Chen M, Coakley FV, Kinkel K, Yu KK, Sica G, et al.
Complex adnexal masses: detection and characterization 
with MR imaging—multivariate analysis. Radiology 2000;
214:39–46.
103.Katayama M, Masui T, Kobayashi S, Ito T, Sakahara H, Nozaki A,
et al. Diffusion-weighted echo planar imaging of ovarian 
tumors: is it useful to measure apparent diffusion 
coefficients? J Comput Assist Tomogr 2002;26:250–6.
104.Adusumilli S, Hussain HK, Caoili EM, Weadock WJ, Murray JP,
Johnson TD, et al. MRI of sonographically indeterminate 
adnexal masses. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2006;187:732–40.
105.Fujii S, Kakite S, Nishihara K, Kanasaki Y, Harada T, Kigawa J, 
et al. Diagnostic accuracy of diffusion-weighted imaging 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 26 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in differentiating benign from malignant ovarian lesions. 
J Magn Reson Imaging 2008;28:1149–56.
106.Thomassin-Naggara I, Daraï E, Cuenod CA, Fournier L,
Toussaint I, Marsault C, et al. Contribution of diffusion-
weighted MR imaging for predicting benignity of complex 
adnexal masses. Eur Radiol 2009;19:1544–52.
107.Thomassin-Naggara I, Toussaint I, Perrot N, Rouzier R, 
Cuenod CA, Bazot M, et al. Characterization of complex 
adnexal masses: value of adding perfusion- and diffusion-
weighted MR imaging to conventional MR imaging.
Radiology 2011;258:793–803.
108.Bernardin L, Dilks P, Liyanage S, Miquel ME, Sahdev A, Rockall
A. Effectiveness of semi-quantitative multiphase dynamic 
contrast-enhanced MRI as a predictor of malignancy in 
complex adnexal masses: radiological and pathological
correlation. Eur Radiol 2012;22:880–90.
109.Mohaghegh P, Rockall AG. Imaging strategy for early ovarian 
cancer: characterization of adnexal masses with conventional
and advanced imaging techniques. Radiographics 2012;32:
1751–73.
110.Dhanda S, Thakur M, Kerkar R, Jagmohan P. Diffusion-
weighted imaging of gynecologic tumors: diagnostic pearls 
and potential pitfalls. Radiographics 2014;34:1393–416.
111.Kinkel K, Lu Y, Mehdizade A, Pelte MF, Hricak H. Indeterminate 
ovarian mass at US: incremental value of second imaging test
for characterization—meta-analysis and Bayesian analysis.
Radiology 2005;236:85–94.
112.Spencer JA, Ghattamaneni S. MR imaging of the sono-
graphically indeterminate adnexal mass. Radiology 2010;
256:677–94.
113.Anthoulakis C, Nikoloudis N. Pelvic MRI as the “gold standard” 
in the subsequent evaluation of ultrasound-indeterminate 
adnexal lesions: a systematic review. Gynecol Oncol 2014;
132:661–8.
114.Fenchel S, Grab D, Nuessle K, Kotzerke J, Rieber A, 
Kreienberg R, et al. Asymptomatic adnexal masses: correlation 
of FDG PET and histopathologic findings. Radiology 2002;
223:780–8.
115.Wahl RL, Javadi MS, Eslamy H, Shruti A, Bristow R. The roles of
fluorodeoxyglucose-PET/computed tomography in ovarian 
cancer: diagnosis, assessing response, and detecting 
recurrence. PET Clin 2010;5:447–61.
116.Zor E, Stokkel MP, Ozalp S, Vardareli E, Yalçin OT, Ak I. F18-FDG 
coincidence-PET in patients with suspected gynecological
malignancy. Acta Radiol 2006;47:612–17.
117.Tingulstad S, Hagen B, Skjeldestad FE, Onsrud M, Kiserud T,
Halvorsen T, et al. Evaluation of a risk of malignancy index 
based on serum CA125, ultrasound findings and menopausal
status in the pre-operative diagnosis of pelvic masses. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol 1996;103:826–31.
118.Tingulstad S, Hagen B, Skjeldestad FE, Halvorsen T, Nustad K,
Onsrud M. The risk-of-malignancy index to evaluate potential
ovarian cancers in local hospitals. Obstet Gynecol 1999;
93:448–52.
119.Torres JC, Derchain SF, Faúndes A, Gontijo RC, Martinez EZ,
Andrade LA. Risk-of-malignancy index in preoperative 
evaluation of clinically restricted ovarian cancer. Sao Paulo 
Med J 2002;120:72–6.
120.Geomini P, Kruitwagen R, Bremer GL, Cnossen J, Mol BW. 
The accuracy of risk scores in predicting ovarian malignancy:
a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 2009;113:384–94.
121.Håkansson F, Høgdall EV, Nedergaard L, Lundvall L, Engelholm 
SA, Pedersen AT, et al.; Danish ‘pelvic mass’ ovarian cancer 
study. Risk of malignancy index used as a diagnostic tool in a 
tertiary centre for patients with a pelvic mass. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand 2012;91:496–502.
122.Davies AP, Jacobs I, Woolas R, Fish A, Oram D. The adnexal
mass: benign or malignant? Evaluation of a risk of malignancy 
index. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1993;100:927–31. 123.Timmerman D, Testa AC, Bourne T, Ferrazzi E, Ameye L,
Konstantinovic ML, et al.; International Ovarian Tumor 
Analysis Group. Logistic regression model to distinguish 
between the benign and malignant adnexal mass before 
surgery: a multicenter study by the International Ovarian 
Tumor Analysis Group. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:8794–801.
124.Timmerman D, Ameye L, Fischerova D, Epstein E, Melis GB,
Guerriero S, et al. Simple ultrasound rules to distinguish 
between benign and malignant adnexal masses before 
surgery: prospective validation by IOTA group. BMJ 2010;
341:c6839.
125.Van Holsbeke C, Van Calster B, Bourne T, Ajossa S, Testa AC,
Guerriero S, et al. External validation of diagnostic models to 
estimate the risk of malignancy in adnexal masses. Clin 
Cancer Res 2012;18;815–25.
126.Van Calster B, Timmerman D, Valentin L, McIndoe A,
Ghaem-Maghami S, Testa AC, et al. Triaging women with 
ovarian masses for surgery: observational diagnostic study to 
compare RCOG guidelines with an International Ovarian 
Tumour Analysis (IOTA) group protocol. BJOG 
2012;119:662–71.
127.Sayasneh A, Wynants L, Preisler J, Kaijser J, Johnson S, 
Stalder C, et al. Multicentre external validation of IOTA 
prediction models and RMI by operators with varied training.
Br J Cancer 2013;108:2448–54.
128.Sayasneh A, Kaijser J, Preisler J, Johnson S, Stalder C, 
Husicka R, et al. A multicenter prospective external validation 
of the diagnostic performance of IOTA simple descriptors 
and rules to characterize ovarian masses. Gynecol Oncol 
2013;130:140–6.
129.Kaijser J, Sayasneh A, Van Hoorde K, Ghaem-Maghami S,
Bourne T, Timmerman D, et al. Presurgical diagnosis of
adnexal tumours using mathematical models and scoring 
systems: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod 
Update 2014;20:449–62.
130.Moore RG, Jabre-Raughley M, Brown AK, Robison KM, 
Miller MC, Allard WJ, et al. Comparison of a novel multiple 
marker assay vs the Risk of Malignancy Index for the predic-
tion of epithelial ovarian cancer in patients with a pelvic 
mass. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010;203:228.e1–6.
131.Li F, Tie R, Chang K, Wang F, Deng S, Lu W, et al. Does risk for 
ovarian malignancy algorithm excel human epididymis 
protein 4 and ca125 in predicting epithelial ovarian cancer:
a meta-analysis. BMC Cancer 2012;12:258.
132.Sandri MT, Bottari F, Franchi D, Boveri S, Candiani M, 
Ronzoni S, et al. Comparison of HE4, CA125 and ROMA 
algorithm in women with a pelvic mass: correlation with 
pathological outcome. Gynecol Oncol 2013;128:233–8.
133.Kaijser J, Van Gorp T, Van Hoorde K, Van Holsbeke C, 
Sayasneh A, Vergote I, et al. A comparison between an 
ultrasound based prediction model (LR2) and the Risk of
Ovarian Malignancy Algorithm (ROMA) to assess the risk of
malignancy in women with an adnexal mass. Gynecol Oncol 
2013;129:377–83.
134.Fung ET. A recipe for proteomics diagnostic test
development: the OVA1 test, from biomarker discovery to 
FDA clearance. Clin Chem 2010;56:327–9.
135.Ueland FR, Desimone CP, Seamon LG, Miller RA, Goodrich S,
Podzielinski I, et al. Effectiveness of a multivariate index assay 
in the preoperative assessment of ovarian tumors. Obstet 
Gynecol 2011;117:1289–97.
136.Bristow RE, Smith A, Zhang Z, Chan DW, Crutcher G, Fung ET,
et al. Ovarian malignancy risk stratification of the adnexal
mass using a multivariate index assay. Gynecol Oncol 
2013;128:252–9.
137.Longoria TC, Ueland FR, Zhang Z, Chan DW, Smith A, Fung ET,
et al. Clinical performance of a multivariate index assay for 
detecting early-stage ovarian cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2014;210:78.e1–9.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 27 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 138.Hall DA, McCarthy KA. The significance of the 
postmenopausal simple adnexal cyst. J Ultrasound Med 
1986;5:503–5.
139.Andolf E, Jörgensen C. Cystic lesions in elderly women,
diagnosed by ultrasound. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:
1076–9.
140.Granberg S, Norström A, Wikland M. Tumors in the lower 
pelvis as imaged by vaginal sonography. Gynecol Oncol 
1990;37:224–9.
141.Luxman D, Bergman A, Sagi J, David MP. The postmenopausal
adnexal mass: correlation between ultrasonic and pathologic 
findings. Obstet Gynecol 1991;77:726–8.
142.Valentin L, Sladkevicius P, Marsàl K. Limited contribution of
Doppler velocimetry to the differential diagnosis of
extrauterine pelvic□tumors. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:425–33.
143.Shalev E, Eliyahu S, Peleg D, Tsabari A. Laparoscopic 
management of adnexal cystic masses in postmenopausal
women. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:594–6.
144.Kroon E, Andolf E. Diagnosis and follow-up of simple ovarian 
cysts detected by ultrasound in postmenopausal women.
Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:211–14.
145.Strigini FA, Gadducci A, Del Bravo B, Ferdeghini M, 
Genazzani AR. Differential diagnosis of adnexal masses with 
transvaginal sonography, color flow imaging, and serum 
CA 125 assay in pre- and postmenopausal women. Gynecol 
Oncol 1996;61:68–72.
146.Aubert JM, Rombaut C, Argacha P, Romero F, Leira J,
Gomez-Bolea F. Simple adnexal cysts in postmenopausal
women: conservative management. Maturitas 1998;30:51–4.
147.Bailey CL, Ueland FR, Land GL, DePriest PD, Gallion HH,
Kryscio RJ, et al. The malignant potential of small cystic 
ovarian tumors in women over 50 years of age. Gynecol 
Oncol 1998;69:3–7.
148.Reimer T, Gerber B, Müller H, Jeschke U, Krause A, Friese K.
Differential diagnosis of peri- and postmenopausal ovarian 
cysts. Maturitas 1999;31:123–32.
149.Ekerhovd E, Wienerroith H, Staudach A, Granberg S.
Preoperative assessment of unilocular adnexal cysts by 
transvaginal ultrasonography: a comparison between 
ultrasonographic morphologic imaging and histopathologic 
diagnosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;184:48–54.
150.Sarkar M, Wolf MG. Simple ovarian cysts in postmenopausal
women: scope of conservative management. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol 2012;162:75–8.
151.Annaiah TK, Reynolds SF, Lopez C. Histology and prevalence 
of ovarian tumours in postmenopausal women: is follow-up 
required in all cases? J Obstet Gynaecol 2012;32:267–70.
152.Moran O, Menczer J, Ben-Baruch G, Lipitz S, Goor E. Cytologic 
examination of ovarian cyst fluid for the distinction between 
benign and malignant tumors. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82:
444–6.
153.Gaetje R, Popp LW. Is differentiation of benign and malignant
cystic adnexal masses possible by evaluation of cysts fluids 
with respect to color, cytology, steroid hormones, and tumor 
markers? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1994;73:502–7.
154.Vercellini P, Oldani S, Felicetta I, Bramante T, Rognoni MT,
Crosignani PG. The value of cyst puncture in the differential
diagnosis of benign ovarian tumours. Hum Reprod 1995;
10:1465–9.
155.Ganjei P, Dickinson B, Harrison TA, Nassiri M, Lu Y. Aspiration 
cytology of neoplastic and non-neoplastic ovarian cysts: is it
accurate? Int J Gynecol Pathol 1996;15:94–101.
156.Higgins RV, Matkins JF, Marroum MC. Comparison of
fine-needle aspiration cytologic findings of ovarian cysts with 
ovarian histologic findings. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:
550–3.
157.Martínez-Onsurbe P, Ruiz Villaespesa A, Sanz Anquela JM,
Valenzuela Ruiz PL. Aspiration cytology of 147 adnexal cysts 
with histologic correlation. Acta Cytol 2001;45:941–7.158.Bonilla-Musoles F, Ballester MJ, Simon C, Serra V, Raga F. 
Is avoidance of surgery possible in patients with 
perimenopausal ovarian tumors using transvaginal
ultrasound and duplex color Doppler sonography? 
J Ultrasound Med 1993;12:33–9. 
159.Perrin RG, Bernstein M. Iatrogenic seeding of anaplastic 
astrocytoma following stereotactic biopsy. J Neurooncol 
1998;36:243–6.
160.Kim JE, Kim CY, Kim DG, Jung HW. Implantation metastasis 
along the stereotactic biopsy tract in anaplastic astrocytoma:
a case report. J Neurooncol 2003;61:215–18.
161.Sainz de la Cuesta R, Goff BA, Fuller AF Jr, Nikrui N, 
Eichhorn JH, Rice LW. Prognostic importance of intra-
operative rupture of malignant ovarian epithelial neoplasms.
Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:1–7.
162.Vergote I, De Brabanter J, Fyles A, Bertelsen K, Einhorn N,
Sevelda P, et al. Prognostic importance of degree of
differentiation and cyst rupture in stage I invasive epithelial
ovarian carcinoma. Lancet 2001;357:176–82.
163.Mizuno M, Kikkawa F, Shibata K, Kajiyama H, Suzuki T, Ino K,
et al. Long-term prognosis of stage I ovarian carcinoma.
Prognostic importance of intraoperative rupture. Oncology 
2003;65:29–36.
164.Vergote I, De Wever I, Tjalma W, Van Gramberen M, 
Decloedt J, van Dam P. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or 
primary debulking surgery in advanced ovarian carcinoma:
a retrospective analysis of 285 patients. Gynecol Oncol 
1998;71:431–6.
165.Chan YM, Ng TY, Ngan HY, Wong LC. Quality of life in women 
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy for advanced 
ovarian cancer: a prospective longitudinal study. Gynecol 
Oncol 2003;88:9–16.
167.Chou LY, Sheu BC, Chang DY, Huang SC, Chen SY, 
Hsu WC, et al. Comparison between transumbilical and 
transabdominal ports for the laparoscopic retrieval of benign 
adnexal masses: a randomized trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol 2010;153:198–202.
166.Ghezzi F, Cromi A, Uccella S, Siesto G, Bergamini V, Bolis P.
Transumbilical surgical specimen retrieval: a viable 
refinement of laparoscopic surgery for pelvic masses. 
BJOG 2008;115:1316–20.
168.Zanatta A, Rosin MM, Gibran L. Laparoscopy as the most
effective tool for management of postmenopausal complex 
adnexal masses when expectancy is not advisable. J Minim 
Invasive Gynecol 2012;19:554–61.
169.Ghezzi F, Cromi A, Uccella S, Bogani G, Serati M, Bolis P.
Transumbilical versus transvaginal retrieval of surgical
specimens at laparoscopy: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2012;207:112.e1–6.
170.Uccella S, Cromi A, Bogani G, Casarin J, Serati M, Ghezzi F.
Transvaginal specimen extraction at laparoscopy without
concomitant hysterectomy: our experience and systematic 
review of the literature. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 
2013;20:583–90.
171.Stratton JF, Tidy JA, Paterson ME. The surgical management 
of ovarian cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 2001;27:111–18.
172.Whitehouse M. A policy framework for commissioning 
cancer services. BMJ 1995;310:1425–6.
173.Luesley D. Improving outcomes in gynaecological cancers.
BJOG 2000;107:1061–3.
174.Geomini PM, Kruitwagen RF, Bremer GL, Massuger L, Mol BW.
Should we centralise care for the patient suspected of having 
ovarian malignancy? Gynecol Oncol 2011;122:95–9.
175.Junor EJ, Hole DJ, McNulty L, Mason M, Young J. Specialist
gynaecologists and survival outcome in ovarian cancer: a 
Scottish national study of 1866 patients. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1999;106:1130–6.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 28 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Appendix I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels 
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in making 
decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. Each guideline is systematically developed 
using a standardised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical Governance 
Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website at
http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development). These recommendations are not intended to dictate an 
exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individual patient
needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. It is hoped that
this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into routine practice. Attention is 
drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated. 
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations 
formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 29 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 Grades of recommendations 
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or 
randomised controlled trial rated as 1++ and 
directly applicable to the target population; or 
A systematic review of randomised controlled 
trials or a body of evidence consisting 
principally of studies rated as 1+ directly 
applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results 
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2++ directly applicable to the target
population, and demonstrating overall
consistency of results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
1++ or 1+ 
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2+ directly applicable to the target population 
and demonstrating overall consistency of
results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
2++ 
Evidence level 3 or 4; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+ 
Good practice point 
Recommended best practice based on the 
clinical experience of the guideline 
development group Classification of evidence levels 
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
very low risk of bias 
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
low risk of bias 
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of
randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a high 
risk of bias 
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case– 
control or cohort studies or high-quality 
case–control or cohort studies with a 
very low risk of confounding, bias or 
chance and a high probability that the 
relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort
studies with a low risk of confounding,
bias or chance and a moderate 
probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a 
high risk of confounding, bias or chance 
and a significant risk that the 
relationship is not causal
3Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports,
case series 
4Expert opinion PC
DBAAppendix II: Clinical algorithm for the management of postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 30 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Postmenopausal ovarian cyst 
(cystic lesion 1 cm or more) 
Measure CA125 
TVS ± TAS 
Calculate RMI I
RMI I <200 
(low risk of malignancy) RMI I >200 
(increased risk of malignancy) 
Cysts fulfilling ALL of the 
following criteria:
asymptomatic, simple 
cyst, < 5 cm, unilocular,
unilateralCysts with ANY of the 
following features:
symptomatic, non-simple 
features, >5 cm, 
multilocular, bilateralCT scan (abdomen and pelvis) 
Referral for gynaecological
oncology MDT review 
Consider conservative 
management Consider surgery 
salpingo-oophorectomy 
(usually bilateral) 
Repeat assessment 
in 4 –6 months 
CA125, TVS ± TAS 
Persistent 
unchanged Resolve Change 
in features 
Discharge Consider 
intervention MDT review 
High likelihood of 
ovarian malignancy MDT review 
Low likelihood of 
ovarian malignancy 
Laparotomy 
Full staging procedure 
by a trained 
gynaecological 
oncologist Laparotomy 
Pelvic clearance (TAH + 
BSO + omentectomy 
+ peritoneal cytology) 
by a suitably trained 
gynaecologist 
Individualise 
treatment after 
discussion with 
woman Repeat 
assessment 
in another 
4–6 months CALCULATION OF THE RMI I
The RMI I combines three presurgical features. It is a product of the serum CA125 level 
(iu/ml); the menopausal status (M); and an ultrasound score (U) as follows:
RMI = U x M x CA125 
•The ultrasound result is scored 1 point for 
each of the following characteristics: multilocular cysts, solid areas, metastases,
ascites and bilateral lesions.
U = 0 (for an ultrasound score of 0) 
U = 1 (for an ultrasound score of 1) 
U = 3 (for an ultrasound score of 2 –5) 
•The menopausal status is scored as:
1 = premenopausal
3 = postmenopausal
This guideline is directed at postmenopausal women and therefore all will be 
allocated the same score of 3 for menopausal status.
•Serum CA125 is measured in iu/ml and can vary between zero and hundreds or even 
thousands of units.Abbreviations 
BSO bilateral salingo-oophorectomy 
CT computed tomography 
MDT multidisciplinary team 
RMIrisk of malignancy index 
TAH total abdominal hysterectomy 
TAS transabdominal scanning 
TVS transvaginal scanning © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 31 of 31 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 DISCLAIMER 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical
practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for 
consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement
regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light
of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to 
be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols or 
guidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by: 
Dr MK Mehasseb MRCOG, Glasgow, Scotland; Dr NA Siddiqui FRCOG, Glasgow, Scotland; and 
Dr F Bryden FRCR, Glasgow, Scotland 
and peer reviewed by: 
Professor JL Alcázar, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Professor TH Bourne FRCOG, London; Dr D Brown,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA; Dr S Dhanda FRCR, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India; Mrs A Diyaf MRCOG, Barnstaple;
Professor SR Goldstein FRCOG, New York, USA; Professor S Guerriero, University of Cagliari, Monserrato, Italy ;
International Ovarian Tumor Analysis Collaborative Group; Professor JTS Kehoe FRCOG, Birmingham; 
Miss DF Kolomainen MRCOG, London; Dr AP Manjunath, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman; 
Dr T Miles, The National Forum of Gynaecological Oncology Nurses, Bath; Professor FR Pérez-López, 
University of Zaragoza Hospital Clínico, Spain ; Dr A Perheentupa, Turku University Hospital, Finland ; Dr LD Roman,
Keck School of Medicine of the University of South Carolina, Los Angeles, California, USA; Royal College of General
Practitioners; Dr M Sarkar, Chettinad Health City, Chettinad Academy of Research and Education, Chennai, India; 
Mr PS Sengupta MRCOG, Durham; Mr MI Shafi FRCOG, Cambridge; Mrs P Sinha FRCOG, St Leonards-on-Sea; 
Ms LM Smith, Peterhead, Scotland; The Royal College of Radiologists; Dr EMAL Toeima MRCOG, Norwich; and 
Dr A Zanatta, Pelvi Urogynecology and Gynecological Surgery and University of Brasilia, Brazil.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr PS Arunakumari FRCOG, Basildon; and Dr CJ Crowe MRCOG, London.
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta 1MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen 2FRCOG, Glasgow, Scotland;
and Dr AJ Thomson 1MRCOG, Paisley, Scotland. 
1co-chairs from June 2014 2until May 2014.
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising any 
conflicts of interest for this guideline is available from:
https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/guidelines/ gtg34/ .
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.
The review process will commence in 2019, unless otherwise indicated. RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 34 32 of 31 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists