Birth After Previous Caesarean Birth
Recommended antenatal care includes implementing a checklist for VBAC or ERCS to facilitate counselling and decision-making. Planned VBAC is suitable for most women with a singleton pregnancy and previous lower segment caesarean delivery. Contraindications to VBAC include previous uterine rupture or classical caesarean scar. Women with complicated uterine scars should be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Labour for women with two or more prior caesareans should be in a center with expertise and immediate surgical delivery. The success rate of planned VBAC is 72-75%, with previous vaginal delivery increasing the likelihood of success. VBAC should be conducted in a well-equipped delivery suite with continuous monitoring. Induction or augmentation of labour increases the risk of uterine rupture. ERCS should be performed after 39+0 weeks of gestation, with antibiotics and thromboprophylaxis administered. VBAC may not be suitable in certain circumstances like post-dates, twin gestation, or antepartum stillbirth. Overall, planned VBAC is considered safe for most women with a single previous lower segment caesarean delivery.

Women with two or more prior caesarean deliveries may be offered VBAC after counselling by a senior obstetrician. Labour should be conducted in a centre with suitable expertise and recourse to immediate surgical delivery. A multivariate analysis showed no significant difference in uterine rupture rates between VBAC with two or more previous caesarean births compared to a single prior caesarean birth. Women considering VBAC should be counselled about success rates, uterine rupture rates, and maternal morbidity. Antenatal counselling should consider factors that increase the risk of uterine rupture, such as short inter-delivery interval, maternal age, obesity, and myometrial thickness. VBAC success rates with two previous caesarean births are similar to those with a single prior caesarean birth. Women seeking multiple future pregnancies should be counselled about the risks associated with repeated caesarean deliveries and the benefits of attempting VBAC. Women should be informed of the risks and benefits of planned VBAC versus ERCS from 39+0 weeks of gestation, including the risks of uterine rupture, perinatal death, and maternal and fetal outcomes. VBAC has a lower risk of adverse outcomes compared to ERCS, but both options have associated risks. Women should be provided with a patient information leaflet and the decision for mode of birth should be agreed upon before the expected delivery date.

The NICHD observational study showed a three-fold increase for serious adverse perinatal outcomes for planned VBAC compared with ERCS. A review of outcomes suggests a very low additional risk for perinatal mortality or serious neonatal morbidity with VBAC. The success rate of planned VBAC is 72-75%, with previous vaginal delivery being the best predictor of success. Factors such as maternal height, age, BMI, gestation, and birthweight also influence VBAC success. Induction and augmentation of labour in VBAC are associated with increased risks of uterine rupture and caesarean delivery. ERCS should be conducted after 39+0 weeks of gestation with appropriate perioperative care. Antibiotics and thromboprophylaxis should be administered, and placenta praevia should be managed multidisciplinarily. Practice guidelines for ERCS are provided in the NICE caesarean section guideline.

Women considering ERCS should be counselled that delaying delivery by 1 week from 38+0 to 39+0 weeks enables around a 5% reduction in the risk of respiratory morbidity, but may be associated with a 5 per 10,000 increase in the risk of antepartum stillbirth. Consideration should be given to administering maternal corticosteroids if ERCS is performed prior to 39 weeks. Perioperative preincision antibiotics achieve a greater reduction in the risk of maternal infection than prophylactic antibiotics administered after making the skin incision. The choice of method of thromboprophylaxis should be as per RCOG guidance. Women in special circumstances, such as post-dates, twin gestation, fetal macrosomia, antepartum stillbirth, or maternal age of 40 years or more, should be approached cautiously when considering VBAC. The NICE induction of labor guideline recommends induction of labor from 41+0 weeks to reduce perinatal mortality. VBAC success rates for preterm and term pregnancies are similar, but the rates of uterine rupture and dehiscence are significantly lower in preterm compared with term VBAC. Future research should focus on identifying high or low-risk women for unsuccessful VBAC, predicting successful VBAC or uterine rupture using ultrasound, investigating the etiology and prevention of stillbirth in women with previous caesarean delivery, and factors impacting the uptake of VBAC.

This clinical guideline provides information on various factors affecting pregnancy outcomes, including uterine rupture, mode of delivery after previous cesarean section, and risks associated with different delivery methods. It also discusses the use of decision aids for pregnant women and the impact of previous cesarean deliveries on subsequent pregnancies. The guideline emphasizes the importance of patient preferences and personalized decision-making in childbirth.

Incidence of neonatal respiratory distress after elective caesarean section: pragmatic randomised trial. Risk of perinatal death associated with labor after previous cesarean delivery in uncomplicated term pregnancies. Life-table analysis of the risk of perinatal death at term and post term in singleton pregnancies. Elective repeat caesarean section versus induction of labor for women with a previous caesarean birth. Planned elective repeat caesarean section versus planned vaginal birth for women with a previous caesarean birth. Interventions for supporting pregnant women’s decision-making about mode of birth after a caesarean. Safety of vaginal birth after cesarean: a systematic review. Elective repeat cesarean delivery versus trial of labor: a meta-analysis of the literature. Validation of a prediction model for vaginal birth after cesarean. Prediction of cesarean section and uterine rupture among women attempting vaginal birth after prior cesarean section. Predicting vaginal birth after cesarean delivery: a review of prognostic factors and screening tools. The influence of intrapartum factors on risk of uterine rupture and successful vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Rates and prediction of successful vaginal birth after cesarean. Prediction of uterine rupture associated with attempted vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Predicting successful vaginal birth after Cesarean section using a model based on Cesarean scar features examined by transvaginal sonography. Effective anatomical and functional status of the lower uterine segment at term: estimating the risk of uterine dehiscence by ultrasound. Impact of labor at prior cesarean on lower uterine segment thickness in subsequent pregnancy. Simple, validated vaginal birth after cesarean delivery prediction model for use at the time of admission. Predicting successful intended vaginal delivery after previous caesarean section: external validation of two predictive models in a Dutch nationwide registration-based cohort with a high intended vaginal delivery rate. Vaginal birth after a cesarean section: the development of a Western European population-based prediction model for deliveries at term. The MFMU Cesarean Registry: factors affecting the success of trial of labor after previous cesarean delivery. Vaginal birth after cesarean outcomes associated with increasing number of prior VBACs. Factors predisposing to perinatal death related to uterine rupture during attempted vaginal birth after cesarean section: retrospective cohort study. Vaginal birth after cesarean for cephalopelvic disproportion: effect of birth weight difference on success. Validation of the prediction model for success of vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Impact of fetal size on trial of labor success for patients with previous cesarean for dystocia. Effect of birth weight on adverse obstetric outcomes in vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Effect of birth weight on adverse obstetric outcomes in vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Correlation between maximum cervical dilatation at cesarean delivery and subsequent vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Outcome of trial of labor after cesarean section in women with past failed operative vaginal delivery. Epidural versus non-epidural or no analgesia in labor. Intrapartum management of trial of labor after cesarean delivery: evidence and experience. Frequent epidural dosing as a marker for impending uterine rupture in patients who attempt vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Intrapartum predictors of uterine rupture. Uterine rupture: differences between a scarred and an unscarred uterus. Uterine rupture with attempted vaginal birth after cesarean delivery: decision-to-delivery time and neonatal outcome. Signs, symptoms and complications of complete and partial uterine ruptures during pregnancy and delivery. Higher maximum doses of oxytocin are associated with an unacceptably high risk for uterine rupture in patients attempting vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Does a maximum dose of oxytocin affect risk for uterine rupture in candidates for vaginal birth after cesarean delivery? Cervical ripening with Foley catheter for induction of labor after cesarean section. Cervical ripening with low-dose prostaglandins in planned vaginal birth after cesarean. Safety of low-dose prostaglandin E2 induction in grandmultiparous women with previous cesarean delivery. Methods of term labor induction for women with a previous cesarean section. Antenatal Corticosteroids to Reduce Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality. Broad-spectrum antibiotics for preterm, prelabour rupture of fetal membranes. Broad-spectrum antibiotics for spontaneous preterm labor. Caesarean section. Reducing the Risk of Venous Thromboembolism during Pregnancy and the Puerperium. Induction of labor. The Maternal-Fetal Medicine Unit cesarean registry

Planned VBAC refers to the intended mode of delivery for women with prior cesarean births who plan to deliver vaginally. Successful VBAC is defined as a vaginal delivery, while unsuccessful VBAC involves emergency cesarean delivery during labor. Uterine rupture is a disruption of the uterine muscle, while uterine dehiscence is a disruption with intact uterine serosa. Perinatal mortality includes stillbirths and neonatal deaths. Term delivery-related perinatal death occurs at or beyond 37 weeks of gestation. Neonatal respiratory morbidity includes transient tachypnea of the newborn and respiratory distress syndrome. Antenatal care includes counseling on delivery options and routine screenings. VBAC success rates and risks of uterine rupture are discussed based on various studies. The guidelines are intended to assist clinicians in decision-making but do not dictate exclusive management.

FRCOG, London; Mr DW Irons FRCOG, Durham; Dr SI Kayani FRCOG, Sabah Al-Salem, Kuwait; Dr R Malhas MRCOG, Walsall; Mr CN Nzewi MRCOG, Guernsey; Mr SOU Orife FRCOG, South Shields; Dr MAK Perera, Avissawella, Sri Lanka; RCOG Ethics Committee; RCOG Women’s Network; Royal College of Midwives; Dr S Rutter MRCOG, Rotherham; Dr P Sarkar FRCOG, Slough; Dr JR Scott FRCOG, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA; Dr M Sinha MRCOG, Chichester; Mrs P Sinha FRCOG, St Leonards-on-Sea; Dr CY Spong, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA; The Royal College of Radiologists; Dr CL Tower MRCOG, Manchester; Dr AU Ukpong, Port Harcourt, Nigeria; Mr DP Webster MRCOG, Poole; and Dr SNE Webster MRCOG, Newcastle upon Tyne. Committee lead reviewers were: Mrs G Kumar FRCOG, Wrexham; Dr P Owen FRCOG, Glasgow; and Dr AJ Thomson MRCOG, Paisley. The chairs of the RCOG Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta1 MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen2FRCOG, Glasgow; and Dr AJ Thomson1MRCOG, Paisley. All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising any conflicts of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/ guidelines/gtg45/ . The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. The review process will commence in 2018, unless otherwise indicated.