Epilepsy in Pregnancy 
Diagnosis of epilepsy and epileptiform seizures should be made by a neurologist. Different types of epilepsy should be assessed for specific risks to the mother and baby. Other conditions should be considered in the differential diagnosis of seizures in pregnant women. 
Women with epilepsy planning pregnancy should have a clinician manage their AEDs based on fetal risk and seizure control. Folic acid intake and minimizing AED exposure can reduce congenital malformations. 
Most women with epilepsy will not have seizure deterioration in pregnancy. Risks and safety precautions should be communicated to women with epilepsy. 
Regular antenatal care with a designated epilepsy care team is recommended. Screening for fetal abnormalities and monitoring AED levels in pregnancy should be individualized. 
Seizures in labour should be managed promptly to avoid complications. Pain relief options for women with epilepsy in labour should be prioritized. 
Postnatal care should include continued AED use and monitoring for seizure triggers. Neonates exposed to AEDs should be monitored for adverse effects. 
Effective contraception is important for women with epilepsy to stabilize their condition and optimize outcomes. 
Healthcare providers should be aware of disability legislation protecting individuals with epilepsy from discrimination.

Epilepsy review services and engagement with WWE during the preconception period and in pregnancy have been a focus of maternal and child health in the UK. Any service caring for WWE needs to provide evidence-based information on risks and benefits to empower parents to make informed choices. Diagnosis of epilepsy should be made by a neurologist, considering seizure history, impact on the mother, and drug history. Classification of seizure type and epilepsy syndrome is important to choose appropriate treatment and prevent seizure deterioration. Differential diagnosis of seizures in pregnancy should consider eclampsia, cardiac, metabolic, and intracranial conditions. Prepregnancy counselling for WWE should discuss the risk of congenital malformations based on AED exposure and emphasize the importance of folic acid supplementation. Exposure to AEDs, especially sodium valproate, may impact long-term neurodevelopment in infants. Minimizing exposure to AEDs and maximizing folic acid intake can help reduce the risk of congenital abnormalities in WWE.

AED polytherapy should have a detailed discussion with the epilepsy specialist on the risks and benefits of continuing or changing the AED prior to planning pregnancy. Where possible, the aim will be to avoid sodium valproate and AED polytherapy. However, if the risk of maternal seizure deterioration from changing the AED is deemed to be high, women will need to be advised to continue the sodium valproate or AED polytherapy. Pregnant women should be informed that two-thirds will not have seizure deterioration in pregnancy. The majority of women do not experience a seizure in pregnancy. Women who were seizure-free for at least 9 months to 1 year prior to pregnancy continued to be seizure-free in pregnancy. Pregnant women with idiopathic generalised epilepsies were more likely to remain seizure-free than those with focal epilepsies. Healthcare professionals should provide verbal and written information on prenatal screening, risks of self-discontinuation of AEDs, effects of seizures and AEDs on the fetus, and breastfeeding. Women should be fully aware of the implications of future pregnancy on their epilepsy and the health of their offspring in the short and long term. WWE tend to overestimate the risks of teratogenicity associated with intake of AEDs in pregnancy. Healthcare professionals should acknowledge the concerns of WWE and be aware of the effect of such concerns on their adherence to AEDs. Pregnant WWE taking levetiracetam or carbamazepine showed that some mothers self-discontinued their AED in pregnancy. Women have concerns regarding the effect of epilepsy and its treatment on motherhood. WWE feel that there is a lack of understanding among healthcare professionals about epilepsy and the specific issues related to pregnancy. Pregnant WWE should have access to regular planned antenatal care with a designated epilepsy care team. WWE taking AEDs who become unexpectedly pregnant should be able to discuss therapy with an epilepsy specialist on an urgent basis. All pregnant WWE should be provided with information about the UK Epilepsy and Pregnancy Register and invited to register. Pregnant WWE should be regularly assessed for risk factors for seizures, adherence to AEDs, and seizure type and frequency. Serial growth scans are required for detection of small-for-gestational-age babies in WWE exposed to AEDs. All babies born to WWE taking enzyme-inducing AEDs should be offered 1 mg of intramuscular vitamin K to prevent haemorrhagic disease of the newborn.

Giving vitamin K to WWE to prevent postpartum hemorrhage. Enzyme-inducing AEDs can increase the risk of hemorrhagic disease of the newborn. Parenteral vitamin K supplementation should be offered routinely to babies born to mothers on enzyme-inducing AEDs. WWE with well-controlled seizures do not require early delivery, but elective caesarean section may be considered in cases of significant deterioration of seizures. Non-epileptic attack disorder should be managed with specialist psychiatric or psychological services. Antenatal administration of oral vitamin K for postpartum hemorrhage prevention has not been evaluated. Adequate analgesia and care in labor can minimize the risk of seizures in WWE. Benzodiazepines are the drugs of choice for managing seizures in labor. Pain relief options in labor for WWE should be prioritized, with caution advised for pethidine use. Induction of labor does not have contraindications in WWE taking AEDs. WWE at risk of peripartum seizures should deliver in a consultant-led unit with facilities for resuscitation. WWE should continue their AEDs postnatally to minimize seizure triggers. AED dose adjustments may be needed post-delivery to avoid toxicity. Neonates born to WWE taking AEDs should be monitored for adverse effects, and breastfeeding is encouraged.

Increasing concentrations of AED in the neonate by 25% during the follow-up period to be clinically important. Lamotrigine, levetiracetam, and topiramate transfer to the child from breast milk to a larger extent compared with sodium valproate, carbamazepine, and phenytoin. Breastfeeding has not been shown to affect cognitive outcomes at 3 years of age in children exposed to certain AEDs. Other options such as alternating breast and bottle milk could be considered. Postpartum safety advice and strategies should be discussed with mothers with epilepsy. Generalised seizures can result in accidental injuries to the mother and baby. Depression should be screened for in the postpartum period. Effective contraception should be offered to women taking AEDs to avoid unplanned pregnancies. Women taking enzyme-inducing AEDs should be informed that a copper IUD is the preferred choice for emergency contraception. Contraceptive efficacy may be improved by adjusting the oestrogen component and pill-free interval. Barrier contraception should be used in addition to oral contraceptives for women taking enzyme-inducing AEDs. The risks of contraceptive failure and adverse effects of each method should be explained to women. Healthcare providers should be aware of equality legislation protecting individuals with disabilities. Future research should focus on optimal monitoring strategies for pregnant women with epilepsy and the effects of AED exposure on offspring. Audit topics should include multidisciplinary input into care and documentation of risks associated with epilepsy and AEDs. Useful links and support groups are provided for further information.

This guideline provides information on the management of epilepsy during pregnancy, including the risks associated with antiepileptic drugs and the importance of monitoring seizures. It also discusses the impact of epilepsy on pregnancy outcomes and the need for pre-conception counseling. Additionally, it highlights the potential neurodevelopmental effects on children exposed to antiepileptic drugs in utero.

Partial seizure in labor can affect fetal heart rate. Labor analgesia for the parturient with neurological disease: what does an obstetrician need to know? Postpartum depression in women with epilepsy versus women without epilepsy: influence of antiepileptic drugs in a prospective study. Antiepileptic drugs and hormonal contraceptives in adolescent women with epilepsy. Unintended pregnancies with the etonogestrel implant (Implanon): a case series from postmarketing experience in Australia. Insertion problems, removal problems, and contraception failures with Implanon®. Antiepileptic drugs and contraception.