Thromboembolic Disease in 
Pregnancy and the Puerperium: 
Acute Management
Green-top Guideline No. 37b 
April 2015RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists2 of 32Thromboembolic Disease in Pregnancy and the Puerperium: 
Acute Management
This is the third edition of this guideline. The first edition was published in April 2001 under the same 
title (numbered Green-top Guideline No. 28) and the second edition was published in February 2007 
and reviewed in 2010. Thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy and the puerperium is addressed in 
Green-top Guideline No. 37a.
Executive summary of recommendations 
Diagnosis of acute venous thromboembolism (VTE) 
How is acute VTE diagnosed in pregnancy?
Any woman with symptoms and/or signs suggestive of VTE should have objective testing performed 
expeditiously and treatment with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) given (see section 6) 
until the diagnosis is excluded by objective testing, unless treatment is strongly contraindicated. 
Individual hospitals should have an agreed protocol for the objective diagnosis of suspected VTE 
during pregnancy. This may recommend the involvement of obstetricians, radiologists, physicians 
and haematologists. 
What investigations are needed for the diagnosis of an acute DVT?
Compression duplex ultrasound should be undertaken where there is clinical suspicion of DVT. 
If ultrasound is negative and there is a low level of clinical suspicion, anticoagulant treatment can 
be discontinued. If ultrasound is negative and a high level of clinical suspicion exists, anticoagulant 
treatment should be discontinued but the ultrasound should be repeated on days 3 and 7. [ New 2015 ]
What investigations are needed for the diagnosis of an acute pulmonary embolism (PE)?
Women presenting with symptoms and signs of an acute PE should have an electrocardiogram 
(ECG) and a chest X-ray (CXR) performed. [ New 2015 ]
In women with suspected PE who also have symptoms and signs of DVT, compression duplex 
ultrasound should be performed. If compression ultrasonography confirms the presence of DVT, 
no further investigation is necessary and treatment for VTE should continue. [ New 2015 ]
In women with suspected PE without symptoms and signs of DVT, a ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) lung 
scan or a computerised tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) should be performed. [ New 2015 ]
When the chest X-ray is abnormal and there is a clinical suspicion of PE, CTPA should be performed 
in preference to a V/Q scan. [ New 2015 ]
Alternative or repeat testing should be carried out where V/Q scan or CTPA is normal but the clinical 
suspicion of PE remains. Anticoagulant treatment should be continued until PE is definitively 
excluded. 
Women with suspected PE should be advised that, compared with CTPA, V/Q scanning may carry 
a slightly increased risk of childhood cancer but is associated with a lower risk of maternal breast 
cancer; in both situations, the absolute risk is very small. [ New 2015 ]C
B
C
C
C
C
DP
C
DRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists3 of 32Where feasible, women should be involved in the decision to undergo CTPA or V/Q scanning. 
Ideally, informed consent should be obtained before these tests are undertaken. 
Should D-dimer testing be performed prior to objective diagnosis?
D-dimer testing should not be performed in the investigation of acute VTE in pregnancy. 
What is the role of pretest probability assessment?
Clinicians should be aware that, at present, there is no evidence to support the use of pretest 
probability assessment in the management of acute VTE in pregnancy. [ New 2015 ]
Baseline blood investigations
What baseline blood investigations should be performed before initiating anticoagulant therapy?
Before anticoagulant therapy is commenced, blood should be taken for a full blood count, 
coagulation screen, urea and electrolytes, and liver function tests. 
Performing a thrombophilia screen prior to therapy is not recommended. 
Initial anticoagulant treatment of VTE in pregnancy
What is the initial treatment of VTE in pregnancy?
In clinically suspected DVT or PE, treatment with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) should be 
commenced immediately until the diagnosis is excluded by objective testing, unless treatment is 
strongly contraindicated. 
What is the therapeutic dose of LMWH in pregnancy?
LMWH should be given in doses titrated against the woman’s booking or early pregnancy weight. 
There is insufficient evidence to recommend whether the dose of LMWH should be given once daily 
or in two divided doses. [ New 2015 ]
There should be clear local guidelines for the dosage of LMWH to be used. 
Should blood tests be performed to monitor heparin therapy in pregnancy?
Routine measurement of peak anti-Xa activity for patients on LMWH for treatment of acute VTE 
in pregnancy or postpartum is not recommended except in women at extremes of body weight 
(less than 50 kg and 90 kg or more) or with other complicating factors (for example, with renal 
impairment or recurrent VTE). 
Routine platelet count monitoring should not be carried out. 
Obstetric patients who are postoperative and receiving unfractionated heparin should have 
platelet count monitoring performed every 2–3 days from days 4 to 14 or until heparin is stopped. 
[New 2015 ]
How should massive life-threatening PE in pregnancy and the puerperium be managed?
 
Collapsed, shocked women who are pregnant or in the puerperium should be assessed by a team 
of experienced clinicians including the on-call consultant obstetrician. CCP
P
PDD
B
B
C
D
DRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists4 of 32Women should be managed on an individual basis regarding: intravenous unfractionated heparin, 
thrombolytic therapy or thoracotomy and surgical embolectomy. 
Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including senior physicians, obstetricians 
and radiologists. 
Intravenous unfractionated heparin is the preferred, initial treatment in massive PE with 
cardiovascular compromise. 
Maternity units should develop guidelines for the administration of intravenous unfractionated 
heparin. 
The on-call medical team should be contacted immediately. An urgent portable echocardiogram or 
CTPA within 1 hour of presentation should be arranged. If massive PE is confirmed, or in extreme 
circumstances prior to confirmation, immediate thrombolysis should be considered. 
Additional therapies
Should graduated elastic compression stockings be employed in the acute management of VTE in pregnancy?
In the initial management of DVT, the leg should be elevated and a graduated elastic compression 
stocking applied to reduce oedema. Mobilisation with graduated elastic compression stockings 
should be encouraged. 
What is the role of inferior vena cava filters in the management of VTE in pregnancy?
Consideration should be given to the use of a temporary inferior vena cava filter in the peripartum 
period for patients with iliac vein VTE to reduce the risk of PE or in patients with proven DVT and 
who have recurrent PE despite adequate anticoagulation. 
Maintenance treatment of VTE
What is the maintenance treatment of DVT or PE?
Treatment with therapeutic doses of subcutaneous LMWH should be employed during the remainder 
of the pregnancy and for at least 6 weeks postnatally and until at least 3 months of treatment has 
been given in total.
Women should be taught to self-inject LMWH and arrangements made to allow safe disposal of 
needles and syringes. Outpatient follow-up should include clinical assessment and advice with 
monitoring of blood platelets and peak anti-Xa levels if appropriate (see sections 5 and 6.3). 
Pregnant women who develop heparin-induced thrombocytopenia or have heparin allergy and 
require continuing anticoagulant therapy should be managed with an alternative anticoagulant 
under specialist advice. 
Can vitamin K antagonists be used during pregnancy for the maintenance treatment of VTE?
Because of their adverse effects on the fetus, vitamin K antagonists, such as warfarin, should not 
be used for antenatal VTE treatment. 
Is there a role for the new anticoagulants in the treatment of VTE in pregnancy?
Consideration should be given to the use of newer anticoagulants (fondaparinux, argatroban or 
r-hirudin) in pregnant women who are unable to tolerate heparin (LMWH or unfractionated heparin) 
or danaparoid and who require continuing anticoagulant therapy. [ New 2015 ]DP
P
P
DCBB
B
C
CPRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists5 of 32Anticoagulant therapy during labour and delivery
Should anticoagulant therapy be altered during labour and delivery?
When VTE occurs at term, consideration should be given to the use of intravenous unfractionated 
heparin which is more easily manipulated. [ New 2015 ]
The woman on LMWH for maintenance therapy should be advised that once she is in established 
labour or thinks that she is in labour, she should not inject any further heparin. 
Where delivery is planned, either by elective caesarean section or induction of labour, LMWH 
maintenance therapy should be discontinued 24 hours prior to planned delivery. 
Regional anaesthetic or analgesic techniques should not be undertaken until at least 24 hours 
after the last dose of therapeutic LMWH. 
LMWH should not be given for 4 hours after the use of spinal anaesthesia or after the epidural 
catheter has been removed, and the epidural catheter should not be removed within 12 hours of 
the most recent injection. [ New 2015 ]
Are specific surgical measures required for anticoagulated patients undergoing delivery by caesarean 
section?
In patients receiving therapeutic doses of LMWH, wound drains (abdominal and rectus sheath) 
should be considered at caesarean section and the skin incision should be closed with interrupted 
sutures to allow drainage of any haematoma. 
What anticoagulant therapy should be employed in women at high risk of haemorrhage?
Any woman who is considered to be at high risk of haemorrhage, and in whom continued heparin 
treatment is considered essential, should be managed with intravenous unfractionated heparin 
until the risk factors for haemorrhage have resolved. 
Postnatal anticoagulation
How should anticoagulation be managed postnatally?
Therapeutic anticoagulant therapy should be continued for the duration of the pregnancy and for at 
least 6 weeks postnatally and until at least 3 months of treatment has been given in total. Before 
discontinuing treatment the continuing risk of thrombosis should be assessed. 
Women should be offered a choice of LMWH or oral anticoagulant for postnatal therapy after 
discussion about the need for regular blood tests for monitoring of warfarin, particularly during 
the first 10 days of treatment. 
Postpartum warfarin should be avoided until at least the fifth day and for longer in women at 
increased risk of postpartum haemorrhage. [ New 2015 ]
Women should be advised that neither heparin (unfractionated or LMWH) nor warfarin is 
contraindicated in breastfeeding. 
Prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome
What measures can be employed to prevent the development of post-thrombotic syndrome?
Women should be advised that prolonged use of LMWH (more than 12 weeks) is associated with a 
significantly lower chance of developing post-thrombotic syndrome. [ New 2015 ]D
D
D
D
D
BCP
P
P
P
DRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists6 of 32Following a DVT, graduated elastic compression stockings should be worn on the affected leg to 
reduce pain and swelling. Clinicians should be aware that the role of compression stockings in the 
prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome is unclear. [ New 2015 ]
Postnatal clinic review
Postnatal review for patients who develop VTE during pregnancy or the puerperium should, 
whenever possible, be at an obstetric medicine clinic or a joint obstetric haematology clinic. 
Thrombophilia testing should be performed once anticoagulant therapy has been discontinued 
only if it is considered that the results would influence the woman’s future management. [ New 2015 ]
1. Purpose and scope 
The aim of this guideline is to provide information, based on clinical evidence where available, regarding 
the immediate investigation and management of women in whom venous thromboembolism is suspected 
during pregnancy or the puerperium. 
2. Introduction and background epidemiology
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) remains one of the main direct causes of maternal death in the UK1 
and sequential reports on Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths have highlighted failures in 
obtaining objective diagnoses and employing adequate treatment.2 In recent years, there has been a 
significant decline in maternal deaths from VTE in the UK (18 deaths between 2006 and 2008 compared 
to 41 in 2003–2005), in part owing to better recognition of women at risk and more widespread use of 
thromboprophylaxis.1 
The subjective clinical assessment of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) is 
particularly unreliable in pregnancy and only a minority of women with clinically suspected VTE have 
the diagnosis confirmed when objective testing is employed; the prevalence of ultimately diagnosed PE 
in pregnant women with suspected PE is 2–6%.3–5 The risk of antenatal VTE is four- to five-fold higher 
in pregnant women than in nonpregnant women of the same age,6,7 although the absolute risk remains 
low at around 1 in 1000 pregnancies.8 Venous thromboembolism can occur at any stage of pregnancy 
but the puerperium is the time of highest risk, with estimates of relative risk of approximately 20-fold.9 
Acute VTE should be suspected during pregnancy in women with symptoms and signs consistent with 
possible VTE, particularly if there are other risk factors for VTE (see Green-top Guideline No. 37a). The 
majority of women with VTE in pregnancy have clinical symptoms.10 The symptoms and signs of DVT 
include leg pain and swelling (usually unilateral) and lower abdominal pain (reflecting extension of 
thrombus into the pelvic vessels and/or development of a collateral circulation) and the symptoms of PE 
include dyspnoea, chest pain, haemoptysis and collapse. It is noteworthy that a low-grade pyrexia and 
leucocytosis can occur with VTE.
3. Identification and assessment of evidence
A search of MEDLINE and PubMed (electronic databases) from 2006–2013 was performed to identify 
all relevant randomised controlled trials, systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Conference abstracts 
published during this period that have since been superseded by full papers have been cited as the 
latter, even when these were published outside the search dates. The databases were searched using 
the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms including all subheadings. The principal terms 
used were: ‘venous thromboembolism’, ‘deep venous thrombosis’, ‘pulmonary thromboembolism’ and 
‘pregnancy’.P
DBRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists7 of 32Where possible in this document, recommendations are based on and linked to the evidence that 
supports them. Many of the guidelines for the management of VTE in nonpregnant patients are based on 
level 1 evidence;11,12 however, level 1 evidence for the management of VTE during pregnancy is lacking13 
and, in general, guideline recommendations for management of VTE during pregnancy are extrapolated 
from studies in nonpregnant patients.
4. Diagnosis of acute VTE
How is acute VTE diagnosed in pregnancy?
Any woman with symptoms and/or signs suggestive of VTE should have objective testing performed 
expeditiously and treatment with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) given (see section 6) 
until the diagnosis is excluded by objective testing, unless treatment is strongly contraindicated. 
Individual hospitals should have an agreed protocol for the objective diagnosis of suspected VTE 
during pregnancy. This may recommend the involvement of obstetricians, radiologists, physicians 
and haematologists. 
Women presenting with symptoms and/or signs suggestive of VTE should have objective 
testing performed expeditiously. If DVT remains untreated, 15–24% of these patients will 
develop PE. PE during pregnancy may be fatal in almost 15% of patients, and in 66% of these, 
death will occur within 30 minutes of the embolic event.14,15 
All hospitals should have a protocol for the diagnosis of suspected VTE in pregnancy which may require 
multidisciplinary team involvement.
4.1 What investigations are needed for the diagnosis of an acute DVT?
Compression duplex ultrasound should be undertaken where there is clinical suspicion of DVT. 
If ultrasound is negative and there is a low level of clinical suspicion, anticoagulant treatment can 
be discontinued. If ultrasound is negative and a high level of clinical suspicion exists, anticoagulant 
treatment should be discontinued but the ultrasound should be repeated on days 3 and 7. 
Compression duplex ultrasound is the primary diagnostic test for DVT.16,17 If ultrasound 
confirms the diagnosis of DVT, anticoagulant treatment should be continued. 
If ultrasound is negative and a high level of clinical suspicion exists, anticoagulant treatment 
should be discontinued but the ultrasound repeated on days 3 and 7.18 If repeat testing is 
negative, no further treatment is required; if repeat testing confirms the presence of DVT, 
anticoagulant treatment should be recommenced and continued. This strategy has been 
evaluated in a prospective cohort study of 221 pregnant women who presented with suspected 
DVT. The sensitivity of serial compression ultrasonography with Doppler imaging was 94.1% 
(95% CI 69.2–99.7%), the negative predictive value was 99.5% (95% CI 96.9–100%) and the 
negative likelihood ratio was 0.068 (95% CI 0.01–0.39).18 
When iliac vein thrombosis is suspected (back and buttock pain and swelling of the entire 
limb), Doppler ultrasound of the iliac vein, magnetic resonance venography or conventional 
contrast venography may be considered,16 although in practice, because of the extensive 
nature of these thrombi, ultrasound venography will often suffice.
4.2 What investigations are needed for the diagnosis of an acute PE?
Women presenting with symptoms and signs of an acute PE should have an electrocardiogram 
(ECG) and a chest X-ray (CXR) performed. PC
CB
CEvidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 2++
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 3RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists8 of 32In women with suspected PE who also have symptoms and signs of DVT, compression duplex 
ultrasound should be performed. If compression ultrasonography confirms the presence of DVT, 
no further investigation is necessary and treatment for VTE should continue. 
In women with suspected PE without symptoms and signs of DVT, a ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) 
lung scan or a computerised tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) should be performed. 
When the chest X-ray is abnormal and there is a clinical suspicion of PE, CTPA should be performed 
in preference to a V/Q scan. 
Alternative or repeat testing should be carried out where V/Q scan or CTPA is normal but the clinical 
suspicion of PE remains. Anticoagulant treatment should be continued until PE is definitively 
excluded. 
Women with suspected PE should be advised that, compared with CTPA, V/Q scanning may carry 
a slightly increased risk of childhood cancer but is associated with a lower risk of maternal breast 
cancer; in both situations, the absolute risk is very small. 
Where feasible, women should be involved in the decision to undergo CTPA or V/Q scanning. 
Ideally, informed consent should be obtained before these tests are undertaken. 
In the diagnosis of PE in the nonpregnant individual, both the electrocardiogram (ECG) 
and arterial blood gas (ABG) measurement are of limited diagnostic value.19,20 However, in 
pregnancy and the puerperium, one study found that the ECG was abnormal in 41% of women 
with acute PE; the most common abnormalities were T wave inversion (21%), S1Q3T3 pattern 
(15%) and right bundle branch block (18% during pregnancy and 4.2% in the puerperium).21 
Given the increasing incidence of ischaemic heart disease in pregnancy, the ECG may also 
be helpful in identifying alternative diagnoses. In the same cohort of women, ABG analysis 
showed that only 10% had arterial P O2 levels less than 60 mmHg and 2.9% had oxygen 
saturation levels less than 90%.21 These findings indicate a diagnostic role for ECG in women 
with suspected acute PE, and that ABG analysis is of limited diagnostic value.
Chest X-ray (CXR) may identify other pulmonary disease such as pneumonia, pneumothorax 
or lobar collapse.22 While the CXR is normal in over half of pregnant patients with objectively 
proven PE,21 abnormal features caused by PE include atelectasis, effusion, focal opacities, 
regional oligaemia or pulmonary oedema.23 The radiation dose to the fetus from a CXR 
performed at any stage of pregnancy is negligible (less than 0.01 mSv).24,25 A CXR should be 
performed before deciding upon further diagnostic tests; a normal CXR prior to V/Q scanning 
improves the likelihood of a definitive V/Q result.26 If the CXR is abnormal with a clinical 
suspicion of PE, CTPA should be performed. 
Pregnant women with suspected PE who have symptoms and signs of DVT should have 
bilateral compression duplex ultrasound leg studies performed. A diagnosis of DVT may 
indirectly confirm a diagnosis of PE and since anticoagulant therapy is the same for both 
conditions, further investigation may not be necessary. This would limit the radiation doses 
given to the mother and her fetus.27 While several studies have investigated the use of lower 
limb ultrasonography in the investigation of nonpregnant patients with suspected PE,28–31 the 
role of ultrasound leg studies in pregnant women with suspected PE and without symptoms 
and signs of DVT is unclear. In one case series, Chan et al. found no cases of DVT in 67 
women presenting with suspected PE.4 Given the higher incidence of isolated iliac vein DVT 
in pregnancy,32 it would be anticipated that there would be an increased likelihood of false-
negative results with this strategy. Therefore, while a positive result is of value, a negative 
investigation does not help to exclude a PE. D
PDC
C
C
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 2+RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists9 of 32The choice of technique for definitive diagnosis (V/Q scan or CTPA) will depend on local 
availability, and individual hospitals should have an agreed protocol for the objective diagnosis 
of suspected PE during pregnancy. A matched case–control study in the UK investigated the 
management of 143 women with antenatal PE; ninety-one women (65%) had a V/Q scan, 42 
(30%) had CTPA performed, 22 (16%) had echocardiography and 16 (11%) were diagnosed by 
angiography.33 Forty women (28%) were diagnosed using a combination of techniques. With 
regard to V/Q lung scanning, during pregnancy the ventilation component can often be omitted 
thereby minimising the radiation dose for the fetus. Studies have compared V/Q or low-dose 
perfusion (Q) scans with CTPA for the detection of PE in pregnancy and have found comparable 
negative predictive values (99% and 100% for CTPA and Q scans respectively) and no significant 
difference between the number of positive, nondiagnostic and normal scans.5,34,35 One study 
reported a higher rate of nondiagnostic scans with CTPA (37.5%) compared with V/Q scanning 
(4%) in pregnancy,36 although this may be related to the imaging protocol employed. 
CTPA has potential advantages over V/Q imaging including: CTPA is more readily available,37,38 
delivers a low radiation dose to the fetus (see section below) and can identify other pathology 
including pneumonia (5–7%), pulmonary oedema (2–6%) and rarely aortic dissection.5,35 Despite 
these potential advantages of CTPA, many authorities continue to recommend V/Q scanning as 
first-line investigation in pregnancy because of its high negative predictive value in this situation 
and its substantially lower radiation dose to pregnant breast tissue (see section below).39,40
Clinicians arranging imaging scans for suspected PE in pregnancy should be aware of the 
potential risks surrounding fetal and maternal radiation exposure.41 CTPA exposes the fetus to 
similar or lower amounts of radiation as V/Q scanning, although studies have been confounded 
by the type and model of scanners used, the imaging protocols employed and the methods used 
to estimate radiation exposure.42 With both techniques, the doses employed are well below 
accepted thresholds for teratogenicity, fetal death and fetal growth restriction, and the main 
concern for the fetus is a very small increased risk of childhood cancer.43 The International 
Commission on Radiological Protection has estimated an increased risk of fatal childhood 
cancer to the age of 15 following in utero radiation exposure of 0.006% per mGy, which equates 
to a risk of 1 in 17 000 per mGy.44 The fetal radiation exposure associated with CTPA and V/Q is 
approximately 0.1 mGy and 0.5 mGy respectively, although quoted figures vary considerably.25,43,45
While CTPA is associated with a low risk of radiation for the fetus, this must be offset by the 
relatively high radiation dose (up to 20 mGy) to the mother’s breast tissue, which is associated 
with an increased risk of breast cancer. The dose estimate for CTPA is 20 to 100 times greater 
than for V/Q scanning. The radiation dose depends on breast size, the technique used and 
the age of the woman – the risk of cancer being greater in younger women.46 Estimates of the 
increased risk of breast cancer associated with CTPA in pregnancy vary considerably and are 
based on modelling or extrapolated data. The delivery of 10 mGy of radiation to a woman’s breast 
has been estimated to increase her lifetime risk of developing breast cancer by 13.6% above her 
background risk47 and this figure has been cited widely. For a 25-year-old whose background 
risk of developing breast cancer in the following 10 years is 0.1%, the extra risk from 10mGy of 
radiation increases the risk by 13.6% of 0.1%, which is 0.0136% extra. Furthermore, Allen and 
Demetriades48 have suggested that even this small risk is an overestimate. Nevertheless, breast 
tissue is especially sensitive to radiation exposure during pregnancy because of hormonally 
induced increased glandular activity.49 The breast doses associated with CTPA can be reduced 
by 20–40% by the use of bismuth shields placed over the breasts.50 It would be prudent to 
recommend that lung perfusion scans should be considered the investigation of first choice for 
young women, especially if there is a family history of breast cancer or the patient has had a 
previous chest CT scan.45Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 3RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists11 of 322 cm [E for edema] and first trimester presentation [Ft] – the ‘LEFt rule’). Righini et al.,71 in a post 
hoc analysis of 157 pregnant women with suspected DVT, applied the LEFt rule and found that a 
negative score accurately identifies pregnant women in whom the proportion of confirmed DVT 
is very low. O’Connor et al.70 examined the use of the modified Wells score (MWS) in pregnancy 
as a risk stratification tool in the diagnosis of PE. They found that a MWS of 6 or higher was 100% 
sensitive and 90% specific with a positive predictive value of 36% for PE on CTPA. No woman 
with a MWS of less than 6 had a PE, giving a negative predictive value of 100%. In each of these 
studies, the authors conclude that prospective trials are required to validate their findings. 
5. Baseline blood investigations
What baseline blood investigations should be performed before initiating anticoagulant therapy?
Before anticoagulant therapy is commenced, blood should be taken for a full blood count, coagulation 
screen, urea and electrolytes, and liver function tests. 
Performing a thrombophilia screen prior to therapy is not recommended. 
The use of anticoagulant therapy can be influenced by renal and hepatic function, and can 
influence the platelet count, and blood should be taken to confirm that these are normal 
before commencing treatment.11
Almost half of all women who have an episode of VTE in pregnancy will have an underlying 
heritable or acquired thrombophilia.72,73 In the nonpregnant individual, the presence of 
thrombophilia does not alter the acute management of VTE with regards to the choice of 
anticoagulant agent, intensity of treatment or duration of therapy,74 and therefore testing for 
thrombophilia is not recommended.11 Furthermore, the physiological changes of pregnancy and 
pathophysiology of acute thrombus can influence the results of a thrombophilia screen. Levels 
of antithrombin and protein C may fall, particularly if the thrombus is extensive. In addition, 
protein S levels fall in normal pregnancy and an acquired activated protein C resistance is found 
in around 40% of pregnancies.75,76 It is recommended therefore that a thrombophilia screen 
should not be performed in pregnant women on presentation with suspected VTE. 
6. Initial anticoagulant treatment of VTE in pregnancy
6.1 What is the initial treatment of VTE in pregnancy?
In clinically suspected DVT or PE, treatment with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) should be 
commenced immediately until the diagnosis is excluded by objective testing, unless treatment is 
strongly contraindicated. 
Meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials indicate that LMWHs are more effective, are 
associated with a lower risk of haemorrhagic complications and are associated with lower 
mortality than unfractionated heparin in the initial treatment of DVT in nonpregnant 
patients.77,78 A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials has shown equivalent efficacy 
of LMWH to unfractionated heparin in the initial treatment of PE.79 A Cochrane review of 
22 studies had over 8000 patients of whom 75% had DVT and 25% PE without evidence of 
DVT; compared with unfractionated heparin, LMWH treatment was associated with lower 
rates of VTE recurrence or extension (3.6% versus 5.4%; OR 0.68, 95% CI 0.55–0.84), lower 
mortality (4.5% versus 6.0%; OR 0.76, 95% CI 0.63–0.92) and less major bleeding during the 
initial treatment period (1.2% versus 2.0%; OR 0.57, 95% CI 0.39–0.83).80 
 
With regard to safety, there is substantial accumulating evidence with the use of LMWHs, 
both in pregnant and nonpregnant patients, for the prevention and treatment of VTE.81 There Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 1++Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 2++BD
B
Evidence 
level 1++RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists12 of 32is evidence that LMWHs do not cross the placenta.82 While a Cochrane review concluded that 
there is no evidence from randomised controlled trials on the effectiveness of anticoagulation 
for DVT in pregnancy,13 systematic reviews and large series of cases have concluded that 
LMWH is a safe and effective alternative to unfractionated heparin as an anticoagulant during 
pregnancy.83–87 These have demonstrated a low risk of recurrent VTE when therapeutic doses 
of LMWH were used to manage VTE in pregnancy; for example, Greer and Nelson-Piercy 
identified a risk of recurrent VTE of 1.15% in women managed with LMWH.84 This compares 
favourably with recurrence rates of 5–8% reported in trials carried out in nonpregnant 
patients treated with LMWH or unfractionated heparin followed by coumarin therapy who 
are followed up for 3–6 months.88,89 
One of the advantages of LMWH over unfractionated heparin is the potential reduced risk of 
bleeding. This is of particular relevance in obstetric practice where obstetric haemorrhage 
remains the most common cause of severe obstetric morbidity.90 LMWHs are not associated 
with an increased risk of severe postpartum haemorrhage (defined as a blood loss of 1000 ml 
or more) in vaginal delivery.91 In one retrospective study85 the observed rate of massive 
postpartum haemorrhage (more than 1500 ml) was 1.1%, which compares favourably with the 
rate of massive haemorrhage (0.7%) from one prospective study without the use of LMWH.92 It 
is known that the risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is substantially lower with 
LMWH use compared with unfractionated heparin and in the 2777 pregnancies treated with 
LMWH and reviewed by Greer and Nelson-Piercy, no cases of HIT associated with thrombosis 
were reported.84 
Data on LMWH also substantiate a lower risk of LMWH compared with unfractionated heparin 
for heparin-induced osteoporosis; the overall risk of this complication on systematic review 
was 0.04% (compared with 2% for unfractionated heparin).84,93 A randomised controlled trial 
investigating bone mineral density in pregnant women receiving long-term dalteparin in 
pregnancy found no significant difference in bone density between LMWH-treated patients 
and controls.94 
In clinically suspected VTE, LMWH should be postponed until objective testing has confirmed 
the diagnosis in women at risk of bleeding after careful consideration of the balance of risks 
of haemorrhage and clotting. The risk factors for bleeding are summarised in Green-top 
Guideline No. 37a. Women who are known to be allergic to LMWH should be offered an 
alternative anticoagulant preparation (see section 8.3).
6.2 What is the therapeutic dose of LMWH in pregnancy?
LMWH should be given in doses titrated against the woman’s booking or early pregnancy weight. 
There is insufficient evidence to recommend whether the dose of LMWH should be given once daily 
or in two divided doses.
There should be clear local guidelines for the dosage of LMWH to be used.
In nonpregnant patients, the recommended therapeutic doses of LMWH vary according to 
the manufacturer (enoxaparin 1.5 mg/kg once daily; dalteparin 10 000–18 000 units once 
daily depending on body weight; tinzaparin 175 units/kg once daily). During pregnancy, 
changes in volume of distribution and renal glomerular filtration rate result in alterations 
in the pharmacokinetics of LMWHs.95–99 Previous editions of this guideline (2001 and 2007) 
recommended a twice-daily dosage regimen for enoxaparin and dalteparin in the treatment of 
VTE in pregnancy (enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily; dalteparin 100 units/kg twice daily). This 
recommendation was based on anti-Xa activity and a paucity of reports on safety and efficacy 
of once-daily dosing.100 Since then, a prospective multicentre observational study has found Evidence 
level 2++
Evidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 4
PC
Evidence 
level 3RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists13 of 32that 60% of practitioners use once-daily dosing of enoxaparin and dalteparin for treatment of 
VTE in pregnancy.101
A national case–control study on the management of antenatal PE using the UK Obstetric 
Surveillance System found that 49% of women were managed with a once-daily dosage schedule.33 
Further, a large, international retrospective study on the use of tinzaparin in pregnancy (with 
254 pregnancies receiving treatment doses and 94.1% of these in a once-daily regimen) has 
provided reassuring data on safety and efficacy of once-daily dosing.85
Recommendations on the treatment of pregnancy-associated VTE from clinicians in New 
Zealand and Australia concluded that there is insufficient evidence to favour one dose regimen 
over the other, and that treatment of acute VTE in pregnancy can be with LMWH administered 
either once daily or twice daily.40
A recent pharmacokinetic study involving 123 pregnant women found that the half-life 
of enoxaparin is prolonged with the progression of pregnancy; the authors conclude that 
their study provides further support for the use of once-daily enoxaparin for treatment of VTE 
in pregnancy.102 
The doses of different LMWHs are given in Tables 1a–c below.
Table 1a. Initial dose of enoxaparin is determined as follows:
Booking or early pregnancy weight Initial dose of enoxaparin
< 50 kg 40 mg twice daily or 60 mg once daily
50–69 kg 60 mg twice daily or 90 mg once daily
70–89 kg 80 mg twice daily or 120 mg once daily
90–109 kg 100 mg twice daily or 150 mg once daily
110–125 kg 120 mg twice daily or 180 mg once daily
> 125 kg Discuss with haematologist
Table 1b. Initial dose of dalteparin is determined as follows:
Booking or early pregnancy weight Initial dose of dalteparin
< 50 kg 5000 iu twice daily or 10 000 iu once daily
50–69 kg 6000 iu twice daily or 12 000 iu once daily
70–89 kg 8000 iu twice daily or 16 000 iu once daily
90–109 kg 10 000 iu twice daily or 20 000 iu once daily
110–125 kg 12 000 iu twice daily or 24 000 iu daily
> 125 kg Discuss with haematologist
Table 1c. Initial dose of tinzaparin is determined as follows:
Initial dose of tinzaparin (based on booking or early pregnancy weight)
175 units/kg once daily
Lower doses of LMWH should be employed if the creatinine clearance is less than 30 ml/minute 
(enoxaparin and dalteparin) or less than 20 ml/minute with tinzaparin.103,104 Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 2+RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists14 of 326.3 Should blood tests be performed to monitor heparin therapy in pregnancy?
Routine measurement of peak anti-Xa activity for patients on LMWH for treatment of acute VTE 
in pregnancy or postpartum is not recommended except in women at extremes of body weight 
(less than 50 kg and 90 kg or more) or with other complicating factors (for example, with renal 
impairment or recurrent VTE). 
Routine platelet count monitoring should not be carried out. 
Obstetric patients who are postoperative and receiving unfractionated heparin should have 
platelet count monitoring performed every 2–3 days from days 4 to 14 or until heparin is stopped. 
Initial experience with enoxaparin for the treatment of VTE in pregnancy indicated that 
satisfactory anti-Xa levels (peak anti-Xa activity, 3 hours post-injection, of 0.5–1.2 u/ml) were 
obtained using a weight-based regimen.105 A recent case series of 13 pregnant women treated 
with therapeutic doses of tinzaparin found that 11 required dose adjustments to maintain the anti-
Xa activity, assessed 4 hours post-injection, in the therapeutic range.99 However, a retrospective 
case–control study from Denmark assessed 166 women managed with prophylactic and 
therapeutic doses of LMWH in pregnancy without anti-Xa monitoring and reported excellent 
clinical outcomes.106 Monitoring of anti-Xa is therefore not routinely required in patients with 
VTE on therapeutic doses of LMWH, particularly as there are concerns over the accuracy of 
anti-Xa monitoring.107,108 There may be a case for monitoring levels at extremes of body weight 
(less than 50 kg and 90 kg or more) and in women with other complicating factors including 
renal disease and recurrent VTE.109 
Guideline documents recommend that routine platelet count monitoring is not required in 
obstetric patients who receive heparin,110,111 as the risk of HIT is low; one case report of HIT 
with thrombosis was identified in a pregnancy managed with enoxaparin.112 The platelet count 
should be checked after 24 hours of initiating treatment if the patient has previously received 
heparin (unfractionated or LMWH) in the last 100 days.111 The frequency of HIT is greater in 
surgical than medical patients, and is more likely with unfractionated heparin. It is therefore 
recommended that obstetric patients who are postoperative and receiving unfractionated 
heparin should have platelet count monitoring performed every 2–3 days from days 4 to 14 or 
until heparin is stopped.110 
6.4 How should massive life-threatening PE in pregnancy and the puerperium be managed?
Collapsed, shocked women who are pregnant or in the puerperium should be assessed by a team 
of experienced clinicians including the on-call consultant obstetrician. 
Women should be managed on an individual basis regarding: intravenous unfractionated heparin, 
thrombolytic therapy or thoracotomy and surgical embolectomy. 
Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including senior physicians, obstetricians 
and radiologists. 
Intravenous unfractionated heparin is the preferred, initial treatment in massive PE with 
cardiovascular compromise. 
Maternity units should develop guidelines for the administration of intravenous unfractionated 
heparin. 
The on-call medical team should be contacted immediately. An urgent portable echocardiogram or 
CTPA within 1 hour of presentation should be arranged. If massive PE is confirmed, or in extreme 
circumstances prior to confirmation, immediate thrombolysis should be considered. C
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 4D
P
P
PD
B
P
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists15 of 32Massive PE may present with shock, refractory hypoxaemia and/or right ventricular dysfunction on 
echocardiogram and is a medical emergency. Collapsed, shocked women who are pregnant or in the 
puerperium should be assessed by a multidisciplinary resuscitation team of experienced clinicians including 
the on-call consultant obstetrician, who should decide on an individual basis whether a woman receives 
intravenous unfractionated heparin, thrombolytic therapy or thoracotomy and surgical embolectomy.
Maternal resuscitation should commence following the principles of ABC and if cardiac arrest 
occurs, cardiopulmonary resuscitation should be performed with the woman in a left lateral 
tilt. A perimortem caesarean section should be performed by 5 minutes if resuscitation is 
unsuccessful and the pregnancy is more than 20 weeks.113 
Intravenous unfractionated heparin is the preferred, initial treatment in massive PE because 
of its rapid effect, extensive experience of its use in this situation and since it can be adjusted 
more readily if thrombolytic therapy is administered.11
One regimen for the administration of intravenous unfractionated heparin is:114 
l loading dose of 80 units/kg, followed by a continuous intravenous infusion of 18 units/kg/hour 
l if a patient has received thrombolysis (see below), the loading dose of heparin should be omitted 
and an infusion started at 18 units/kg/hour
l it is mandatory to measure activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) level 4–6 hours after the 
loading dose, 6 hours after any dose change and then at least daily when in the therapeutic range. 
The therapeutic target APTT ratio is usually 1.5–2.5 times the average laboratory control value. 
(This will depend on the APTT reagent used in the laboratory and, when unfractionated heparin is 
employed, the advice of a haematologist should be sought)
l using this weight-adjusted regimen, the infusion rate should be adjusted according to the APTT as 
described in Table 2.
Table 2. Adjustments in the infusion rate of unfractionated heparin according to the APTT
APTT ratio Dose change (units/kg/hour) Additional action Next APTT (hour)
< 1.2 + 4 Re-bolus 80 units/kg 6
1.2–1.5 + 2 Re-bolus 40 units/kg 6
1.5–2.5 no change 24
2.5–3.0 – 2 6
> 3.0 – 3 Stop infusion 1 hour 6
It is recognised that APTT monitoring of unfractionated heparin is technically problematic, 
particularly in late pregnancy when an apparent heparin resistance occurs due to increased 
fibrinogen and factor VIII which influence the APTT.115,116 This can lead to unnecessarily high 
doses of heparin being used with subsequent haemorrhagic problems. Where such problems 
are considered to exist, haematologists should be involved in the patient’s management. It may 
be useful to determine the anti-Xa level as a measure of heparin dose. With unfractionated 
heparin, a lower level of anti-Xa is considered therapeutic (target range 0.35–0.7 u/ml or 
0.5–1.0 u/ml for patients with life-threatening PE).117 
In massive life-threatening PE with haemodynamic compromise (or with limb- or life-threatening 
ischaemic complications from extensive iliofemoral vein thrombosis), thrombolytic therapy should 
be considered as anticoagulant therapy alone will not reduce the obstruction in the circulation. After 
thrombolytic therapy has been given, an infusion of unfractionated heparin can be given, but the loading 
dose (outlined above) should be omitted.Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 2+ Evidence 
level 1+RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists16 of 32A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials using thrombolytic agents for PE has established 
that thrombolytic therapy is more effective than heparin therapy in reducing clot burden and 
improving haemodynamics.118 These studies, however, have not shown any impact on long-
term survival over and above that of conventional therapy with heparin or LMWH, and no 
thrombolytic agent has been shown to be superior to any of the others.118 However, when Wan et 
al. restricted their analysis to those trials with massive PE, they identified a significant reduction in 
recurrent PE or death from 19.0% with heparin alone to 9.4% with thrombolysis (OR 0.45, 95% CI 
0.22–0.90).118 Current recommendations suggest that thrombolytic therapy should be reserved 
for patients with severe pulmonary thromboembolism with haemodynamic compromise.119 
There are now a large number of published case reports and case series on the use of thrombolytic 
therapy in pregnancy,120–123 including cases treated with: streptokinase,123–125 urokinase,126 
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA; alteplase)121,127,128 and tenecteplase.129 A major 
concern regarding the use of thrombolytic therapy in pregnancy is fetal and maternal bleeding. 
In one literature review, Ahearn et al.121 reported on 172 women treated with thrombolytic 
therapy (167 of whom had DVT or PE); problems associated with treatment included five 
nonfatal maternal bleeding complications (2.9%) and three fetal deaths (1.7%). No maternal 
deaths associated with thrombolytic therapy have been reported. More recently, te Raa et al.123 
reported on 13 cases of massive PE during pregnancy – four had haemorrhagic complications 
and there were two fetal deaths. Most bleeding events occur around catheter and puncture 
sites and, in pregnant women, there have been no reports of intracranial bleeding. 
If the patient is not suitable for thrombolysis or is moribund, a discussion with the cardiothoracic 
surgeons with a view to urgent thoracotomy should be had.112
7. Additional therapies
7.1 Should graduated elastic compression stockings be employed in the acute management of 
VTE in pregnancy?
In the initial management of DVT, the leg should be elevated and a graduated elastic compression 
stocking applied to reduce oedema. Mobilisation with graduated elastic compression stockings 
should be encouraged. 
Patients with acute DVT have traditionally been recommended bed rest and immobilisation 
for fear of dislodging an unstable thrombus and causing PE, and by the belief that rest relieves 
pain and swelling. However, randomised controlled trials have shown that early ambulation, 
with leg compression, does not increase the risk of PE, does not increase thrombus 
propagation, and that pain and swelling improved faster compared to those patients who 
had their mobility restricted.130–138 This approach may also prevent the development of post-
thrombotic syndrome (see section 11). A randomised controlled trial comparing knee-length 
with thigh-length hosiery concluded that thigh-length compression elastic stockings do not 
offer better protection against post-thrombotic syndrome than below-knee hosiery and are 
less well tolerated.139 National guidance in the UK recommends that patients with proximal 
DVT should be offered below-knee compression stockings with an ankle pressure greater 
than 23 mmHg and that hosiery does not need to be worn on the unaffected leg.12 Accurate 
fitting and careful instruction in the correct application of the hosiery is essential to avoid 
discomfort and assist rather than prevent venous return. A pilot audit of compliance with 
graduated compression stockings in pregnancy showed poor levels of compliance related to 
discomfort and side effects.140 BEvidence 
level 1++
Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 1+RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists17 of 327.2 What is the role of inferior vena cava filters in the management of VTE in pregnancy?
Consideration should be given to the use of a temporary inferior vena cava filter in the peripartum 
period for patients with iliac vein VTE to reduce the risk of PE or in patients with proven DVT and 
who have recurrent PE despite adequate anticoagulation. 
Placement of a temporary inferior vena cava (IVC) filter in obstetric practice is indicated when 
recurrent thromboembolism occurs despite adequate anticoagulation, or when anticoagulation 
is contraindicated (such as the peripartum period). Case reports and case series have reported 
favourable outcomes with regard to safety and effectiveness on the use of IVC filters in 
pregnancy.141–145 The long-term safety of IVC filters is uncertain and the main complications 
associated with vena cava filters are migration, an increased risk of lower limb DVT and caval 
thrombosis and, rarely, infection.12 
8. Maintenance treatment of VTE
8.1 What is the maintenance treatment of DVT or PE?
Treatment with therapeutic doses of subcutaneous LMWH should be employed during the remainder 
of the pregnancy and for at least 6 weeks postnatally and until at least 3 months of treatment has 
been given in total. 
Women should be taught to self-inject LMWH and arrangements made to allow safe disposal of 
needles and syringes. Outpatient follow-up should include clinical assessment and advice with 
monitoring of blood platelets and peak anti-Xa levels if appropriate (see sections 5 and 6.3). 
Pregnant women who develop heparin-induced thrombocytopenia or have heparin allergy and 
require continuing anticoagulant therapy should be managed with an alternative anticoagulant 
under specialist advice. 
Women with antenatal VTE can be managed with subcutaneous therapeutic doses of LMWH 
for the remainder of the pregnancy77–79,81,83–87 (see section 6.2). If LMWH therapy requires 
monitoring (e.g. extremes of body weight or renal impairment, see section 6.3), the aim is to 
achieve a peak anti-Xa activity, 3 hours post-injection, of 0.5–1.2 u/ml. 
The rationale for recommending therapeutic doses of LMWH (rather than reduced, prophylactic 
doses) throughout the remainder of the pregnancy is based on the continuing risk of recurrent 
VTE during this time arising from: pregnancy-related changes in the coagulation system, 
reduced venous flow velocity, a higher incidence of isolated iliac vein DVT in pregnancy and in 
at least 50% of patients a thrombophilia will be present. A high recurrence rate of VTE (9 of 35 
patients) was reported in a prospective randomised controlled trial in nonpregnant patients, 
when thromboprophylactic doses of unfractionated heparin (5000 iu every 12 hours) were 
employed after initial management with intravenous unfractionated heparin.146 
 
In their observational study on the management of antenatal VTE in Britain and Ireland, Voke 
et al.101 found that doses of LMWH were reduced in 22% of women after initial treatment; the 
reasons given included clinical improvement several weeks after diagnosis and transfer from 
twice- to once-daily injections. 
It is not yet established whether the dose of LMWH or unfractionated heparin can be reduced 
to an intermediate dose after an initial period of therapeutic anticoagulation. In view of the 
compelling safety data for LMWHs,83–87 we continue to recommend continuation of therapeutic 
doses based on the patient’s weight throughout pregnancy. Reducing to an intermediate dose 
may be useful in pregnant women at increased risk of bleeding or osteoporosis.D
C
Evidence 
level 3Evidence 
level 3
B
C
Evidence 
level 1+
Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 2++RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists18 of 32Women should be taught to self-inject and can then be managed as outpatients until delivery; 
arrangements should be made to allow safe disposal of needles and syringes. A clinical audit 
and a prospective cohort study have shown good levels of compliance with LMWH self-
injection therapy during the antenatal period.147,148 
Prolonged unfractionated heparin use during pregnancy may result in osteoporosis and 
fractures.93,149 As discussed previously (section 6.1), the risk of osteoporosis with LMWH is much 
less than with unfractionated heparin, with one systematic review reporting a risk of 0.04%.84 
Allergic skin reactions to heparin can occur and may require the heparin preparation to be 
changed.150 A prospective observational study of 111 pregnant women receiving heparin 
treatment (94 had LMWH and 17 had unfractionated heparin) found heparin-induced skin 
reactions in 22 (19.8%).151 All lesions were caused by allergic delayed-type hypersensitivity 
reactions and the median time of onset was 50.5 days (range 5–184 days). 
In women who are unable to tolerate heparin, usually because of allergic skin reactions without 
evidence of HIT, an alternative LMWH can be prescribed, although the cross-reactivity rate to 
different heparin preparations is 33.3%.151 Where the problem persists or in women with HIT, 
the use of danaparoid, a low-molecular-weight heparinoid, can be considered. A review of 91 
pregnancies in 83 women concluded that danaparoid is an effective and safe antithrombotic 
in pregnancy for women who are intolerant of heparin.152
8.2 Can vitamin K antagonists be used during pregnancy for the maintenance treatment of VTE?
Because of their adverse effects on the fetus, vitamin K antagonists, such as warfarin, should not 
be used for antenatal VTE treatment. 
Vitamin K antagonists cross the placenta readily and are associated with adverse pregnancy 
outcomes including miscarriage, prematurity, low birthweight, neurodevelopmental problems 
and fetal and neonatal bleeding. They are also associated with a characteristic embryopathy 
following fetal exposure in the first trimester.153,154 
8.3 Is there a role for the new anticoagulants in the treatment of VTE in pregnancy?
Consideration should be given to the use of newer anticoagulants (fondaparinux, argatroban or 
r-hirudin) in pregnant women who are unable to tolerate heparin (LMWH or unfractionated heparin) 
or danaparoid and who require continuing anticoagulant therapy. 
Case reports and case series have described the use of newer anticoagulants in pregnancy 
following the development of HIT or skin allergy to heparins; these preparations are 
administered parenterally and include fondaparinux (a selective factor-Xa inhibitor),112,155,156 
argatroban (a direct thrombin inhibitor)157–160 and r-hirudin (a direct thrombin inhibitor).161–165 
While these drugs are not licensed for use in pregnancy, preliminary data regarding their 
safety and efficacy in pregnancy are reassuring; fondaparinux has been recommended by a 
group of experts (the Pregnancy and Thrombosis Working Group) as an alternative to LMWH 
when HIT occurs in pregnancy.166
There are no reports on the use of the non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants (NOACs, 
previously called new or novel oral anticoagulants, e.g. rivaroxaban, apixaban, betrixaban and 
dabigatran) in pregnancy or the puerperium and as they are likely to cross the placenta and 
have potential direct fetal effects, they should therefore be avoided in the antenatal period.154CEvidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 2++
Evidence 
level 2–
Evidence 
level 3
DEvidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 4RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists19 of 329. Anticoagulant therapy during labour and delivery
9.1 Should anticoagulant therapy be altered during labour and delivery?
When VTE occurs at term, consideration should be given to the use of intravenous unfractionated 
heparin which is more easily manipulated. 
The woman on LMWH for maintenance therapy should be advised that once she is in established 
labour or thinks that she is in labour, she should not inject any further heparin. 
Where delivery is planned, either by elective caesarean section or induction of labour, LMWH 
maintenance therapy should be discontinued 24 hours prior to planned delivery. 
Regional anaesthetic or analgesic techniques should not be undertaken until at least 24 hours 
after the last dose of therapeutic LMWH. 
LMWH should not be given for 4 hours after the use of spinal anaesthesia or after the epidural 
catheter has been removed, and the epidural catheter should not be removed within 12 hours of 
the most recent injection. 
Where possible, anticoagulant therapy should be altered to avoid an unwanted anticoagulant effect 
during delivery. Women should be advised not to inject any further heparin if they are in established 
labour or think they are in labour.
For elective delivery, LMWH should be stopped 24 hours before induction of labour or caesarean 
section. Subcutaneous unfractionated heparin should be discontinued 12 hours before and 
intravenous unfractionated heparin stopped 6 hours before induction of labour or regional 
anaesthesia.167 Women who present in labour shortly after injecting LMWH can be reassured that 
bleeding complications are very uncommon with LMWH (see section 6.1). If spontaneous labour 
occurs in women receiving therapeutic doses of subcutaneous unfractionated heparin, careful 
monitoring of the APTT is required (see above for use of APTT in pregnancy). If it is markedly 
prolonged near delivery, protamine sulfate may be required to reduce the risk of bleeding. 
When VTE occurs at term, the risk of recurrent thrombosis may be increased if anticoagulant 
therapy is discontinued to allow a planned induction of labour or caesarean section; one study 
suggested that the risk of recurrent VTE is higher within 2 weeks of the initial thrombosis.168 
Consideration can be given to the use of intravenous unfractionated heparin which is more easily 
manipulated and, because of its shorter half-life, minimises the duration without anticoagulant 
therapy. However, as noted previously, there are issues in monitoring unfractionated heparin in 
pregnancy using the APTT. One approach to the use of anticoagulant therapy in this situation 
has been described by McLintock et al.40
The incidence of spinal haematoma after regional anaesthesia (with or without antithrombotic 
therapy) in the obstetric population is unknown. It is considered that obstetric patients have 
a lower incidence of spinal haematoma than elderly patients.169,170 Epidural anaesthesia can be 
sited in obstetric patients undergoing treatment for VTE only after discussion with a senior 
anaesthetist, in keeping with local anaesthetic protocols. When a woman presents while on a 
therapeutic regimen of LMWH, regional techniques should not be employed for at least 24 hours 
after the last dose of LMWH. LMWH should not be given for at least 4 hours after the epidural 
catheter has been removed and the catheter should not be removed within 12 hours of the most 
recent injection.167
For delivery by elective caesarean section, the treatment doses of LMWH should be omitted 
for 24 hours prior to surgery. A thromboprophylactic dose of LMWH (enoxaparin 40 mg; DD
Evidence 
level 4D
P
DRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists20 of 32dalteparin 5000 iu; tinzaparin 75 iu/kg) should be given 4 hours postoperatively (at least 4 hours 
after removal of the epidural catheter, if appropriate) and the treatment dose recommenced 
8 to 12 hours later. 
9.2 Are specific surgical measures required for anticoagulated patients undergoing delivery 
by caesarean section?
In patients receiving therapeutic doses of LMWH, wound drains (abdominal and rectus sheath) 
should be considered at caesarean section and the skin incision should be closed with interrupted 
sutures to allow drainage of any haematoma. 
Measures should be taken to allow drainage of any haematoma, including the use of drains and 
interrupted skin sutures. A case–control study has reported an increased incidence of wound 
complications in women receiving peripartum anticoagulation.171 The incidence of wound 
haematoma was 9.1% in women receiving anticoagulation and 1.3% in controls. 
9.3 What anticoagulant therapy should be employed in women at high risk of haemorrhage?
Any woman who is considered to be at high risk of haemorrhage, and in whom continued heparin 
treatment is considered essential, should be managed with intravenous unfractionated heparin 
until the risk factors for haemorrhage have resolved. 
Unfractionated heparin has a shorter half-life than LMWH and its activity is more completely 
reversed with protamine sulfate. It should therefore be used in situations when anticoagulation 
is required but concerns exist regarding bleeding; these situations include: antepartum 
haemorrhage, coagulopathy, progressive wound haematoma, suspected intra-abdominal 
bleeding, and postpartum haemorrhage. One regimen for the administration of unfractionated 
heparin is given in section 6.4. If a woman develops a haemorrhagic problem while on LMWH, 
the treatment should be stopped and advice sought from a haematologist. Protamine sulfate 
reverses the anti-IIa fraction of LMWH, but does not fully reverse the anti-Xa effect; case series 
have shown that it is useful in the management of bleeding associated with LMWH in some, 
but not all, patients.172
10. Postnatal anticoagulation
How should anticoagulation be managed postnatally?
Therapeutic anticoagulant therapy should be continued for the duration of the pregnancy and for at 
least 6 weeks postnatally and until at least 3 months of treatment has been given in total. Before 
discontinuing treatment the continuing risk of thrombosis should be assessed. 
Women should be offered a choice of LMWH or oral anticoagulant for postnatal therapy after 
discussion about the need for regular blood tests for monitoring of warfarin, particularly during 
the first 10 days of treatment. 
Postpartum warfarin should be avoided until at least the fifth day and for longer in women at 
increased risk of postpartum haemorrhage. 
Women should be advised that neither heparin (unfractionated or LMWH) nor warfarin is 
contraindicated in breastfeeding. 
National guidelines in the UK recommend that in nonpregnant patients anticoagulant therapy 
should be continued for at least 3 months for proximal DVT or PE and longer if the risk of 
recurrent VTE is considered to be high.12 The presence of continuing prothrombotic factors 
that are a feature of pregnancy (see section 8.1) and the safety of LMWH have led authorities P
PPEvidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 4Evidence 
level 4
DEvidence 
level 2+
C
DRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists21 of 32to propose that, in the management of VTE in pregnancy, anticoagulant therapy should be 
continued for the duration of the pregnancy and until at least 6 weeks postpartum and to 
allow a total duration of treatment of at least 3 months.81 Both heparin and warfarin are 
satisfactory for use postpartum. NOACs (see section 8.3) could be considered in women who 
are not breastfeeding, although no reports were identified of their use in the puerperium. 
Before discontinuing treatment the continuing risk of thrombosis should be assessed. 
Women should be offered a choice of LMWH or oral anticoagulant for postnatal therapy after discussion 
about the need for regular blood tests for monitoring of warfarin. If the woman chooses to continue 
with LMWH postnatally, then the doses and dosage schedule that were employed antenatally should 
be continued. 
A prospective cohort study has shown that women’s adherence to LMWH therapy decreases 
postnatally (mean percentage adherence to LMWH antenatally was 97.92% and 93.37% 
postnatally). The authors conclude that healthcare workers should reinforce the necessity of 
adherence to LMWH treatment during the postpartum period.148 
If the woman chooses to commence warfarin postpartum, this should be avoided until at least the 
fifth postnatal day. Daily testing of the international normalised ratio (INR) is recommended during 
the transfer from LMWH to warfarin to avoid over-anticoagulation. Warfarin administration should be 
delayed in women considered to be at risk of postpartum haemorrhage. 
A systematic review on dosage regimens for initiating warfarin found no evidence to suggest a 
10 mg loading dose is superior to 5 mg, although no studies in that review involved obstetric 
patients.173 
A case–control study investigated the number of days and total warfarin dose required to 
achieve therapeutic INR in a group of postpartum women compared to a group of matched 
nonpregnant women.174 The postpartum women required larger doses of warfarin and took 
significantly longer to reach therapeutic INR; the authors propose that the coagulation changes 
that occur in pregnancy and persist into the puerperium antagonise warfarin and may justify 
higher loading doses. 
The regimen for commencing warfarin should be based on nomograms developed with 
haematologists175 (for an example, see Appendix II). The INR should be checked on day two of 
warfarin treatment and subsequent warfarin doses titrated to maintain the INR between 2.0 and 
3.0; heparin treatment should be continued until the INR is greater than 2.0 for at least 24 hours.176
Neither heparin (unfractionated or LMWH) nor warfarin is contraindicated in breastfeeding. 
There is little published data on whether LMWHs are secreted in breast milk; in a case series of 
15 women receiving LMWH after caesarean section, small amounts of heparin were detected 
in the breast milk of 11 patients.177 Since neither unfractionated heparin nor LMWH is orally 
active, no clinical effect would be anticipated in the infant.178 Warfarin does not pass into 
breast milk to any measurable degree; it is 99% bound to serum proteins which results in 
minimal transfer to breast milk.179,180
11. Prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome
What measures can be employed to prevent the development of post-thrombotic syndrome?
Women should be advised that prolonged use of LMWH (more than 12 weeks) is associated with a 
significantly lower chance of developing post-thrombotic syndrome. Evidence 
level 4
BEvidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 2++
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 3RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists22 of 32Following a DVT, graduated elastic compression stockings should be worn on the affected leg to 
reduce pain and swelling. Clinicians should be aware that the role of compression stockings in the 
prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome is unclear. 
The post-thrombotic syndrome (PTS) is characterised by chronic persistent leg swelling, pain, 
a feeling of heaviness, dependant cyanosis, telangiectasis, chronic pigmentation, eczema, 
associated varicose veins and in the most severe cases, venous ulceration. A case–control 
study from Norway found a prevalence of PTS of 42% following DVT in pregnancy; proximal 
postnatal thrombosis, smoking and age greater than 33 years were independent predictors of 
the development of PTS.181 Other recognised risk factors include: recurrent ipsilateral DVT and 
obesity.182 A randomised controlled trial of long-term use of LMWH (tinzaparin for more than 
12 weeks) versus tinzaparin for 5 days then warfarin for 12 weeks in patients with proximal 
DVT reported a significantly lower rate of PTS in patients allocated to prolonged LMWH.183 A 
subanalysis has shown that the benefits of prolonged LMWH are even greater for iliac vein 
DVT (OR 0.53, 95% CI 0.33–0.83) than with non-iliac DVT (OR 0.79, 95% CI 0.67–0.93).184 
While this study was conducted in nonpregnant subjects, the results may be relevant to the 
pregnant population where iliac vein DVT is more common and prolonged use of LMWH is 
standard treatment. 
Graduated elastic compression stockings have been shown in meta-analyses of randomised 
controlled trials to offer substantial protection against the development of PTS in the nonpregnant 
(relative risk 0.54)185 and national guidelines recommend that compression hosiery (more than 
23 mmHg) should be worn on the affected leg for at least 2 years.12 More recently, the benefits 
of compression stockings in preventing PTS have been questioned. A high-quality randomised 
controlled trial of over 800 patients with proximal DVT has reported the effectiveness of 30–40 
mmHg (class II) compression stockings compared to a placebo stocking worn daily for 2 years 
on the incidence of PTS; compression stockings did not prevent the occurrence of PTS after a 
first proximal DVT and did not influence the severity of PTS or rate of recurrent VTE.186 
12. Postnatal clinic review
Postnatal review for patients who develop VTE during pregnancy or the puerperium should, 
whenever possible, be at an obstetric medicine clinic or a joint obstetric haematology clinic. 
Thrombophilia testing should be performed once anticoagulant therapy has been discontinued 
only if it is considered that the results would influence the woman’s future management. 
At the postnatal review, an assessment should be made of post-thrombotic venous damage and 
advice should be given on the need for thromboprophylaxis in any future pregnancy and at 
other times of increased risk (see Green-top Guideline No. 37a). Thrombophilia testing should 
be performed once anticoagulant therapy has been discontinued and only if it is considered 
that the results would influence the woman’s future management; testing will not alter the 
duration and intensity of acute treatment but may alter prophylaxis in subsequent pregnancy 
(Green-top Guideline No. 37a). Hormonal contraception should be discussed with reference 
to guidance from the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare.187
13. Recommendations for future research
l The role of D-dimer testing and pretest probability scoring in the diagnosis of VTE in pregnancy 
require further investigation.
l The maternal and fetal radiation risks of tests used in the diagnosis of PE in pregnancy need to be 
clarified.Evidence 
level 1+B
P
DEvidence 
level 1++
Evidence 
level 4RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists23 of 32l The role of newer diagnostic modalities (e.g. V/QSPECT) in the diagnosis of PE in pregnancy needs 
further evaluation.
l The optimum dosage regimen of LMWH for treatment of VTE in pregnancy (once daily versus two 
divided doses) merits further investigation.
l Doses of LMWH required in obese pregnant and puerperal women.
l The value and role of anti-Xa monitoring, including measurement of trough anti-Xa activity, of 
LMWH treatment in pregnancy needs further study.
l Studies are required to establish the safety and efficacy of newer anticoagulant agents in pregnancy.
l Studies are required to determine whether thrombophilia status alters the risk of recurrence of 
VTE and whether thrombophilia status requires an alteration in the duration of treatment.
l Strategies to prevent and treat post-thrombotic syndrome following DVT in pregnancy are required.
14. Auditable topics
l Documentation of risks of VTE investigations and management (100%).
l Correct therapeutic management of suspected and proven VTE (100%).
l Appropriate interval for administration of postpartum anticoagulant therapy (100%).
l Documentation of postpartum management plan (100%).
l Attendance for postnatal review and appropriate thrombophilia testing (100%).
15. Useful links and support groups
l Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Information for you: Treatment of venous 
thrombosis in pregnancy and after birth . London: RCOG; 2011 [https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/
patients/patient-leaflets/treatment-of-venous-thrombosis-in-pregnancy-and-after-birth/].
l Lifeblood: The Thrombosis Charity. Thrombosis and pregnancy . Llanwrda: Lifeblood: The 
Thrombosis Charity; 2013 [http://www.thrombosis-charity.org.uk/perch/resources/thrombosis-
pregnancy-crystal-mark-feb-2013.pdf].
References
1. Centre for Maternal and Child Enquiries (CMACE). Saving 
Mothers’ Lives: Reviewing maternal deaths to make 
motherhood safer: 2006–2008. The Eighth Report of the 
Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths in the United 
Kingdom. BJOG 2011;118 Suppl 1:57–64.
2. Confidential Enquiry into Maternal and Child Health 
(CEMACH). Why Mothers Die 2000–2002. The Sixth Report 
of the Con fidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths in the 
United Kingdom . London: RCOG Press; 2004.
3. Hull RD, Raskob GE, Carter CJ. Serial impedance 
plethysmography in pregnant patients with clinically 
suspected deep-vein thrombosis. Clinical validity of 
negative findings. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:663–7. 
4. Chan WS, Ray JG, Murray S, Coady GE, Coates G, Ginsberg 
JS. Suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: clinical 
presentation, results of lung scanning, and subsequent 
maternal and pediatric outcomes. Arch Intern Med 
2002;162:1170–5.
5. Shahir K, Goodman LR, Tali A, Thorsen KM, Hellman 
RS. Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: CT pulmonary 
angiography versus perfusion scanning. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol 2010;195:W214–20.
6. Heit JA, Kobbervig CE, James AH, Petterson TM, Bailey 
KR, Melton LJ 3rd. Trends in the incidence of venous 
thromboembolism during pregnancy or postpartum: 
a 30-year population-based study. Ann Intern Med 
2005;143:697–706.7. Pomp ER, Lenselink AM, Rosendaal FR, Doggen CJ. 
Pregnancy, the postpartum period and prothrombotic 
defects: risk of venous thrombosis in the MEGA study. 
J Thromb Haemost 2008;6:632–7.
8. Jacobsen AF, Skjeldestad FE, Sandset PM. Incidence and 
risk patterns of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy 
and puerperium—a register-based case-control study. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2008;198:233.e1–7.
9. Greer IA. Thrombosis in pregnancy: updates in diagnosis 
and management. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ 
Program 2012;2012:203–7.
10. Virkus RA, Løkkegaard EC, Lidegaard Ø, Langhoff-Roos J, 
Bjerregaard L, Skovlund CW, et al. Venous thromboembolism 
in pregnancy and the puerperal period: a study of 1210 
events. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2013;92:1135–42.
11. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). 
Prevention and management of venous thromboembol-
ism. SIGN publication no. 122. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2010.
12. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
Venous thromboembolic diseases: the management 
of venous thromboembolic diseases and the role of 
thrombophilia testing . NICE clinical guideline 144. 
Manchester: NICE; 2012.
13. Che Yaakob CA, Dzarr AA, Ismail AA, Zuky Nik Lah NA, 
Ho JJ. Anticoagulant therapy for deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT) in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2010;(6):CD007801.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists24 of 3214. Rutherford SE, Phelan JP. Deep venous thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin 
North Am 1991;18:345–70.
15. Gherman RB, Goodwin TM, Leung B, Byrne JD, Hethumumi 
R, Montoro M. Incidence, clinical characteristics, and 
timing of objectively diagnosed venous thromboembolism 
during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1999;94:730–4.
16. Bates SM, Jaeschke R, Stevens SM, Goodacre S, Wells PS, 
Stevenson MD, et al.; American College of Chest Physicians. 
Diagnosis of DVT: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention 
of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians 
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 2012;141 
2 Suppl:e351S–418S.
17. Le Gal G, Kercret G, Ben Yahmed K, Bressollette L, Robert-
Ebadi H, Riberdy L, et al.; EDVIGE study group. Diagnostic 
value of single complete compression ultrasonography in 
pregnant and postpartum women with suspected deep 
vein thrombosis: prospective study. BMJ 2012;344:e2635.
18. Chan WS, Spencer FA, Lee AY, Chunilal S, Douketis JD, 
Rodger M, et al. Safety of withholding anticoagulation in 
pregnant women with suspected deep vein thrombosis 
following negative serial compression ultrasound and iliac 
vein imaging. CMAJ 2013;185:E194–200.
19. Rodger M, Makropoulos D, Turek M, Quevillon J, Raymond F, 
Rasuli P, et al. Diagnostic value of the electrocardiogram in 
suspected pulmonary embolism. Am J Cardiol 2000;86:807–9.
20. Rodger MA, Carrier M, Jones GN, Rasuli P, Raymond F, 
Djunaedi H, et al. Diagnostic value of arterial blood gas 
measurement in suspected pulmonary embolism. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:2105–8.
21. Blanco-Molina A, Rota LL, Di Micco P, Brenner B, Trujillo-
Santos J, Ruiz-Gamietea A, et al.; RIETE Investigators. Venous 
thromboembolism during pregnancy, postpartum or during 
contraceptive use. Thromb Haemost 2010;103:306–11.
22. Ferrari E, Baudouy M, Cerboni P, Tibi T, Guigner A, Leonetti 
J, et al.; French Multicentre Registry. Clinical epidemiology 
of venous thromboembolic disease. Results of a French 
Multicentre Registry. Eur Heart J 1997;18:685–91.
23. Fidler JL, Patz EF Jr, Ravin CE. Cardiopulmonary complications 
of pregnancy: radiographic findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 
1993;161:937–42.
24. Damilakis J, Perisinakis K, Prassopoulos P, Dimovasili E, 
Varveris H, Gourtsoyiannis N. Conceptus radiation dose 
and risk from chest screen-film radiography. Eur Radiol 
2003;13:406–12. 
25. Nguyen CP, Goodman LH. Fetal risk in diagnostic radiology. 
Semin Ultrasound CT MR 2012;33:4–10.
26. Daftary A, Gregory M, Daftary A, Seibyl JP, Saluja S. Chest 
radiograph as a triage tool in the imaging-based diagnosis of 
pulmonary embolism. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2005;185:132–4.
27. Scarsbrook AF, Evans AL, Owen AR, Gleeson FV. Diagnosis 
of suspected venous thromboembolic disease in pregnancy. 
Clin Radiol 2006;61:1–12.
28. Turkstra F, Kuijer PM, van Beek EJ, Brandjes DP, ten Cate 
JW, Büller HR. Diagnostic utility of ultrasonography of leg 
veins in patients suspected of having pulmonary embolism. 
Ann Intern Med 1997;126:775–81.
29. Daniel KR, Jackson RE, Kline JA. Utility of lower extremity 
venous ultrasound scanning in the diagnosis and exclusion 
of pulmonary embolism in outpatients. Ann Emerg Med 
2000;35:547–54.
30. Mac Gillavry MR, Sanson BJ, Büller HR, Brandjes DP; 
ANTELOPE-Study Group. Compression ultrasonography 
of the leg veins in patients with clinically suspected 
pulmonary embolism: is a more extensive assessment of 
compressibility useful? Thromb Haemost 2000;84:973–6.
31. Wells PS, Ginsberg JS, Anderson DR, Kearon C, Gent M, Weitz 
J, et al. Utility of ultrasound imaging of the lower extremities 
in the diagnostic approach in patients with suspected 
pulmonary embolism. J Intern Med 2001;250:262–4.
32. James AH, Tapson VF, Goldhaber SZ. Thrombosis during 
pregnancy and the postpartum period. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2005;193:216–9.33. Knight M; UKOSS. Antenatal pulmonary embolism: risk 
factors, management and outcomes. BJOG 2008;115:453–61.
34. Cahill AG, Stout MJ, Macones GA, Bhalla S. Diagnosing 
pulmonary embolism in pregnancy using computed-
tomographic angiography or ventilation–perfusion. Obstet 
Gynecol 2009;114:124–9.
35. Revel MP, Cohen S, Sanchez O, Collignon MA, Thiam R, 
Redheuil A, et al. Pulmonary embolism during pregnancy: 
diagnosis with lung scintigraphy or CT angiography? 
Radiology 2011;258:590–8.
36. Ridge CA, McDermott S, Freyne BJ, Brennan DJ, Collins CD, 
Skehan SJ. Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: comparison 
of pulmonary CT angiography and lung scintigraphy. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol 2009;193:1223–7.
37. Bhargavan M, Sunshine JH, Hervey SL, Jha S, Vializ J, Owen 
JB. The actual role of CT and ventilation–perfusion scanning 
in workup for suspected pulmonary embolism: evidence 
from hospitals. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2009;193:1324–32. 
38. Vinayakamoorthy V, Geary S, Ganatra R. A United Kingdom 
based survey of clinical practice in the diagnosis of suspected 
pulmonary embolism. Nucl Med Commun 2010;31:112–20.
39. Leung AN, Bull TM, Jaeschke R, Lockwood CJ, Boiselle 
PM, Hurwitz LM, et al.; ATS/STR Committee on Pulmonary 
Embolism in Pregnancy. An official American Thoracic 
Society/Society of Thoracic Radiology clinical practice 
guideline: evaluation of suspected pulmonary embolism in 
pregnancy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011;184:1200–8.
40. McLintock C, Brighton T, Chunilal S, Dekker G, McDonnell 
N, McRae S, et al.; Councils of the Society of Obstetric 
Medicine of Australia and New Zealand; Australasian 
Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis. Recommendations 
for the diagnosis and treatment of deep venous thrombosis 
and pulmonary embolism in pregnancy and the postpartum 
period. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2012;52:14–22.
41. Groves AM, Yates SJ, Win T, Kayani I, Gallagher FA, Syed R, et 
al. CT pulmonary angiography versus ventilation-perfusion 
scintigraphy in pregnancy: implications from a UK survey 
of doctors’ knowledge of radiation exposure. Radiology 
2006;240:765–70.
42. Bourjeily G, Paidas M, Khalil H, Rosene-Montella K, Rodger M. 
Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Lancet 2010;375:500–12.
43. Schembri GP, Miller AE, Smart R. Radiation dosimetry and 
safety issues in the investigation of pulmonary embolism. 
Semin Nucl Med 2010;40:442–54.
44. International Commission on Radiological Protection. 
Pregnancy and medical radiation. ICRP Publication 84. 
Ann ICRP 2000;30(1).
45. Cook JV, Kyriou J. Radiation from CT and perfusion 
scanning in pregnancy. BMJ 2005;331:350.
46. Hurwitz LM, Reiman RE, Yoshizumi TT, Goodman PC, 
Toncheva G, Nguyen G, et al. Radiation dose from 
contemporary cardiothoracic multidetector CT protocols 
with an anthropomorphic female phantom: implications 
for cancer induction. Radiology 2007;245:742–50.
47. Remy-Jardin M, Remy J. Spiral CT angiography of the 
pulmonary circulation. Radiology 1999;212:615–36.
48. Allen C, Demetriades T. Radiation risk overestimated. 
Radiology 2006;240:613–4.
49. Ronckers CM, Erdmann CA, Land CE. Radiation and breast 
cancer: a review of current evidence. Breast Cancer Res 
2005;7:21–32.
50. Hurwitz LM, Yoshizumi TT, Goodman PC, Nelson RC, 
Toncheva G, Nguyen GB, et al. Radiation dose savings for 
adult pulmonary embolus 64-MDCT using bismuth breast 
shields, lower peak kilovoltage, and automatic tube current 
modulation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2009;192:244–53.
51. Bourjeily G, Chalhoub M, Phornphutkul C, Alleyne TC, 
Woodfield CA, Chen KK. Neonatal thyroid function: effect 
of a single exposure to iodinated contrast medium in utero. 
Radiology 2010;256:744–50.
52. Cutts BA, Dasgupta D, Hunt BJ. New directions in the 
diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary embolism in 
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2013;208:102–8.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists25 of 3253. Wells PS, Anderson DR, Rodger M, Forgie M, Kearon C, Dreyer 
J, et al. Evaluation of D-dimer in the diagnosis of suspected 
deep-vein thrombosis. N Eng J Med 2003;349:1227–35.
54. Francalanci I, Comeglio P, Alessandrello Liotta A, Cellai AP, 
Fedi S, Parretti E, et al. D-dimer plasma levels during normal 
pregnancy measured by specific ELISA. Int J Clin Lab Res 
1997;27:65–7.
55. Khalafallah AA, Morse M, Al-Barzan AM, Adams M, Dennis 
A, Bates G, et al. D-Dimer levels at different stages of 
pregnancy in Australian women: a single centre study 
using two different immunoturbidimetric assays. Thromb 
Res 2012;130:e171–7.
56. Yamada T, Kawaguchi S, Araki N, Takeda M, Nishida R, 
Yamada T, et al. Difference in the D-dimer rise between 
women with singleton and multifetal pregnancies. Thromb 
Res 2013;131:493–6.
57. Morikawa M, Yamada T, Yamada T, Akaishi R, Koyama T, 
Minakami H. Changes in D-dimer levels after cesarean 
section in women with singleton and twin pregnancies. 
Thromb Res 2011;128:e33–8.
58. Francalanci I, Comeglio P, Liotta AA, Cellai AP, Fedi S, 
Parretti E, et al. D-Dimer in intra-uterine growth retardation 
and gestational hypertension. Thromb Res 1995;80:89–92.
59. Elliott CG. Evaluation of suspected pulmonary embolism in 
pregnancy. J Thorac Imaging 2012;27:3–4.
60. Torbicki A, Perrier A, Konstantinides S, Agnelli G, Galiè N, 
Pruszczyk P, et al.; ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines 
(CPG). Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of acute 
pulmonary embolism: the Task Force for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Acute Pulmonary Embolism of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2008;29:2276–315.
61. Damodaram M, Kaladindi M, Luckit J, Yoong W. D-dimers as 
a screening test for venous thromboembolism in pregnancy: 
is it of any use? J Obstet Gynaecol 2009;29:101–3.
62. Levy MS, Spencer F, Ginsberg JS, Anderson JA. Reading 
between the (Guidelines). Management of submassive 
pulmonary embolism in the first trimester of pregnancy. 
Thromb Res 2008;121:705–7.
63. To MS, Hunt BJ, Nelson-Piercy C. A negative D-dimer does 
not exclude venous thromboembolism (VTE) in pregnancy. 
J Obstet Gynaecol 2008;28:222–3.
64. Ahmad A, Jamjute P, Ghosh T, Klazinga DA. D-dimer 
negative deep vein thrombosis in puerperium. Eur Clin 
Obstet Gynaecol 2008;3:131–4.
65. Chan WS, Chunilal S, Lee A, Crowther M, Rodger M, 
Ginsberg JS. A red blood cell agglutination d-dimer test to 
exclude deep venous thrombosis in pregnancy. Ann Intern 
Med 2007;147:165–70. 
66. Chan WS, Lee A, Spencer FA, Chunilal S, Crowther M, Wu 
W, et al. D-dimer testing in pregnant patients: towards 
determining the next ‘level’ in the diagnosis of deep vein 
thrombosis. J Thromb Haemost 2010;8:1004–11. 
67. Kovac M, Mikovic Z, Rakicevic L, Srzentic S, Mandic V, 
Djordjevic V, et al. The use of D-dimer with new cutoff can be 
useful in diagnosis of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2010;148:27–30.
68. Kawaguchi S, Yamada T, Takeda M, Nishida R, Yamada T, 
Morikawa M, et al. Changes in d-dimer levels in pregnant 
women according to gestational week. Pregnancy Hypertens 
2013;3:172–7.
69. Chan WS, Lee A, Spencer FA, Crowther M, Rodger M, Ramsay 
T, et al. Predicting deep venous thrombosis in pregnancy: 
out in “LEFt” field? Ann Intern Med 2009;151:85–92.
70. O’Connor C, Moriarty J, Walsh J, Murray J, Coulter-Smith S, 
Boyd W. The application of a clinical risk stratification score 
may reduce unnecessary investigations for pulmonary 
embolism in pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 
2011;24:1461–4.
71. Righini M, Jobic C, Boehlen F, Broussaud J, Becker F, Jaffrelot 
M, et al.; EDVIGE study group. Predicting deep venous 
thrombosis in pregnancy: external validation of the LEFT 
clinical prediction rule. Haematologica 2013;98:545–8.72. Robertson L, Wu O, Langhorne P, Twaddle S, Clark P, Lowe 
GD, et al.; Thrombosis: Risk and Economic Assessment of 
Thrombophilia Screening (TREATS) Study. Thrombophilia 
in pregnancy: a systematic review. Br J Haematol 
2006;132:171–96.
73. Monreal M, del Campo R, Papadakis E. Thrombophilia and 
venous thromboembolism: RIETE experience. Best Pract 
Res Clin Haematol 2012;25:285–94.
74. Ho WK, Hankey GJ, Quinlan DJ, Eikelboom JW. Risk of 
recurrent venous thromboembolism in patients with 
common thrombophilia: a systematic review. Arch Intern 
Med 2006;166:729–36.
75. Thomson AJ, Greer IA. Acute management of suspected 
thromboembolic disease in pregnancy. In: Pavord S, Hunt 
B, editors. The Obstetric Hematology Manual . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press; 2010. p. 91–8.
76. Said JM, Ignjatovic V, Monagle PT, Walker SP, Higgins JR, 
Brennecke SP. Altered reference ranges for protein C and 
protein S during early pregnancy: Implications for the 
diagnosis of protein C and protein S deficiency during 
pregnancy. Thromb Haemost 2010;103:984–8.
77. Dolovich L, Ginsberg JS. Low molecular weight heparin 
in the treatment of venous thromboembolism: an updated 
meta-analysis. Vessels 1997;3:4–11.
78. Gould MK, Dembitzer AD, Doyle RL, Hastie TJ, Garber 
AM. Low-molecular-weight heparins compared with 
unfractionated heparin for treatment of acute deep venous 
thrombosis. A meta-analysis of randomized, controlled 
trials. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:800–9.
79. Quinlan DJ, McQuillan A, Eikelboom JW. Low-molecular-
weight heparin compared with intravenous unfractionated 
heparin for treatment of pulmonary embolism: a meta-
analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med 
2004;140:175–83.
80. van Dongen CJ, van den Belt AG, Prins MH, Lensing 
AW. Fixed dose subcutaneous low molecular weight 
heparins versus adjusted dose unfractionated heparin for 
venous thromboembolism. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2004;(4):CD001100.
81. Bates SM, Greer IA, Middeldorp S, Veenstra DL, Prabulos AM, 
Vandvik PO; American College of Chest Physicians. VTE, 
thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy: 
Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 
9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-
Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 2012;141 2 
Suppl:e691S–736S.
82. Forestier F, Daffos F, Capella-Pavlovsky M. Low molecular 
weight heparin (PK 10169) does not cross the placenta 
during the second trimester of pregnancy: study by direct 
fetal blood sampling under ultrasound. Thromb Res 
1984;34:557–60.
83. Sanson BJ, Lensing AW, Prins MH, Ginsberg JS, Barkagan 
ZS, Lavenne-Pardonge E, et al. Safety of low-molecular-
weight heparin in pregnancy: a systematic review. Thromb 
Haemost 1999;81:668–72.
84. Greer IA, Nelson-Piercy C. Low-molecular-weight 
heparins for thromboprophylaxis and treatment of venous 
thromboembolism in pregnancy: a systematic review of 
safety and efficacy. Blood 2005;106:401–7.
85. Nelson-Piercy C, Powrie R, Borg JY, Rodger M, Talbot 
DJ, Stinson J, et al. Tinzaparin use in pregnancy: an 
international, retrospective study of the safety and efficacy 
profile. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2011;159:293–9.
86. Galambosi PJ, Kaaja RJ, Stefanovic V, Ulander VM. Safety 
of low-molecular-weight heparin during pregnancy: a 
retrospective controlled cohort study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol 2012;163:154–9.
87. Romualdi E, Dentali F, Rancan E, Squizzato A, Steidl L, 
Middeldorp S, et al. Anticoagulant therapy for venous 
thromboembolism during pregnancy: a systematic review 
and a meta-analysis of the literature. J Thromb Haemost 
2013;11:270–81.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists26 of 3288. Hirsh J, Warkentin TE, Shaughnessy SG, Anand SS, Halperin JL, 
Raschke R, et al. Heparin and low-molecular-weight heparin: 
mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetics, dosing, monitoring, 
efficacy, and safety. Chest 2001;119 1 Suppl:64S–94S.
89. Yusen RD, Gage BF. Outpatient treatment of acute venous 
thromboembolic disease. Clin Chest Med 2003;24:49–61.
90. Lennox C, Marr L; Reproductive Health Programme, 
Healthcare Improvement Scotland. Scottish Confidential 
Audit of Severe Maternal Morbidity. 9th Annual Report . 
[Edinburgh/Glasgow]: Healthcare Improvement Scotland; 
2013.
91. Knol HM, Schultinge L, Veeger NJ, Kluin-Nelemans HC, 
Erwich JJ, Meijer K. The risk of postpartum haemorrhage in 
women using high dose of low-molecular-weight heparins 
during pregnancy. Thromb Res 2012;130:334–8.
92. Waterstone M, Bewley S, Wolfe C. Incidence and predictors 
of severe obstetric morbidity: case-control study. BMJ 
2001;322:1089–93.
93. Dahlman TC. Osteoporotic fractures and the recurrence of 
thromboembolism during pregnancy and the puerperium 
in 184 women undergoing thromboprophylaxis with 
heparin. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:1265–70.
94. Rodger MA, Kahn SR, Cranney A, Hodsman A, Kovacs 
MJ, Clement AM, et al.; TIPPS investigators. Long-term 
dalteparin in pregnancy not associated with a decrease in 
bone mineral density: substudy of a randomized controlled 
trial. J Thromb Haemost 2007;5:1600–6.
95. Blombäck M, Bremme K, Hellgren M, Lindberg H. A 
pharmacokinetic study of dalteparin (Fragmin) during late 
pregnancy. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 1998;9:343–50.
96. Casele HL, Laifer SA, Woelkers DA, Venkataramanan R. 
Changes in the pharmacokinetics of the low-molecular-
weight heparin enoxaparin sodium during pregnancy. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 1999;181:1113–7.
97. Sephton V, Farquharson RG, Topping J, Quenby SM, Cowan 
C, Back DJ, et al. A longitudinal study of maternal dose 
response to low molecular weight heparin in pregnancy. 
Obstet Gynecol 2003;101:1307–11.
98. Thomson AJ, Greer IA. Advances in Low Molecular Weight 
Heparin Use in Pregnancy. In: Garg HG, Linhardt RJ, Hales 
CA, editors. Chemistry and Biology of Heparin and 
Heparan Sulfate . Oxford: Elsevier; 2005. p. 745–68.
99. Gibson PS, Newell K, Sam DX, Mansoor A, Jiang X, Tang S, 
et al. Weight-adjusted dosing of tinzaparin in pregnancy. 
Thromb Res 2013;131:e71–5.
100. Smith MP, Norris LA, Steer PJ, Savidge GF, Bonnar J. 
Tinzaparin sodium for thrombosis treatment and prevention 
during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004;190:495–501.
101. Voke J, Keidan J, Pavord S, Spencer NH, Hunt BJ; British 
Society for Haematology Obstetric Haematology Group. 
The management of antenatal venous thromboembolism in 
the UK and Ireland: a prospective multicentre observational 
survey. Br J Haematol 2007;139:545–58.
102. Patel JP, Green B, Patel RK, Marsh MS, Davies JG, Arya R. 
Population pharmacokinetics of enoxaparin during the 
antenatal period. Circulation 2013;128:1462–9.
103. Baglin T, Barrowcliffe TW, Cohen A, Greaves M; British 
Committee for Standards in Haematology. Guidelines 
on the use and monitoring of heparin. Br J Haematol 
2006;133:19–34.
104. National Patient Safety Agency. Reducing treatment dose 
errors with low molecular weight heparins [http://www.
nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/alerts/?entryid45=75208]. Accessed 2015 
Jan 14.
105. Rodie VA, Thomson AJ, Stewart FM, Quinn AJ, Walker ID, 
Greer IA. Low molecular weight heparin for the treatment 
of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy: a case series. 
BJOG 2002;109:1020–4.
106. Andersen AS, Berthelsen JG, Bergholt T. Venous 
thromboembolism in pregnancy: prophylaxis and 
treatment with low molecular weight heparin. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand 2010;89:15–21.107. Kitchen S, Iampietro R, Woolley AM, Preston FE. Anti Xa 
monitoring during treatment with low molecular weight 
heparin or danaparoid: inter-assay variability. Thromb 
Haemost 1999;82:1289–93.
108. Greer I, Hunt BJ. Low molecular weight heparin in pregnancy: 
current issues. Br J Haematol 2005;128:593–601.
109. Nutescu EA, Spinler SA, Wittkowsky A, Dager WE. Low-
molecular-weight heparins in renal impairment and obesity: 
available evidence and clinical practice recommendations 
across medical and surgical settings. Ann Pharmacother 
2009;43:1064–83.
110. Watson H, Davidson S, Keeling D; Haemostasis and 
Thrombosis Task Force of the British Committee for 
Standards in Haematology. Guidelines on the diagnosis 
and management of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: 
second edition. Br J Haematol 2012;159:528–40.
111. Linkins LA, Dans AL, Moores LK, Bona R, Davidson 
BL, Schulman S, et al.; American College of Chest 
Physicians. Treatment and prevention of heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention 
of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians 
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 2012;141 
2 Suppl:e495S–530S.
112. Hajj-Chahine J, Jayle C, Tomasi J, Corbi P. Successful surgical 
management of massive pulmonary embolism during the 
second trimester in a parturient with heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 
2010;11:679–81.
113. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 
Maternal Collapse in Pregnancy and the Puerperium . 
Green-top Guideline No. 56. London: RCOG; 2011.
114. Raschke RA, Gollihare B, Peirce JC. The effectiveness of 
implementing the weight-based heparin nomogram as a 
practice guideline. Arch Intern Med 1996;156:1645–9.
115. Hyers TM, Hull RD, Weg JG. Antithrombotic therapy for venous 
thromboembolic disease. Chest 1995:108 4 Suppl:335S–351S.
116. Raschke RA, Guidry JR, Foley MR. Apparent heparin 
resistance from elevated factor VIII during pregnancy. 
Obstet Gynecol 2000;96:804–6.
117. Hirsh J. Heparin. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1565–74.
118. Wan S, Quinlan DJ, Agnelli G, Eikelboom JW. Thrombolysis 
compared with heparin for the initial treatment of 
pulmonary embolism: a meta-analysis of the randomized 
controlled trials. Circulation 2004;110:744–9.
119. Jaff MR, McMurtry MS, Archer SL, Cushman M, Goldenberg 
N, Goldhaber SZ, et al.; American Heart Association 
Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Perioperative 
and Resuscitation; American Heart Association Council 
on Peripheral Vascular Disease; American Heart 
Association Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and 
Vascular Biology. Management of massive and submassive 
pulmonary embolism, iliofemoral deep vein thrombosis, 
and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: a 
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation 2011;123:1788–830.
120. Turrentine MA, Braems G, Ramirez MM. Use of 
thrombolytics for the treatment of thromboembolic disease 
during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1995;50:534–41.
121. Ahearn GS, Hadjiliadis D, Govert JA, Tapson VF. Massive 
pulmonary embolism during pregnancy successfully 
treated with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator: a 
case report and review of treatment options. Arch Int Med 
2002;162:1221–7.
122. Leonhardt G, Gaul C, Nietsch HH, Buerke M, Schleussner 
E. Thrombolytic therapy in pregnancy. J Thromb 
Thrombolysis 2006;21:271–6.
123. te Raa GD, Ribbert LS, Snijder RJ, Biesma DH. Treatment 
options in massive pulmonary embolism during pregnancy; a 
case-report and review of literature. Thromb Res 2009;124:1–5.
124. McTaggart DR, Ingram TG. Massive pulmonary embolism 
during pregnancy treated with streptokinase. Med J Aust 
1977;1:18–20.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists27 of 32125. Hall RJ, Young C, Sutton GC, Cambell S. Treatment of acute 
massive pulmonary embolism by streptokinase during 
labour and delivery. Br Med J 1972;4:647–9.
126. Kramer WB, Belfort M, Saade GR, Surani S, Moise KJ Jr. 
Successful urokinase treatment of massive pulmonary 
embolism in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1995;86:660–2.
127. Fasullo S, Scalzo S, Maringhini G, Cannizzaro S, Terrazzino 
G, Paterna S, et al. Thrombolysis for massive pulmonary 
embolism in pregnancy: a case report. Am J Emerg Med 
2011;29:698.e1–4.
128. Lonjaret L, Lairez O, Galinier M, Minville V. Thrombolysis 
by recombinant tissue plasminogen activator during 
pregnancy: a case of massive pulmonary embolism. Am J 
Emerg Med 2011;29:694.e1–2.
129. dos Santos LF, Andrade C, Rodrigues B, Moreira D, 
Delgado A, Manso P, et al. Pregnancy and acute pulmonary 
embolism: a case report. Rev Port Cardiol 2012;31:389–94. 
130. Aschwanden M, Labs KH, Engel H, Schwob A, Jeanneret C, 
Mueller-Brand J, et al. Acute deep vein thrombosis: early 
mobilization does not increase the frequency of pulmonary 
embolism. Thromb Haemost 2001;85:42–6. 
131. Blättler W, Partsch H. Leg compression and ambulation is 
better than bed rest for the treatment of acute deep venous 
thrombosis. Int Angiol 2003;22:393–400. 
132. Brandjes DP, Büller HR, Heijboer H, Huisman MV, de Rijk 
M, Jagt H, et al. Randomised trial of effect of compression 
stockings in patients with symptomatic proximal-vein 
thrombosis. Lancet 1997;349:759–62. 
133. Partsch H. Bed rest versus ambulation in the initial 
treatment of patients with proximal deep vein thrombosis. 
Curr Opin Pulm Med 2002;8:389–93. 
134. Partsch H, Blättler W. Compression and walking versus bed 
rest in the treatment of proximal deep venous thrombosis with 
low molecular weight heparin. J Vasc Surg 2000;32:861–9. 
135. Isma N, Johanssson E, Björk A, Björgell O, Robertson F, 
Mattiasson I, et al. Does supervised exercise after deep 
venous thrombosis improve recanalization of occluded vein 
segments? A randomized study. J Thromb Thrombolysis 
2007;23:25–30. 
136. Jünger M, Diehm C, Störiko H, Hach-Wunderle V, Heidrich 
H, Karasch T, et al. Mobilization versus immobilization in 
the treatment of acute proximal deep venous thrombosis: 
a prospective, randomized, open, multicentre trial. Curr 
Med Res Opin 2006;22:593–602. 
137. Romera A, Vila R, Perez-Piqueras A, Marti X, Cairols 
MA. Early mobilization in patients with acute deep vein 
thrombosis: does it increase the incidence of symptomatic 
pulmonary embolism? Phlebology 2005;20:141. 
138. Trujillo-Santos J, Perea-Milla E, Jiménez-Puente A, Sánchez-
Cantalejo E, del Toro J, Grau E, et al.; RIETE Investigators. 
Bed rest or ambulation in the initial treatment of patients 
with acute deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism: 
findings from the RIETE registry. Chest 2005;127:1631–6.
139. Prandoni P, Noventa F, Quintavalla R, Bova C, Cosmi 
B, Siragusa S, et al.; Canano Investigators. Thigh-length 
versus below-knee compression elastic stockings for 
prevention of the postthrombotic syndrome in patients 
with proximal-venous thrombosis: a randomized trial. 
Blood 2012;119:1561–5.
140. Pike GN, Hobson M, Hay E, Nash M, Hay C, Byrd L. A pilot 
audit of thromboprophylaxis compliance with graduated 
compression stockings in pregnancy. J Thromb Haemost 
2011;9 Suppl 2:431.
141. Kawamata K, Chiba Y, Tanaka R, Higashi M, Nishigami K. 
Experience of temporary inferior vena cava filters inserted 
in the perinatal period to prevent pulmonary embolism in 
pregnant women with deep vein thrombosis. J Vasc Surg 
2005;41:652–6.
142. Sendon S, Deruelle P, Dalmas AF, Lions C, Legrand A. 
Use of temporary inferior vena cava filter placement in 
pregnant women near term. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod 
Biol 2008;140:143–4.143. Gupta S, Ettles DF, Robinson GJ, Lindow SW. Inferior vena 
cava filter use in pregnancy: preliminary experience. BJOG 
2008;115:785–8.
144. Milford W, Chadha Y, Lust K. Use of a retrievable inferior 
vena cava filter in term pregnancy: case report and review 
of literature. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2009;49:331–3.
145. Liu Y, Sun Y, Zhang S, Jin X. Placement of a retrievable 
inferior vena cava filter for deep venous thrombosis in term 
pregnancy. J Vasc Surg 2012;55:1042–7.
146. Hull R, Delmore T, Genton E, Hirsh J, Gent M, Sackett 
D, et al. Warfarin sodium versus low-dose heparin in the 
long-term treatment of venous thrombosis. N Eng J Med 
1979;301;855–8.
147. Pike GN, Hobson M, Hay E, Nash M, Hay C, Byrd L. A 
pilot audit of thromboprophylaxis compliance with low 
molecular weight heparin in pregnancy. J Thromb Haemost 
2011;9 Suppl 2:431.
148. Patel JP, Auyeung V, Patel RK, Marsh MS, Green B, Arya R, 
et al. Women’s views on and adherence to low-molecular-
weight heparin therapy during pregnancy and the 
puerperium. J Thromb Haemost 2012;10:2526–34.
149. Douketis JD, Ginsberg JS, Burrows RF, Duku EK, Webber 
CE, Brill-Edwards P. The effects of long-term heparin 
therapy during pregnancy on bone density. A prospective 
matched cohort study. Thromb Haemost 1996;75:254–7.
150. Grassegger A, Fritsch P, Reider N. Delayed-type 
hypersensitivity and cross-reactivity to heparins and 
danaparoid: a prospective study. Dermatol Surg 
2001;27:47–52.
151. Schindewolf M, Gobst C, Kroll H, Recke A, Louwen F, 
Wolter M, et al. High incidence of heparin-induced allergic 
delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions in pregnancy. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:131–9.
152. Magnani HN. An analysis of clinical outcomes of 91 
pregnancies in 83 women treated with danaparoid 
(Orgaran®). Thromb Res 2010;125:297–302.
153. Schaefer C, Hannemann D, Meister R, Eléfant E, Paulus W, 
Vial T, et al. Vitamin K antagonists and pregnancy outcome. 
A multi-centre prospective study. Thromb Haemost 
2006;95:949–57.
154. Tang AW, Greer I. A systematic review on the use of new 
anticoagulants in pregnancy. Obstet Med 2013;6:64–71.
155. Ciurzy ński M, Jankowski K, Pietrzak B, Mazanowska N, 
Rzewuska E, Kowalik R, et al. Use of fondaparinux in a 
pregnant woman with pulmonary embolism and heparin-
induced thrombocytopenia. Med Sci Monit 2011;17:CS56–9.
156. Nagler M, Haslauer M, Wuillemin WA. Fondaparinux – data 
on efficacy and safety in special situations. Thromb Res 
2012;129:407–17.
157. Ekbatani A, Asaro LR, Malinow AM. Anticoagulation 
with argatroban in a parturient with heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia. Int J Obstet Anesth 2010 ;19:82–7.
158. Young SK, Al-Mondhiry HA, Vaida SJ, Ambrose A, Botti JJ. 
Successful use of argatroban during the third trimester 
of pregnancy: case report and review of the literature. 
Pharmacotherapy 2008;28:1531–6.
159. Taniguchi S, Fukuda I, Minakawa M, Watanabe K, Daitoku 
K, Suzuki Y. Emergency pulmonary embolectomy during 
the second trimester of pregnancy: report of a case. Surg 
Today 2008;38:59–61.
160. Tanimura K, Ebina Y, Sonoyama A, Morita H, Miyata 
S, Yamada H. Argatroban therapy for heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia during pregnancy in a woman with 
hereditary antithrombin deficiency. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 
2012;38:749–52.
161. Huhle G, Geberth M, Hoffmann U, Heene DL, Harenberg 
J. Management of heparin-associated thrombocytopenia in 
pregnancy with subcutaneous r-hirudin. Gynecol Obstet 
Invest 2000;49:67–9.
162. Mehta R, Golichowski A. Treatment of heparin induced 
thrombocytopenia and thrombosis during the first 
trimester of pregnancy. J Thromb Haemost 2004;2:1665–6.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists28 of 32163. Harenberg J, Jörg I, Bayerl C, Fiehn C. Treatment of a woman 
with lupus pernio, thrombosis and cutaneous intolerance 
to heparins using lepirudin during pregnancy. Lupus 
2005;14:411–2.
164. Aijaz A, Nelson J, Naseer N. Management of heparin allergy 
in pregnancy. Am J Hematol 2001;67:268–9.
165. Hiwarkar P, Stasi R, Sutherland G, Shannon M. Deep vein 
and intracardiac thrombosis during the post-partum period 
in Behçet’s disease. Int J Hematol 2010;91:679–86.
166. Duhl AJ, Paidas MJ, Ural SH, Branch W, Casele H, Cox-
Gill J, et al.; Pregnancy and Thrombosis Working Group. 
Antithrombotic therapy and pregnancy: consensus report 
and recommendations for prevention and treatment 
of venous thromboembolism and adverse pregnancy 
outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2007;197:457.e1–21.
167. Gogarten W, Vandermeulen E, Van Aken H, Kozek S, Llau JV, 
Samama CM; European Society of Anaesthesiology. Regional 
anaesthesia and antithrombotic agents: recommendations of 
the European Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol 
2010;27:999–1015.
168. Büller HR, Gent M, Gallus AS, Ginsberg J, Prins MH, 
Baildon R; Columbus Investigators. Low-molecular-
weight heparin in the treatment of patients with venous 
thromboembolism. N Engl J Med 1997;337:657–62.
169. Crawford JS. Some maternal complications of epidural 
analgesia for labour. Anaesthesia 1985;40:1219–25.
170. Moen V, Dahlgren N, Irestedt L. Severe neurological 
complications after central neuraxial blockades in Sweden 
1990–1999. Anesthesiology 2004;101:950–9.
171. Limmer JS, Grotegut CA, Thames E, Dotters-Katz SK, 
Brancazio LR, James AH. Postpartum wound and bleeding 
complications in women who received peripartum 
anticoagulation. Thromb Res 2013;132:e19–23.
172. van Veen JJ, Maclean RM, Hampton KK, Laidlaw S, Kitchen 
S, Toth P, et al. Protamine reversal of low molecular weight 
heparin: clinically effective? Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 
2011;22:565–70.
173. Heneghan C, Tyndel S, Bankhead C, Wan Y, Keeling D, Perera 
R, et al. Optimal loading dose for the initiation of warfarin: a 
systematic review. BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2010;10:18.
174. Brooks C, Rutherford JM, Gould J, Ramsay MM, James DK. 
Warfarin dosage in postpartum women: a case–control 
study. BJOG 2002;109:187–90.
175. Kovacs MJ, Anderson DA, Wells PS. Prospective assessment of 
a nomogram for the initiation of oral anticoagulation therapy 
for outpatient treatment of venous thromboembolism. 
Pathophysiol Haemost Thromb 2002;32:131–3.176. Keeling D, Baglin T, Tait C, Watson H, Perry D, Baglin C, 
et al.; British Committee for Standards in Haematology. 
Guidelines on oral anticoagulation with warfarin – fourth 
edition. Br J Haematol 2011;154:311–24.
177. Richter C, Sitzmann J, Lang P, Weitzel H, Huch A, Huch R. 
Excretion of low molecular weight heparin in human milk. 
Br J Clin Pharmacol 2001;52:708–10.
178. Bates SM. Pregnancy-associated venous thromboembolism: 
prevention and treatment. Semin Hematol 2011;48:271–84.
179. Clark SL, Porter TF, West FG. Coumarin derivatives and 
breast-feeding. Obstet Gynecol 2000;95:938–40.
180. Orme ML, Lewis PJ, de Swiet M, Serlin MJ, Sibeon R, Baty 
JD, et al. May mothers given warfarin breast-feed their 
infants? Br Med J 1977;i:1564–5.
181. Wik HS, Jacobsen AF, Sandvik L, Sandset PM. Prevalence and 
predictors for post-thrombotic syndrome 3 to 16 years after 
pregnancy-related venous thrombosis: a population-based, 
cross-sectional, case-control study. J Thromb Haemost 
2012;10:840–7.
182. Vazquez SR, Kahn SR. Advances in the diagnosis and 
management of postthrombotic syndrome. Best Pract Res 
Clin Haematol 2012;25:391–402.
183. Hull RD, Pineo GF, Brant R, Liang J, Cook R, Solymoss S, 
et al; LITE Trial Investigators. Home therapy of venous 
thrombosis with long-term LMWH versus usual care: 
patient satisfaction and post-thrombotic syndrome. Am J 
Med 2009;122:762–9.e3.
184. Hull RD, Liang J, Merali T. Effect of long-term LMWH on 
post-thrombotic syndrome in patients with iliac/noniliac 
venous thrombosis: a subanalysis from the Home-LITE 
study. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost 2013;19:476–81.
185. Musani MH, Matta F, Yaekoub AY, Liang J, Hull RD, Stein 
PD. Venous compression for prevention of postthrombotic 
syndrome: a meta-analysis. Am J Med 2010;123:735–40.
186. Kahn SR, Shapiro S, Wells PS, Rodger MA, Kovacs MJ, Anderson 
DR, et al.; SOX trial investigators. Compression stockings to 
prevent post-thrombotic syndrome: a randomised placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet 2014;383:880–8. 
187. Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare. UK Medical 
Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use . [London]: FSRH; 
2009 (revised 2010).RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists29 of 32Appendix I: Algorithm for the investigation and initial management of suspected PE in pregnancy 
and the puerperium
Suspected PE:
– clinical assessment
– perform CXR and ECG
– test FBC, U&E, LFTs
– commence LMWH (unless treatment is contraindicated)
Perform compression 
duplex ultrasound
Compression ultrasound 
confirms DVT
Continue therapeutic 
doses of LMWHNO Is the CXR normal?
PE confirmedSymptoms and signs of DVT
YES
YES
YESPerform V/Q scan
If the clinical suspicion of PE is low, discontinue 
LMWH and consider alternative diagnoses
If the clinical suspicion of PE is high, consider 
alternative or repeat testing and continue LMWHNO
NO
NOPerform CTPA
Continue therapeutic 
doses of LMWHYES
Abbreviations 
CTPA computerised tomography pulmonary angiogram; CXR chest X-ray; DVT deep venous thrombosis; ECG electrocardiogram; 
FBC full blood count; LFTs liver function tests; LMWH low-molecular-weight heparin; PE pulmonary embolism; 
U&Es urea and electrolytes; V/Q scan ventilation/perfusion scan.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists30 of 32Appendix II: Suggested nomogram for commencing warfarin treatment in the puerperium
Day of warfarin treatment International normalised ratio (INR) Warfarin dose (mg)
First 7.0
Second 7.0
Third < 2.0 7.0
2.0–2.1 5.0
2.2–2.3 4.5
2.4–2.5 4.0
2.6–2.7 3.5
2.8–2.9 3.0
3.0–3.1 2.5
3.2–3.3 2.0
3.4 1.5
3.5 1.0
3.6–4.0 0.5
> 4.0 0.0
Fourth < 1.4 > 8.0
1.4 8.0
1.5 7.5
1.6–1.7 7.0
1.8 6.5
1.9 6.0
2.0–2.1 5.5
2.2–2.3 5.0
2.4–2.6 4.5
2.7–3.0 4.0
3.1–3.5 3.5
3.6–4.0 3.0
4.1–4.5 omit next day’s dose then give 2 mg
> 4.5 omit two days’ doses then give 1 mgRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists31 of 32Appendix III: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in 
making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. Each guideline is systematically 
developed using a standardised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical 
Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website 
at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These recommendations are not intended to dictate 
an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individual 
patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. 
It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into routine 
practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated. 
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations 
formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
At least one meta-analysis, systematic reviews 
or randomised controlled trial rated as 1++, and 
directly applicable to the target population; or 
 
A systematic review of randomised controlled 
trials or a body of evidence consisting 
principally of studies rated as 1+, directly 
applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results
A body of evidence including studies rated 
as 2++ directly applicable to the target 
population, and demonstrating overall 
consistency of results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
1++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2+ directly applicable to the target population, 
and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a very 
low risk of bias
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
low risk of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of 
randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a high 
risk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of 
case–control or cohort studies or high-
quality case–control or cohort studies 
with a very low risk of confounding, bias 
or chance and a high probability that the 
relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort 
studies with a low risk of confounding, 
bias or chance and a moderate 
probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a 
high risk of confounding, bias or chance 
and a significant risk that the 
relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, 
case series
4 Expert opinionClassification of evidence levels Grades of recommendations
Good practice point
Recommended best practice based on the 
clinical experience of the guideline 
development groupDCBA
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 37b © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists32 of 32This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by: 
Dr AJ Thomson MRCOG, Paisley and Professor IA Greer FRCOG, Liverpool
and peer reviewed by: 
British Committee for Standards in Haematology; Mrs AHD Diyaf MRCOG, Barnstaple; King’s Thrombosis Centre; 
RCOG Women’s Network. 
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr M Gupta MRCOG, London; Mr AT Leather FRCOG, Ipswich; and 
Dr P Owen FRCOG, Glasgow. 
Conflicts of interest: 
Dr Thomson was provided with a travel grant by LEO Pharma to attend an overseas conference in March 2014.
Professor Greer: none declared.
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. 
The review process will commence in 2018, unless otherwise indicated.
DISCLAIMER 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical 
practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for 
consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement 
regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light 
of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to 
be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols 
or guidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.