SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
No. 451: Asymptomatic
Endometrial Thickening in
Postmenopausal Women

Authors: Wendy Wolfman, MD, Toronto, ON
Olga Bougie, MD, Kingston, ON
Innie Chen, MD, Ottawa, ON
Yale Tang, MD, Edmonton, AB
Susan Goldstein, MD, Toronto, ON
Jeanne Bouteaud, MD, Montréal, QC

RECOMMENDED CHANGES IN PRACTICE
1. Postmenopausal women without bleeding or risk factors do not need investigations if they have endometrial thickness <11 mm on ultrasound.
2. Further endometrial investigations should be decided on an individual basis, based on specific ultrasound findings and the patient’s personal risk for endometrial cancer.

KEY MESSAGES
1. Routine pelvic ultrasound is not recommended to screen for endometrial cancer.
2. Most patients with endometrial cancer present with postmenopausal bleeding.
3. Endometrial thickness <11 mm is associated with a low risk of malignancy.
4. Patients with endometrial thickening and risk factors may need further assessments.
5. Hormone therapies in a continuous combined formulation do not increase the risk of endometrial cancer.
6. Patients on tamoxifen do not need routine ultrasound if asymptomatic.
7. Endometrial biopsy in patients with global thickening on ultrasound is accurate.
8. Invasive endometrial procedures have a low but significant complication risk.

RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. Endometrial tissue sampling should not be extrapolated to asymptomatic women.
2. Women with endometrial thickness >11 mm and other positive ultrasound findings should have endometrial sampling or be referred for further investigations.
3. Further investigations should be based on individual risk factors in asymptomatic women with increased endometrial thickening.
4. Postmenopausal women without bleeding or risk factors and endometrial thickening <11 mm do not need invasive investigations.
5. Transvaginal ultrasound is not recommended for screening for endometrial cancer.
6. Further investigations for women with endometrial thickening >11 mm should include hysterosonogram, diagnostic hysteroscopy, dilation and curettage, or monitoring.
7. Women on continuous combined hormone therapy without bleeding do not need screening ultrasounds.
8. Women on tamoxifen do not need routine ultrasound.
9. Women with cervical stenosis and no bleeding should be managed based on individual factors.

Clinical characteristics such as menopausal status, polycystic ovary syndrome, a long menstrual history, and infertility may increase the risk of hyperplasia. Lynch syndrome is an inherited risk factor for hyperplasia and endometrial cancer. Exposure to estrogen and progesterone hormone therapy post-menopause has been shown to increase the risk of hyperplasia in some studies. Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy, typically diagnosed in postmenopausal women presenting with postmenopausal bleeding. Endometrial thickness >11 mm or increased vascularity on ultrasound may warrant additional investigation with endometrial biopsy. Endometrial biopsy is recommended for assessment of endometrial tissue, with blind outpatient endometrial biopsy being a cost-effective and minimally invasive option. Systemic menopausal hormone treatments can affect endometrial thickness, with unopposed systemic estrogen increasing thickness. Newer estrogen-progestin therapies have not shown significant increases in endometrial thickness or hyperplasia.

Levonorgestrel intrauterine system combined with estrogen therapy has been shown to be effective in managing menopausal symptoms. Tibolone and tissue selective estrogen complex tablet are also options for hormone therapy. Studies have shown mixed results regarding the risk of endometrial cancer with these therapies. Transdermal testosterone as an adjunct to estradiol does not increase endometrial thickness. Limited studies on herbal or complementary menopausal products show no increase in endometrial thickness. Local hormone therapies containing estradiol, conjugated equine estrogen, or testosterone are also effective in managing genitourinary syndrome of menopause. Tamoxifen therapy is associated with thicker endometrium in postmenopausal patients. Aromatase inhibitors have been shown to reduce endometrial thickness. Cervical stenosis can complicate endometrial biopsy, and medical management options include prostaglandin E1 and osmotic dilators. Operative techniques may be necessary in cases of cervical stenosis. Routine screening for asymptomatic women on tamoxifen is not recommended. Endometrial biopsy should be considered in women with suspected pathology or at high risk for cancer.

Watchful monitoring with repeat ultrasound over 4 months may be an option if the patient is counselled with respect to her individual endometrial cancer risk. Newer literature continues to support the extremely low risk of malignancy in women with asymptomatic global endometrial thickening <10-11 mm.

Hormone therapy in postmenopausal women and risk of endometrial hyperplasia: a Cochrane review summary. Various studies have investigated the effects of different hormone therapies on endometrial safety and bleeding profiles in postmenopausal women. Results have shown varying effects on endometrial thickness and safety, with some therapies showing no significant impact. Further research is needed to fully understand the implications of hormone therapy on endometrial health in postmenopausal women.

Preoperative ripening of the cervix before operative hysteroscopy is recommended. Misoprostol prior to hysteroscopy in premenopausal and post-menopausal women is also recommended. Self-administered vaginal misoprostol is compared to placebo for cervical ripening before operative hysteroscopy. Resectoscopic cervical trauma can be minimized by inserting Laminaria digitata preoperatively. Complications of hysteroscopy should be considered in a prospective, multicenter study. Experience of hysteroscopy indications and complications should be monitored. A multicenter survey of complications associated with operative hysteroscopies is recommended. Ultrasonography can be used in difficult postmenopausal dilation and curettage. Dilute vasopressin solution can affect the force needed for cervical dilatation. Hysteroscopic management of a stenotic cervix can be achieved. A hysteroscopic morcellator may help overcome cervical stenosis. Ultrasonography-guided transvaginal endometrial biopsy is useful in patients with cervical stenosis.