Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is a common condition in late pregnancy, characterized by itching and elevated bile acids. Perinatal risks include preterm birth, neonatal respiratory distress, and stillbirth. Treatment includes ursodeoxycholic acid for itching and planned early birth based on bile acid levels. Fetal monitoring has not shown to improve outcomes. Recurrence in future pregnancies is common. Clinicians should consider ICP in pregnant individuals with itching, perform bile acid testing, and offer ursodeoxycholic acid for treatment. Monitoring and delivery timing should be based on bile acid levels. Continuous fetal monitoring is recommended during labor. Resolution of symptoms should be confirmed postpartum. Patients and family members are at higher risk for ICP in future pregnancies.

This clinical practice guideline aims to evaluate and summarize the available literature on ICP and provide evidence-based recommendations for clinical care. ICP is a common gestational disease that targets the liver, with varying incidence rates globally. Bile acids play a key role in the pathophysiology of ICP, and genetic susceptibility may contribute to its development. Risk factors for ICP include advanced maternal age, multiparity, diabetes, and certain ethnicities. The most common symptom of ICP is pruritis, with elevated serum bile acids being a common laboratory finding. Diagnosis is confirmed by elevated total serum bile acids, and monitoring levels is important for fetal outcomes. Maternal and fetal sequelae of ICP include an increased risk of pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, stillbirth, preterm birth, and neonatal complications. Further testing for alternative diagnoses is recommended in certain cases.

Urocholate impacted the rate and rhythm of cardiomyocyte contraction and abnormal calcium dynamics. Evaluation of pregnancies with ICP have supported the presence of alterations to fetal cardiac parameters. The goal of treating ICP is to ameliorate maternal symptomatology of pruritus and improve fetal outcomes. Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is the most frequently used medication for ICP. Treatment with UDCA may reduce the risk of preterm birth. Refractory cases of ICP may benefit from a referral to a specialist. Follow-up laboratory testing and monitoring should be performed to gauge the magnitude of fetal risk. Fetal monitoring with electronic fetal heart rate monitoring or ultrasound may be considered. Delivery timing should be based on the highest recorded non-fasting bile acid level. Postpartum outcomes, contraception considerations, and recurrence risk should be discussed. The recurrence risk of ICP in future pregnancies is around 70%. Individuals with ICP are at an increased risk of acquiring metabolic disease during adulthood. The World Health Organization has endorsed the use of postpartum combined estrogen-progestin contraception for those with ICP. Overall, ICP is a multifactorial and common hepatic disease unique to pregnancy.

Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is a condition that can lead to adverse pregnancy outcomes and fetal complications. It is associated with elevated serum bile acid concentrations and may increase the risk of preeclampsia. Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid has been shown to be effective in managing the condition. Induction of labor may be necessary in some cases to reduce the risk of complications. Further research is needed to better understand the pathophysiology and optimal management of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy.

Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy
Differential diagnoses for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy include AFLP, allergic or drug reaction, autoimmune hepatitis, biliary obstruction, drug-induced liver injury, HELLP syndrome, and more. Recommendations for iatrogenic birth are based on non-fasting bile acid levels. Contraceptive eligibility for women with a history of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is outlined.