Management of Suspected Ovarian Masses in Premenopausal Women
This guideline provides information for clinicians on the initial assessment and management of suspected ovarian masses in premenopausal women. It clarifies when referral to a gynaecological oncologist is necessary and highlights the importance of early diagnosis and referral for improved outcomes. Conservative management and laparoscopic techniques are recommended for benign ovarian masses, with referral to a gynaecological oncologist for suspicious cases. Serum CA-125 levels and ultrasound findings are key factors in assessing the risk of malignancy. The Risk of Malignancy Index (RMI) and ultrasound rules can aid in estimating the risk of malignancy without relying solely on CA-125 levels. Women with specific ultrasound findings suggestive of malignancy should be referred to a gynaecological oncology service. Other guidelines from the USA and Canada also provide recommendations for managing premenopausal women with pelvic masses. Asymptomatic women with small simple ovarian cysts can be managed expectantly.

Women with simple ovarian cysts of 50–70 mm in diameter should have yearly ultrasound follow-up, and those with larger simple cysts should be considered for further imaging or surgical intervention. Persistent or increasing ovarian cysts may warrant surgical management, especially in cases of mature cystic teratomas. Combined oral contraceptives do not help in the treatment of functional ovarian cysts. The laparoscopic approach is preferred for elective surgical management of ovarian masses, with lower morbidity and quicker recovery time. Laparoscopic management of presumed benign ovarian cysts should be done by experienced surgeons. Aspiration of ovarian cysts is less effective and has a high rate of recurrence. Spillage of cyst contents should be avoided to prevent potential malignancy. The possibility of removing an ovary should be discussed preoperatively. Removal of benign ovarian masses should be done via the umbilical port for better outcomes. Audit topics include unexpected malignancy after laparoscopic surgery and complications following surgery for ovarian cysts.

Three-dimensional quantification of tumor vascularity as a tertiary test after B-mode and power Doppler evaluation for detection of ovarian cancer. Assessment of factors that affect the quality of performance and interpretation of sonography of adnexal masses. Effect of quality of gynaecological ultrasonography on management of patients with suspected ovarian cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Differential diagnosis of adnexal masses: risk of malignancy index, ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging, and radioimmunoscintigraphy. Simple ultrasound rules to distinguish between benign and malignant adnexal masses before surgery: prospective validation by IOTA group. The accuracy of risk scores in predicting ovarian malignancy: a systematic review. Screening for early familial ovarian cancer with transvaginal ultrasonography and colour blood flow imaging. Logistic regression model to distinguish between the benign and malignant adnexal mass before surgery: a multicenter study by the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis Group. How relevant are ACOG and SGO guidelines for referral of adnexal mass? A risk of malignancy index incorporating CA 125, ultrasound and menopausal status for the accurate preoperative diagnosis of ovarian cancer. Evaluation of a risk of malignancy index based on serum CA-125, ultrasound findings and menopausal status in the pre-operative diagnosis of pelvic masses. The risk-of-malignancy index to evaluate potential ovarian cancers in local hospitals. Comparison of two malignancy risk indices based on serum CA125, ultrasound score and menopausal status in the diagnosis of ovarian masses. Prospective evaluation of three different models for the pre-operative diagnosis of ovarian cancer. Distinguishing the benign and malignant adnexal mass: an external validation of prognostic models. Comparison of three risk of malignancy indices in evaluation of pelvic masses. A risk of malignancy index in preoperative diagnosis of ovarian cancer. Risk of malignancy index in the preoperative evaluation of patients with adnexal masses. External validation of mathematical models to distinguish between benign and malignant adnexal tumors: a multicenter study by the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis Group. Terms, definitions and measurements to describe the sonographic features of adnexal tumors: a consensus opinion from the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) Group. Management of asymptomatic ovarian and other adnexal cysts imaged at US: Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound Consensus Conference Statement. Management of functional ovarian cysts after induction of ovulation. Hormonal treatment of functional ovarian cysts: a randomized, prospective study. Expectant management of functional ovarian cysts: an alternative to hormonal therapy. Is expectant management of sonographically benign adnexal cysts an option in selected asymptomatic premenopausal women? The growth pattern of ovarian dermoid cysts: a prospective study in premenopausal and postmenopausal women. Oral contraceptives for functional ovarian cysts. Laparoscopy versus laparotomy for benign ovarian tumor: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Should adnexal mass size influence surgical approach? A series of laparoscopically managed large adnexal masses. Laparoscopic management of extremely large ovarian cysts. Laparoscopic management of giant ovarian cyst. Role of puncture and aspiration in expectant management of simple ovarian cysts: a randomised study. Operative laparoscopy for ovarian cysts. Laparoscopic excision of ovarian neoplasms subsequently found to be malignant. Laparoscopic management of ovarian dermoid cysts: a review of cases. Laparoscopic management of ovarian dermoid cysts: ten years' experience. Laparoscopic management of ovarian dermoid cysts: potential fear of dermoid spill, myths and facts. Large ovarian endometriomas. Comparison between transumbilical and transabdominal ports for the laparoscopic retrieval of benign adnexal masses: a randomized trial. Transumbilical surgical specimen retrieval: a viable refinement of laparoscopic surgery for pelvic masses.

Condensed Version:

RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 62