Maternity Services Staffing: Midwifery, nursing, and support staff for all care settings (RSCH PRH only)

This document provides a description of existing staff capacity, including midwifery and support staffing arrangements within the BSUH Maternity Department. It also outlines the process for managing short-medium term staffing issues and future staffing requirements. 

The maternity services are provided on two sites, Royal Sussex County Hospital (RSCH) and Princess Royal Hospital (PRH), as well as supporting homebirths and community services. 

The document serves as an information document for CNST and includes details on staff groups utilized by the maternity services in each care setting at RSCH and PRH. 

Specialist midwives and supervisors of midwives play key roles in providing specialist clinical care, skills, teaching, and management for the maternity services. The supervisors of midwives provide 24/7 on-call coverage for all maternity services.

1.9.2 The expected ratio of supervisors to midwives is 1:15. It is expected that 3 trainee supervisors who are supported annually to maintain ratio levels.

1.10 Manager’s on-call
1.10.1 There is a manager on-call rota 24/7 which the 3 managers and Deputy Head of Midwifery support. The Head of Midwifery is available to be contacted out of hours and will return calls/messages as soon as able.

1.11 Required staffing levels for each care setting
1.11.1 In maternity services, staffing and skill mix levels need to reflect the local model of care, case mix, the needs of women, their families, and service design. The totality of midwifery care has an impact on and implications for antenatal, intrapartum, and postnatal provision within the acute sector, as well as in primary care and community settings.

1.12 Parameters of Care and Staffing Allowances included in the ratios
1.12.1 Community-based staff have a travel time allowance. Community care for hospital births includes specific hours for antenatal and postnatal care.

1.13 Skill Mix Rationale
1.13.1 It is important to distinguish between the situations where MCA assist the midwife and where he/she replaces the midwife. Birthrate Plus makes it clear that ward and clinic staffing levels for midwives are based upon the premise that they are supported by MCA and clerical staff.

1.14 Additional Roles
1.14.1 All maternity services require additional roles to manage and provide maternity services over and above clinical care. This includes senior midwifery management, governance, risk, practice development, antenatal screening coordinator, and specialist midwives.

1.15 Required Staffing Levels
The required staffing levels for all midwifery, nursing, and support staff for each of the care settings in BSUH NHS Trust maternity services are calculated using Safer Childbirth and Birthrate Plus ratio.

Leave arrangements should be made in accordance with the Managing Sickness Absence Policy and Procedure. The Head of Midwifery and Deputy Head of Midwifery should be informed of short-term sickness leave or unplanned increased workload. Specialist midwives are expected to inform the LW coordinator of any short-term sickness or absence. Midwives and other staff on short-term leave should have the staffing shortfall addressed by the Labour ward coordinator, who may request staff to change shifts or contact the Bank office for additional staff. In cases of unplanned increased workload, the LW coordinator should attempt to find staffing cover within the existing pool of staff. 

An annual review of midwifery, nursing, and support staffing levels in maternity services should be conducted to ensure they are in line with recommendations. If staffing issues cannot be resolved at departmental or divisional levels, a business case should be prepared and submitted for funding consideration. The progress of the business plan should be monitored and reported back regularly. Compliance with staffing standards and contingency plans should be audited annually or as indicated. 

References: Birthrate Plus 2009 Evidence based ratios for Midwifery Workforce Planning, Royal College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 2007 Safer Childbirth: minimum Standards for the Organisation and Delivery of Care in Labour.