Perinatal Care for Trans and Non-Binary People (RSCH PRH only) MP005

Key Principles
Scope
Responsibilities
1 General Approach
1.1 Validity and Rights
1.2 Language
1.3 Environment
1.4 Communication
1.6 Documentation
1.7 In-patient Care
2 Pre-conception Care
3 Antenatal Care
4 Intrapartum Care
5 Postnatal Care
6 Audit and Service Development
7 Appendices

Individuals should be addressed by their preferred name and pronouns, even if not updated in the system. Pronoun stickers can be used for communication in perinatal care. Privacy and dignity should be maintained in in-patient care. Trans and non-binary individuals may need support with conception and pregnancy. Antenatal care should include discussions on hormone therapy and surgeries. Professionals should be aware of potential gender dysphoria and provide appropriate support. Trauma-informed care should be practiced during clinical examinations. Catheter selection should be in line with protocol for pregnant individuals.

4.4.3 People who have had lower surgery may have also had their urethra relocated and/or lengthened. In these situations, professionals should ask the individual about the location and length of their urethra prior to attempting catheterisation. 
4.4.4 Insertion technique is the same for all people who do not have a prostate – i.e. cis women, trans men and non-binary people assigned female at birth. 
4.4.5 An aseptic non-touch technique should be used for catheter insertion, using the non-dominant hand to stabilise the penis/phallus, or any other tissues, as necessary. 
4.4.6 In/out catheters may be too short for people who have had lower surgery which includes urethral lengthening. In these circumstances, standard length indwelling catheters (40cm) can be inserted temporarily, effectively functioning as in/out catheters. 

5 Postnatal Care 
5.1 On shared wards that are typically used for cis women, trans and non-binary individuals should be offered the choice between a side-room or shared accommodation on the ward, including the Postnatal Ward. 
5.2 Postnatal checks should be performed as per MP071 Provisions and Schedules of Postnatal Care Pathway, taking into account additional communication needs while also ensuring safe and thorough care. 
5.2.2 Assessment of chest health is important, including for people who have had top surgery, as usually some mammary tissue still remains. Professionals should discuss signs and symptoms of mastitis, particularly if the individual has had their nipples grafted or removed altogether. 
5.3 Refer to the My Language Preferences sheet, a copy of which should be transferred over from the Antenatal Care Record. 
5.4 Professionals should discuss the potential for postnatal depression with all gestational parents. Those who have previously taken testosterone may be more at risk, or their experience of postnatal depression may be different to cis women. 

5.5 Trans and non-binary parents should be supported in their choices regarding infant feeding. Breast/chestfeeding or expressing may still be possible after top surgery, as long as the nipples have not been permanently removed. 
5.6 Some parents may be keen to initiate, or resume, testosterone therapy soon after they have birthed. 
5.7 The current legal process for registration of birth in the UK stipulates that the birth parent is always recorded as “Mother” regardless of gender identity or legal sex. 
5.8 Contraception is recommended for all birthing parents, if they engage in sexual activity that could result in conception.

Gender expression is how a person presents themselves, while gender identity is a person's innate sense of their own gender. Gender reassignment involves changing the body to align with a person's gender. Hormone therapy can induce physical and emotional changes for some trans and non-binary individuals. Intersex people are born with physical sex characteristics that don't fit typical norms. Lower surgery refers to gender-affirming genital surgeries. Misgendering can have a negative impact on trans individuals. Transition involves making permanent changes to align with a person's gender identity. Trans men and trans women are individuals who identify as a different gender than their sex assigned at birth. Transphobia is the fear or dislike of someone based on their trans or non-binary identity. Victimisation occurs when someone is treated poorly for making a complaint related to gender reassignment discrimination.

Appendix 7 – My Language Preferences  
Birth parent: Pronouns:  
Co-parent/s: Pronouns:  
Additional support person: Pronouns:  
Anatomical Term Preferred Term Example  
Breast/s  
Breastfeeding  
Breastmilk  
Cervix  
Clitoris  
Labia  
Perineum  
Uterus  
Vagina  
Vaginal examination  
Vulva  

NICE CG190, 2014:  
Treat all [people] in labour with respect. Ensure that [they] are in control of and involved in what is happening to [them], and 
recognise that the way in which care is given is key to this. To facilitate this, establish a rapport with the [birthing person], ask 
[them] about [their] wants and expectations for labour, and be aware of the importance of tone and demeanour, and of the 
actual words used. Use this information to support and guide [them] through [their] labour. NMC The Code, 2015:  
1 Treat people as individuals and uphold their dignity  
1.3 avoid making assumptions and recognise diversity and individual choice  
2 Listen to people and respond to their preferences and concerns  
2.2 recognise and respect the contribution that people can make to their own health and wellbeing  
7 Communicate clearly  
7.2 take reasonable steps to meet people’s language and communication needs, providing, wherever possible, 
assistance to those who need help to communicate their own or other people’s needs  

Name: NHS No.  
MY LANGUAGE PREFERENCES  
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust Version 1 March 2020 Perinatal Care for Trans and Non-Binary People MP005