Antenatal screening for Hepatitis B aims to identify and manage the infection early in pregnancy to reduce the risk of transmission to the baby. Screening should be offered at the first antenatal contact, with information provided to enable informed choice. Testing should ideally be done before 10 weeks, but can be offered at any point during pregnancy. Repeat testing may be considered in certain high-risk cases. Women who decline screening should be informed of the benefits and offered further discussion with a specialist. If screening is declined, follow-up should be offered at later stages of pregnancy.

Obstetric Consultants include a Consultant Virologist, Antenatal Screening Co-ordinator, Neonatal secretary, and Consultant Neonatologist. 

Samples for antenatal screening for infectious diseases should be taken at booking by a midwife or nurse. Samples should be labeled according to guidelines and sent to Brighton Pathology for processing. 

Unacceptable samples will require a repeat within 10 working days. Results will be available within 5 working days and should be followed up within 10 days. 

Negative results for Hepatitis B should be explained to the woman, emphasizing the need for continued caution. Women can request repeat screening at any time during pregnancy. 

Positive Hepatitis B results require confirmatory testing and follow-up care coordinated by the Specialist Midwife for Reproductive Health and Wellbeing. 

Babies born to HBV-infected mothers should receive a full course of vaccination within the first year of life. Babies may also require Hepatitis B immunoglobulin depending on the mother's status. 

Mothers should be given written information about their baby's injections and the importance of completing the full course of immunization. After administration, documentation should be made in the baby's notes.

The midwife should telephone the SMRHW to advise of date/time of birth and date/time that the first vaccine was administered. The neonatal secretaries also send a copy of the Hepatitis B Notification form to the SMRHW as a second alert. The Child Health Record Unit informs the consultant community paediatrician who arranges for a blood test form to be sent to the parents at 1 year. Follow-up to ensure babies have received their full vaccine schedule varies between localities. Minimum auditable standards include data on women booking, eligible for screening, tested, declining screening, diagnosed with new Hep B infection, diagnosed with old HBV infection, high infectivity, specialist assessment within 10 working days, and babies born to positive women receiving appropriate vaccinations within 12 hours. The Specialist Midwife for Reproductive Health and Wellbeing will maintain databases of women declining screening and women with a hep B positive status and outcome of babies born to Hep B positive mothers. An annual audit of women's notes will take place. All incidents related to antenatal screening for Hepatitis B are reported via the trust's internal reporting system. The Antenatal Screening for Infectious Diseases Steering Group meets twice yearly to address all issues pertaining to Hep B screening. All women are given information booklet 'Screening tests for you and your baby' at booking. Screening for HIV, Hep B, and syphilis is recommended. Screening results are followed up within 10 working days. The SMRHW completes the follow-up of Hepatitis B positive results, including completing an immunization consent form and referring the woman to the liver unit for follow-up. The role of the midwife after birth includes informing the on-call pediatrician, completing the PCHR, informing the SMRHW of the birth and vaccine administration, and ensuring the full course of vaccines is completed.

Antenatal screening for Hepatitis B is important due to the risk of transmission from mother to child and the potential for chronic infection, cirrhosis of the liver, and liver cancer. It can be transmitted through blood, sexual contact, and vertical transmission. The risk of transmission is higher in mothers who are HBV e-antigen positive. It is crucial to screen for Hepatitis B during pregnancy to prevent complications.