Antenatal screening for HIV aims to identify HIV-positive pregnant women early to reduce the risk of mother-to-child transmission, facilitate appropriate management, and safeguard the woman's health. Screening should be offered early in pregnancy, ideally by 10 weeks, and to all women regardless of previous screening results. Women booking late or arriving unbooked should still be offered screening. Known HIV-positive women should be re-screened. If a positive diagnosis is known, the woman should be referred to a specialist for appropriate management.

7.0 Declining Screening
Screening is optional. All women have the right to decline screening. In these cases, the midwife should complete a booking blood test declined form and return to the SMRHW. The decision to decline screening must be clearly documented by the midwife in the hand-held notes. Where women decline screening, the midwife should ensure that the woman is aware she can opt for screening at any stage later in her pregnancy and is aware of how to arrange this. The woman should also be informed that they will be contacted by the SMRHW to further discuss their choices.

7.2 If the woman remains unscreened at 28 weeks, the midwife should re-offer screening at the 28-week visit. The SMRHW will follow up at 32 weeks, and if the woman remains unscreened, will inform various staff members by email.

8 Taking the Sample
The sample may be taken at booking by the midwife or practice nurse. The sample must be labeled according to laboratory guidelines. Additional information should be included on the request form if relevant.

9 Unacceptable Samples
If the sample is deemed unacceptable, the laboratory will inform the sample requestor to request a repeat. A repeat sample should ideally be taken within 10 working days of the request being received by the maternity unit.

10 Results Processes
Results will be available within 5 working days. Failsafes are in place to ensure all women who accept screening receive a result. It is the responsibility of the sample requestor to follow up results within 10 working days. Women who terminate or miscarry should also be notified of their results.

11 Negative Result
A negative result does not confer protection on the woman. The option for a repeat test later in the pregnancy should be offered in cases where the woman is anxious about her status. Women can also request repeat screening at any stage of the pregnancy.

12 Follow Up For Women with an HIV Positive Result
All confirmatory testing is performed in Brighton pathology laboratory. The virology laboratory staff will inform the Specialist Midwife for Reproductive Health and Wellbeing and designated Health Advisors by email of an HIV positive or equivocal result. Various members of staff are also informed about an HIV positive result.

13 Documentation/ Liaison with Other Members of the Healthcare Team
Women have a right to confidentiality regarding an HIV positive result. The SMRHW has the responsibility to inform certain staff once informed consent has been obtained.

14 On-Going Care of Women Living With HIV In Pregnancy
Refer to the BSUH protocols for further guidance on management.

15 Audit and Monitoring
Minimum auditable standards include collecting data on the number of women booking, eligible for screening, tested, declining screening, diagnosed with newly diagnosed HIV infection, and attending for.

Specialist assessment within 10 working days of a positive result. Data requirements for screening are available online. Annual audit of women's notes will be conducted. Training for midwives on antenatal screening is mandatory. Incidents related to screening for HIV are reported internally. Care pathway for antenatal screening includes offering screening for HIV at booking. Results of HIV screening must be followed up within 10 working days. Contact information for key personnel is provided. HIV is a blood-borne virus that can be transmitted through various means. Pregnant women are offered screening for HIV to reduce the risk of transmission to the child.