DNA Appointments (RSCH PRH only) MP017

Key Principles: A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope: This protocol applies to women and people who do not attend appointments.

Responsibilities: Midwives & Obstetricians are responsible for accessing, reading, understanding, and following this guidance. Management is responsible for ensuring the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National recommendations.

Introduction: Women and people who do not access care are at higher risk of maternal & fetal complications and death. Practitioners should personally and actively follow up regular non-attendance or 'no access'.

Principles: Develop pathways to facilitate antenatal and postnatal care for childbearing women and people who do not actively engage with maternity services.

Guidelines for care: Highlight vulnerable groups and ensure appropriate referral/liaison with multidisciplinary team/specialist agencies. Each woman should have a flexible and individual care plan drawn up at booking.

Responsibilities of Relevant Staff Groups: Midwives, Clinic lead Midwife, Area Manager, Team Leader, Appropriate Specialist, and Ward Clerks each have specific responsibilities in ensuring women and people who miss appointments are followed up and seen.

Process for Ensuring that Women and People who Miss any Type of Antenatal Appointment are Followed-Up and Seen: Detailed process for community antenatal clinic, antenatal clinic in hospital, and missed DAU/Triage/Labour ward appointment.

Missed Obstetric Scan Appointment: Ultrasonographer informs clinic lead midwife of any missed scan appointments for follow-up.

References: Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths in the United Kingdom (2010) Saving Mothers Lives; reviewing maternal deaths to make motherhood safer; 2006-2008. MBRRACE-UK - Saving Lives, Improving Mothers' Care 2017.

Name of midwife:  
Action taken: 

Third appointment missed:  
Date of appointment  
Location of appointment  
Gestation  

Name of midwife:  
Action taken:  

At next appointment attended, please secure top page in the antenatal pages of the maternal notes. The carbon copy to be submitted to team leader for activity audit.  

If 3 appointments missed, please inform team leader and submit carbon copy for activity audit.