Hypertension & Pre-eclampsia in Pregnancy

Key Principles:
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope:
This protocol applies to all pregnant women/people with Hypertensive Disease.

Responsibilities:
Midwives & Obstetricians: To access, read, understand and follow this guidance. To use their professional judgement in application of this protocol.
Management Team: To ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National recommendations. To ensure the protocol is accessible to all relevant staff.

Definitions:
Hypertension: Systolic over 140mmHg on two separate occasions in pregnancy. Diastolic over 90mmHg on two separate occasions in pregnancy.
Pre-existing hypertension: Women/people with hypertension at the booking appointment or before 20 weeks of pregnancy.
Gestational hypertension: New-onset hypertension presenting after 20 weeks of pregnancy.
Pre-eclampsia: Raised BP on two occasions at >20/40 gestation with significant proteinuria.
Eclampsia: Pre-eclampsia with seizures.
HELLP Syndrome: Subtype of preeclampsia with severe features.
Preeclampsia superimposed upon pre-existing hypertension: New onset of proteinuria or end-organ dysfunction after 20 weeks of gestation in a woman with pre-existing hypertension.

Antenatal Management:
Risk assessment and Antiplatelet agent (150mg Aspirin) for high-risk individuals. Assessment of proteinuria in hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Referral and management guidance for midwives in antenatal clinic setting.

Management of Chronic Hypertension:
Pre-pregnancy advice, treatment options, antihypertensive drugs, antenatal appointments, and timing of birth.

Do not offer planned early birth before 37 weeks to women/people with chronic hypertension whose blood pressure is lower than 160/110 mmHg, with or without antihypertensive treatment, unless there are other medical indications or fetal growth restriction. For women/people with chronic hypertension whose blood pressure is lower than 160/110 mmHg with or without antihypertensive treatment, timing of birth should be agreed after 37 weeks between the woman and the senior obstetrician. If planned early birth is necessary, offer a course of antenatal corticosteroids and magnesium sulphate if indicated. Postnatal monitoring should include measuring blood pressure daily for the first 2 days after birth, at least once between day 3 and day 5 after birth, and as clinically indicated if antihypertensive treatment is changed after birth. Aim to keep blood pressure lower than 140/90 mmHg and continue antihypertensive treatment if required. Review antihypertensive treatment 2 weeks after birth with their GP or specialist, and offer a medical review 6-8 weeks after birth. Management of gestational hypertension includes a full assessment in a secondary care setting and consideration of various risk factors. Antihypertensive drugs such as labetalol, nifedipine, or methyldopa should be considered based on side-effect profiles, risks, and the woman's preferences. Timing of birth for gestational hypertension should not be offered before 37 weeks unless there are other medical indications or fetal growth restriction. If planned early birth is necessary, offer a course of antenatal corticosteroids and magnesium sulphate if indicated. Postnatal monitoring should include measuring blood pressure daily for the first 2 days after birth, at least once between day 3 and day 5 after birth, and as clinically indicated if antihypertensive treatment is changed after birth. Continue antihypertensive treatment if required and offer a medical review with their GP or specialist 2 weeks after transfer to community care. For pre-eclampsia, assessment should be performed by a healthcare professional trained in the management of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Features of severe pre-eclampsia should be monitored, and management and treatment should aim for a target blood pressure of 135/85 mmHg or less. In cases of acute severe hypertension, severe pre-eclampsia, or eclampsia, women/people should be managed in a high dependency unit environment, and anticonvulsants such as intravenous magnesium sulphate should be given. Recurrent fits should be treated with additional doses of magnesium sulphate, and observations should be conducted at least hourly. Monitoring of serum magnesium levels is recommended in certain cases. Do not use diazepam, phenytoin, or other anticonvulsants as an alternative to magnesium sulphate in women/people with eclampsia. Acute management of severe hypertension should be initiated for blood pressure of 160/110 mmHg or MAP 125 or more during pregnancy or after birth.

immediately with one of the following:  
Labetalol infusion: - First Line Treatment  
Intravenous labetalol should be used for first-line therapy because it is effective, has a rapid onset of action, and a good safety profile.  
Step 1 Begin with 20mg intravenously over 2 minutes  
Step 2 If BP remains above target level at 10 minutes, give 40mg IV over 2 minutes  
Step 3 If BP remains above target level at 20 minutes, give 80mg IV over 2 minutes  
Step 4 If BP remains above target level at 30 minutes, give 80mg IV over 2 minutes  
Step 5 If BP remains above target level at 40 minutes, give 80mg IV over 2 minutes  
Step 1 Infusion of labetalol via syringe pump at 5mg/ml starting rate of 4ml/hr or 20mg/hr  
Step 2 If BP remains above target level at 30 minutes increase to 40mg/hr  
Step 3 If BP remains above target level at 30 minutes increase to 80mg/hr  
Step 4 If BP remains above target level at 30 minutes increase to 160mg/hr (maximum dose)  
Cumulative maximum dose is 300 mg. If target BP is not achieved, switch to another class of agent.  
Contraindications: Labetalol is contra-indicated in patients with a history of oral steroid dependent asthma or obstructive airways disease.  
Oral nifedipine – Second Line Treatment  
Caution - In most cases, use of immediate-release oral nifedipine will be safe and well tolerated  
Nifidipine used in conjunction with Magnisium sulphate may cause profound hypotension.  
Intravenous hydralazine – Third Line Treatment  
Adequate reduction of blood pressure is less predictable than with IV labetalol  
Step 1 5 mg IV gradually over 1 to 2 minutes  
Step 2 If BP remains above target level at 20 minutes, give 5 or 10mg IV over 2 minutes, depending on the initial response  
Step 3 If BP remains above target level at 40 minutes, give 5 or 10mg IV over 2 minutes  
Cumulative maximum dose is 30 mg  
Consider using up to 500 ml crystalloid fluid before or at the same time as the first dose of intravenous hydralazine in the antenatal period.  
If target BP is not achieved, switch to another class of agent.

In women with chronic hypertension, only perform cardiotocography if clinically indicated. 
For women with gestational hypertension, conduct ultrasound for fetal growth, amniotic fluid volume assessment, and umbilical artery doppler velocimetry at diagnosis and repeat every 2 to 4 weeks if needed. 
In cases of pre-eclampsia or severe gestational hypertension, conduct cardiotocography at diagnosis and repeat if necessary based on specific criteria. 
Additional fetal monitoring may be required based on previous conditions. 
During the postnatal period, discuss antihypertensive treatment options for breastfeeding women. 
Advise on long-term risks of cardiovascular disease and provide recommendations for reducing these risks. 
Consider pre-pregnancy counseling for women with a history of early birth. 
Encourage maintaining a healthy BMI and discuss the inter-pregnancy interval's impact on hypertension recurrence. 
Routine screening for thrombophilia is not recommended.

Flowchart for midwives in community antenatal clinic settings:

- Systolic ≤140, Diastolic <90: Routine antenatal care/follow up
- Diastolic ≥90: Refer for obstetric opinion
- Any other concerns? Yes: Refer for obstetric opinion
- PET Symptoms? Yes: Refer for obstetric opinion
- Urinalysis - protein: NAD/Trace, +, ++/more: See woman within one week. Repeat BP check & urinalysis
- Send MSU: See woman within one week. Repeat BP check & urinalysis
- Repeat BP check: BP within normal range, Raised BP >140 mmHg, Systolic >150