Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only) MP015

1.1 Ask all women and people about their substance use in a non-judgemental way during the booking history.
1.2 Provide consistent advice and harm reduction messages regarding alcohol use at each antenatal contact.
1.3 Refer women or people using non-prescribed substances or alcohol to the One Stop Clinic and Drug and Alcohol Service.
1.4 Encourage attendance at the One Stop Clinic for support, information, and guidance.
1.5 Document substance use issues in the electronic maternity record.
1.6 Follow the care pathway for the One Stop Clinic for different levels of substance use.
1.7 Provide specific care for stimulants, cannabis, opioids, alcohol, and benzodiazepines at the One Stop Clinic.
1.8 Manage missed appointments by notifying the care midwife and offering further appointments.

has appointment with key-worker. If not in drug treatment, continued attempts made in conjunction with other involved services. Other agencies to be notified to encourage woman or person to attend offered next appointment. One Stop midwives will contact woman or person to offer appointment. Community Midwife (CMW) will be informed. Further appointment for next One Stop Clinic will also be confirmed by letter. Continued alcohol/substance use. Disclosure of recreational substance/alcohol use prior to confirmation of pregnancy.

Intra-Partum care. If substance use is stabilized, most pregnant women and people with substance-related issues will go on to have a normal pregnancy, labor, and delivery of a term baby of normal birth weight. All women and people should receive the same options of pain relief as other women. A combined maternal/parental and neonatal One Stop Clinic birth plan will be in the Scanned Documents section of the electronic record. This plan contains important information and should be followed carefully. If urine toxicology is requested in the birth plan, this should be taken from mother/parent and/or neonate within 24 hours of birth. The midwife providing intrapartum care should ask the woman/person to provide a urine specimen following birth. The midwife providing postnatal care should, with maternal/parental permission, place a urine collection bag on the baby and collect a urine specimen. The woman or person may refuse consent for urinalysis. Avoid separating mother/parent and baby wherever possible. Health professionals should consult and follow the care plan regarding breast/chest feeding.

Disclosing drug use for the 1st time on admission to hospital. Abrupt cessation not advised for alcohol, benzodiazepines, stimulants, opioids. Late maternal/parental disclosure of problematic substance use. Assess for safeguarding referral. Contact Neonatologist/Obstetrician/One Stop midwives and substance use services where physical dependence is an issue. Pregnancy Intra-partum withdrawal may occur 2-6 weeks post-birth. Ensure Health visitor is informed on discharge.

Disclosing drug use for the 1st time on admission to hospital (antenatal & postnatal). Admitting health professional should inform neonatologist, obstetrician, and the Substance Use Midwives as soon as possible. Following birth, send urine of either mother or birthing parent and neonate to lab for toxicology. Until lab results are obtained, encourage woman or person to express and discard human milk if they want to breast/chest feed. Keep mother or birthing parent and neonate together unless there are significant and objective concerns regarding the mother or birthing parent’s ability to provide safe and adequate care. Health professional providing care to contact Drug and Alcohol Service. Give details to the Drug and Alcohol Service about the woman’s reported substance use so that they are able to advise about methadone starting dose.

Post-natal Care. Although parental problem alcohol and substance use affects families, research evidence does not support the assumption that parental substance use will automatically lead to child neglect or abuse. Children of parents who use non-prescribed drugs and alcohol are more likely to be at an increased risk of adverse life experiences and poor outcomes. Midwife providing postnatal care to ensure that obstetricians and neonatologists are aware of mother or birthing parent and baby. Midwife providing postnatal care to liaise with specialist midwives and safeguarding midwife regarding substance use and any potential child protection issues. Midwife providing postnatal care should check with the plan to ascertain whether the baby needs to be monitored for neonatal abstinence syndrome. Any child protection concerns should be documented. Breast/chest feeding advice is usually given on an individual basis. If the woman or person continues to use alcohol or non-prescribed substances, refer to birth plan and discuss with a member of the One Stop Clinic team. Ensure the correct details of discharge address and telephone number are obtained prior to discharge. Give up to date details to Community Midwifery Team and Health Visiting Service. If the woman or person is moving out of the area, ensure that information is shared with the new community midwifery team.

Society of Behavioral Medicine guidelines emphasize the importance of providing accessible, non-judgmental care for pregnant women and individuals using substances. The focus is on promoting stability and improving outcomes for both the individual and their baby. The guidelines also highlight the benefits of breastfeeding for substance-dependent individuals and the risks associated with alcohol use during pregnancy. Harm reduction strategies, such as providing clean needles and syringes, safer sex advice, and avoiding sharing injecting equipment, are recommended to reduce the risk of hepatitis infection among people who inject drugs. Opioid Substitution Therapy is also recommended to mitigate the risks of non-prescribed opioid use during pregnancy.

Alcohol: No safe level of alcohol use in pregnancy. Risk of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder. Advised to avoid alcohol during pregnancy and breastfeeding.
Benzodiazepines: Effects on user include relaxation and slurred speech. No specific information on pregnancy effects. Advised to consult a healthcare professional for guidance on use during pregnancy and breastfeeding.

epam and Temazepam are sedatives that can have a duration of action of approximately 1 to 3 days. They can provide relief of anxiety and tension but may also cause respiratory depression, hypotonia, poor feeding, and neonatal dependence. It is important to avoid immediate cessation and refer to appropriate clinics for reduction or cessation plans.

Cannabis, also known as marijuana, can have varying effects on the user including relaxation, food cravings, and loss of concentration. It may also cause hallucinations and has been associated with increased risk for psychopathology in children. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) can accumulate in the fatty tissue of the neonate, so smoking in the presence of the infant should be avoided. Reduction or cessation sessions can be arranged with consent.

Opioids, such as heroin and morphine, provide relief of pain and anxiety but can also cause respiratory depression, blood born viruses, and neonatal dependence. Immediate cessation is not advised, and referral to appropriate clinics is recommended for support.

Codeine, another opioid, can cause warmth, wellbeing, and sleepiness but may also lead to respiratory depression and neonatal dependence. Breastfeeding is contraindicated with codeine phosphate, and referral to clinics is recommended for support.

Various hallucinogens, such as LSD, PCP, and Ketamine, have different durations of action and effects on the user. Breastfeeding should be avoided with these substances, and immediate cessation is advised with referral to appropriate clinics.

Detection times of common drugs in urine can vary depending on the dose, frequency, route of administration, and urine excretion/dilution. It is important to ensure the accuracy of the specimen and interpret results in the context of clinical findings. False positives can occur due to certain medications, and negative results may not always rule out the presence of certain drugs.