Day Assessment Unit (DAU) Maternity Protocol: MP025 - University Hospital Sussex NHS Trust’s East

Key Principles: A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope: This guideline applies to all women attending DAU at PRH or RSCH.

Responsibilities: Midwives & Obstetricians must access, read, understand, and follow this guidance. Management Team must ensure the guideline is reviewed as required and accessible to all relevant staff.

Introduction: Location, opening times, staffing, facilities, appointment systems, and referrals at DAU.

Ultrasound Scans (USS): Urgent scans booked through DAU, indications for urgent scans listed.

EPU: Early Pregnancy Unit mainly for early pregnancy issues, DAU for 2nd and 3rd trimester issues.

Referrals and Documentation: Role of community midwife and GP, documentation procedures, and support from Antenatal clinic.

Delivery Suite: Direct admission to Delivery Suite when appropriate, medical/obstetric review if needed.

Other Clinical Conditions: Specific protocols for various conditions such as hypertension, itching, reduced fetal movement, and more.

Vaginal Bleeding In Pregnancy: Assessment and management guidelines for vaginal bleeding.

Clinically Small for Dates: Assessment and referral procedures for clinically small dates.

References: Excluded for brevity.

2 Risk assessment and identification of risk factors  
Maternal observations: temp, BP, pulse, and urinalysis  
Fetal assessment: abdominal palpation, SFH, and fetal movements. If reduced fetal movements are reported and ≥26 /40, undertake a CTG  
Registrar to review and an individualized plan of care to be fully documented  
If any concerns, Registrar should discuss with the on-call consultant  

9 Care plan following UA & MCA dopplers  
Suggested algorithm after registrar/consultant review of the scan following UA and MCA Doppler  
Abnormal Doppler  
MCA PI < 5th  
UA PI >95th  
Normal liquor volume Abnormal Doppler  
Reverse or absent EDF MCA & UA Doppler & AFI assessment  
Normal Doppler.  
Normal AFI  
Normal movements Abdominal Circumference on or < 5th centile  
Discuss with consultant urgently  
CTG as in-patient the plan of management  
Steroids if preterm  
Delivery by C/S if viable Referral to Fetal Medicine (or on-call) consultant  
Weekly Doppler & liquor volume  
Fortnightly growth scan  
Steroids if possible preterm delivery Discuss with consultant  
Fortnightly growth scan & Dopplers  
(Consider steroids) Day Assessment Unit (RSCH PRH only)  

10 Suspected Large For Dates in Non-Diabetic Women  
Women with a suspected large for dates fetus from clinical review and abdominal palpation (>3cm more than gestation in weeks) should not be referred for an ultrasound scan providing there are no other risk factors identified  
Midwife to check for glycosuria; if positive refer via BadgerNet for GTT  
Ensure you check the results and if negative care can continue with normal A/N care pathway  
If Polyhydramnios is suspected from clinical review and abdominal palpation women should be referred to DAU for an urgent obstetric review and referral for ultrasound scan if clinically indicated  
Algorithm for the diagnosis of large for gestational age (LGA) pregnancy in non-diabetic women  
Clinically LGA by palpation (>3cm)  
In the community: Check for glucose in urine, check previous GTT results (if relevant), check for clinical evidence of increased amniotic fluid, check fetal movements  
No other risk factors present  
DAU Obstetric review & USS within 48 hours on DAU  
Normal GTT and normal scan  
Abnormal GTT  
Refer to joint Diabetic clinic  
Increased AFI  
Normal GTT and/or EFW >95th centile  
Refer to Consultant ANC  
Reassure, no further action  
If glucose in urine and/or abnormal previous GTT  
Book GTT via badger at PRH and email UHSussex.maternityadminrsch@nhs.net at RSCH  
Suspect Polyhydramnios  
Book USS via BadgerNet at PRH or UHSussex.maternityadminrsch@nhs.net at RSCH  
Arrange GTT and USS  
Refer to MP018 Diabetes for further management  

11 Indications for Growth Scans  
In addition to the routine scans, additional scans may be indicated for the following maternal conditions. These scans are normally arranged and followed up in the AN consultant clinics, however, the result may be followed up in the DAU or Sussex House by the medical staff if needed  

12 Musculoskeletal Dysfunction in Pregnancy Pathway  

13 Propess IOL for Low-Risk Pregnancy  
Please refer to the Maternity Protocol MP033 Induction of Labour  
At PRH: contact triage to arrange a slot in the induction calendar and document IOL booking on BadgerNet  
At RSCH: Complete the IOL booking via BadgerNet then email to UHSussex.rsch.ancreferrals@nhs.net Sussex house midwife will pick up the referral and contact the women/person with a date and time to attend for their IOL  
Musculoskeletal problem, including SPD identified  
Refer to DAU  
Refer to ANC for Medication & pain management/Function/Social/Birth plan  
If urgent IOL (to be commenced within 72 hours) contact MAU to be booked  

14 Women Who Decline IOL (42 weeks) DAU:  
Please refer to Maternity Protocol MP033 Induction of Labour  

15 GTT Booking  
PRH GTT booking flowchart: Women/people are referred directly to the Phlebotomist. Results are sent back to the ANC  
RSCH GTT booking flowchart:  
Candidates fulfilling the maternity guidelines criteria for GTT. i.e. obesity or diabetes protocols from:  
Community  
DAU  
ANC  
Phlebotomist  
Take bloods  
Pathology Lab sends results to ANC for review by lead MW  
Normal < 7.8mmol/L  
No follow up  
Abnormal: ≥