Multiple Pregnancy 
and Birth  

Key Principles: A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol. 

Scope: This protocol applies to pregnant women having twins and higher-order pregnancies. 

Responsibilities: Midwives & Obstetricians should access, read, understand, and follow this guidance. Management is responsible for ensuring the protocol is reviewed as required and accessible to all relevant staff. 

Definitions Used in Multiple Pregnancy: Chorionicity and amnionicity determine the type of pregnancy, such as DCDA, MCDA, and MCMA twins. 

Introduction: Multiple pregnancies are associated with increased perinatal morbidity and mortality, maternal risks, and challenges in monochorionic pregnancies. 

Determining Chorionicity and Amnionicity: Ultrasound examinations are essential for determining risk and ongoing management in multiple pregnancies. 

For all Pregnant women with Multiple Pregnancies: Referral to the obstetric-led antenatal clinic is necessary by 16 weeks for twin pregnancies and directly to the fetal medicine team for triplet pregnancies. 

Information Sharing, Support Networks, and Allied Healthcare Referral: Pregnant women should be involved in care plans and decision-making, provided with emotional support, and referred to support groups and additional healthcare specialists. 

Scan Appointments: Anomaly and growth scan appointments are essential for monitoring fetal development and identifying any concerns. 

Proposed Schedule of Care: Each woman pregnant with twins should be under consultant-led care, with frequent obstetric appointments and growth scans based on chorionicity. 

Initial Consultations and Care Planning: Risks of multiple pregnancies for the pregnant woman and babies should be discussed at the first clinic appointment.

Risk of intervention in labor including caesarean section and post-partum hemorrhage are important considerations in multiple pregnancies. Fetal risks in multiple pregnancies vary depending on chorionicity, with additional risks such as TTTS in DC twins and cord entanglement in MCMA twins. Monitoring through regular appointments and scans is crucial to manage any concerns that may arise. It is also important to discuss signs of preterm labor and consider interventions like antenatal steroids for fetal lung maturation. Referral to a fetal medicine center may be necessary for certain complications or indications. Ultrasound scans are recommended for monitoring fetal growth and other specific issues in multiple pregnancies. Discussions regarding the timing and mode of delivery, as well as considerations for vaginal birth, epidural use, and management of the third stage of labor, should be tailored to each individual case.

2 Do not offer physiological management of the third stage to those with a twin or triplet pregnancy. 
18.3 Recommend pregnant women / people with a twin or triplet pregnancy active management of the third stage (10 IU of oxytocin by IM injection) and that it is associated with a lower risk of postpartum haemorrhage and/or blood transfusion. 
18.4 Consider active management of the third stage with additional uterotonics for pregnant women / people who have 1 or more risk factors (in addition to a twin or triplet pregnancy) for postpartum haemorrhage. 

19.1 Intrapartum monitoring 
19.1.1 Recommend continuous cardiotocography when more than 26 weeks gestation and in established labour. 
19.1.2 Perform a portable ultrasound scan when labour starts, to confirm which twin is which, the presentation of each twin, and to locate the fetal hearts. 
19.1.3 Consider separating the fetal heart rates by 20 beats/minute on the CTG settings if there is difficulty differentiating between them. 
19.1.4 A fetal scalp electrode (if no contraindications) for Twin I is recommended if there is difficulty monitoring each fetal heart and ensure two separate heart rates are being detected. 

19.2 For pregnant women / people between 23+0 and 25+6 weeks of pregnancy who are in established labour, involve a senior obstetrician in discussions with the pregnant woman / person 
19.2.1 On admission inform the neonatologist, ANNP, anaesthetist and obstetric consultant on call. 
19.2.2 Refer to the agreed plan made during the antenatal consultations. 
19.2.3 Site a grey 16-gauge cannula once in labour, Obtain IV access and take an FBC and Group & Save. 
19.2.4 If progress in labour is slower than expected for parity, escalate to the obstetric registrar for review. 
19.2.5 Labour can be augmented with oxytocin after discussion with Consultant Obstetrician. 
19.2.6 The delivery room should be prepared with 2 (or 1 per baby) resuscitaires, ultrasound machine, and IV infusion of oxytocin. 
19.2.7 If there are no complications the birth can be in the birthing room on labour ward, if there are intrapartum complications recommend transfer to the theatre. 
19.2.8 Keep the birthing woman / person and their birthing partner(s) updated and fully informed at all times. 

20 Staff presence / awareness: 
20.1 The middle grade obstetrician should be present at delivery and must have experience with twin deliveries - if not then the consultant obstetrician must be present. 
20.2 The consultant obstetrician should be made aware if there is a woman / person having a vaginal birth of twins in the department. Where possible they should be informed and present in the department at the time of delivery. 
20.3 Term twin deliveries can be conducted by experienced midwives if agreed by the middle grade. 
20.4 Neonatal support should be in attendance on labour ward for all twin deliveries. 

21 Management of the second stage of labour 
21.1 Delivery of first twin 
21.1.1 If cephalic this delivery can be led by a midwife if all proceeds normally, including usual midwife care. 
21.1.2 Optimum cord clamping as in a singleton delivery. Ensure clear identification of the first twin cord. 

21.2 Following delivery of first twin 
21.2.1 Active management of the delivery of twin 2 has been reported as the major factor in reducing morbidity and the need for caesarean section. 
21.2.2 There is no definite evidence regarding the safe interval between the delivery of first and second twins when there is no suspected fetal compromise; but there are reports of an increase in poor outcome for the second twin if delayed beyond 45 minutes. 
21.2.3 Continue external monitoring for Twin II and await descent of presenting part into pelvis 

21.2.4 Middle grade obstetrician should: 
• Identify lie and presentation of twin 2 using abdominal palpation/ vaginal examination/ultrasound. 
• consider of external version (membranes intact) if not longitudinal position 
• ARM should only be performed once the presenting part is in the pelvis, if unsuccessful consider internal podalic version or LSCS depending on clinical judgement 

21.2.5 If there is ‘suspicious’ or ‘pathological’ CTG trace, and vaginal birth cannot be achieved within 20 minutes, discuss performing a caesarean section with the pregnant woman/person and birth partner(s) 
21.2.6 Inform Consultant

ANC Consultant Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, Bloods for Hb, Document plan in hand-held notes. Review, Discuss, and document scan report. Discuss and agree birth plan, timing, and mode of delivery. Give date for induction or elective LSCS. Discuss use of syntocinon in 3rd stage labour. Midwife led clinic at 34 weeks. Discuss fetal movements, signs of labor, and contact numbers. Discuss any anxieties and postnatal depression. Advise on postnatal care provision from MMW. USS at 36 weeks. Visit delivery suite if an option for the unit. Finalize birth plan and explore any queries re Induction process or LSCS procedure. Midwife led clinic at 37 weeks. If planned delivery declined, weekly appointments with scans with specialist obstetrician until delivered. Plan for delivery at 37 weeks if not delivered. Multiple Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only) MP020. Schedule of Care for MC Twins. 6-11+6 weeks, 1st contact with MMW, Booking MW, USS, and referrals as required. 1st trimester USS dating scan. 16 weeks, USS, ANC consultant, BP and urinalysis, USS, Health Visitor referral. Fetal assessment scan. Refer to Evelina for fetal cardiac scan. 18 weeks, USS, ANC consultant, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis. 20 weeks, USS, ANC consultant, Anomaly scan, BP and urinalysis. MAT B1. 22 weeks, USS, ANC consultant, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis. 24 weeks, USS, ANC consultant, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, Blood for FBC. Midwife appointment at 26 weeks, BP and urinalysis, Mental health assessment, MAT B1. Offer gestational diabetes test. 28 weeks, USS, ANC consultant, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, Bloods for Hb and antibodies. Offer routine anti-D prophylaxis if required. 30 weeks, Midwife appointment, BP and urinalysis, Check bloods. Discuss infant feeding checklist. Discuss Vitamin K prophylaxis. Newborn screening tests. 32 weeks, USS, ANC consultant, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, Bloods for Hb. Document plan in hand-held notes. Finalize birth options, book IOL or LSCS as appropriate. 34-36 weeks, Midwife appointment, ANC appointment, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis. Discuss fetal movements, signs of labor, and contact numbers. Discuss any anxieties and postnatal depression. Advise on postnatal care provision from MMW. Offer course of corticosteroids. Plan for delivery at 36 weeks following course of steroids. ANTENATAL CARE PATHWAY FOR WOMEN WITH UNCOMPLICATED TRIPLET PREGNANCY. GESTATION (WEEKS), MDT CONTACT, ACTION. 6-11+6 weeks, 1st contact with MMW, USS/screening/fetal medicine. 16 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, BP and urinalysis, USS, Health Visitor referral. Fetal assessment scan. 18 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, BP and urinalysis, USS, Fetal assessment scan. 20 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, Anomaly scan, BP and urinalysis, Fetal assessment scan. 22 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis USS. 24 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, Blood for FBC. MAT B1. 26 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, Mental health assessment, MAT B1. Offer gestational diabetes test. 28 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, Bloods for Hb and antibodies. Offer routine anti-D prophylaxis if required. 30 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, fetal assessment scan. 32 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, Bloods for Hb. Document plan in hand-held notes. 34 weeks, Fetal medicine team + MAST, Fetal assessment scan, BP and urinalysis, with specialist obstetrician. If planned delivery declined, weekly appointments with scans with specialist obstetrician until delivered. Visit delivery suite, NNU, and transitional care if wishes. Discuss fetal movements, signs of labor, and contact numbers. Discuss any anxieties and