Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) Maternity protocol: MP027
Date agreed: March 2022

Key Principles:
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope:
This guideline applies to women or persons who have had female genital mutilation. This policy needs to be read in conjunction with the BSUH FGM policy.

Responsibilities:
Midwives & Obstetricians: To access, read, understand and follow this guidance. Management: To ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National recommendations. To ensure the protocol is accessible to all relevant staff.

Introduction:
Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) is predominantly practiced in certain regions and is illegal in the UK. It is considered a public health, human rights, and safeguarding children issue.

Types of FGM:
There are 4 types of FGM according to the World Health Organisation.

Antenatal Care:
Midwives should recognize women at risk of FGM early in the antenatal period and document their status. Regulated professionals are legally required to report cases of FGM in under 18s.

Antenatal Defibulation:
Offered as early as possible in pregnancy, antenatal defibulation has several advantages and indications for use.

Intrapartum Care:
Privacy and dignity should be offered to women and persons with known FGM to prevent complications during birth.

At birth, hospital birth is recommended. Successful defibulation with low risks for vaginal birth can consider home birth. Midwives should provide care for unplanned homebirths with women who have not been defibulated. Women can request female birth attendants and have an individualized birth plan. The midwife should inform the on-call registrar of the woman's labor progress and agree on a care plan for birth. Planned vaginal birth should include a full plan of care documented in maternal notes. Informed consent is required for all procedures and interventions. An epidural should be discussed for women planning a vaginal birth to facilitate defibulation if required. Defibulation can be carried out early in labor under epidural anesthesia. Aseptic technique should be used, and suturing should be performed by a trained clinician. Postnatal care should include checking the perineum and encouraging mobilization. Female infants of women who underwent FGM are at risk and should be safeguarded. Maternal FGM must be included in the discharge summary for community midwives. All discussions and referrals must be documented. Community postnatal visiting should be targeted and individualized. Midwives should ensure health visitors are aware of FGM and complete necessary forms.