Preterm birth is the most important single determinant of adverse infant outcome in terms of survival and quality of life. Regular and painful uterine contractions which lead to cervical change prior to 37 completed weeks of gestation should be considered as threatened pre-term labour. It is important to refer pregnant individuals with suspected preterm labour for assessment. Fetal Fibronectin testing is recommended for women between 22+0 and 34+6 weeks gestation with a history of tightening. Obstetric review and management are essential for pregnant individuals with preterm labour. Other investigations, such as MSU/HVS, should be monitored and results chased accordingly.

Results of blood tests, ultrasound scans, and sensitivities should be checked regularly. For women with threatened preterm labor, an ultrasound scan should be requested to assess fetal growth. Antenatal corticosteroids can be given to women with threatened preterm labor from 23-34+6/40 gestation. Corticosteroids can reduce neonatal respiratory distress and other complications. Tocolytics can be used with preterm rupture of membranes to delay delivery. Magnesium sulfate may be considered for fetal neuroprotection in early preterm birth. Mode of delivery and fetal monitoring should be discussed with a consultant obstetrician. Caesarean section is not routinely recommended for preterm breech presentation. Neonatal support should be provided at delivery, and opiates should be avoided in labor.

Preterm prelabour rupture of membranes, antenatal corticosteroids to reduce neonatal morbidity, prevention of early-onset neonatal Group B Streptococcal Disease, NICE guidelines for antenatal and intrapartum care, and diabetes mellitus in pregnancy are important clinical guidelines. Additionally, magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection of the fetus and to prevent cerebral palsy following preterm birth are significant interventions. Perinatal management of extreme preterm birth before 27 weeks of gestation is outlined in the clinical guideline. Appendices provide information for parents of very premature babies born at different gestational ages.