Neonatal BCG Immunisation Programme (RSCH PRH only) MP065

Key Principles:
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope:
This protocol applies to all women; those booking at any stage of pregnancy, women who deliver and those who receive postnatal care.

Neonatal BCG vaccine is offered to:
- All infants (0-12 months) living in areas of the UK where annual incidence of TB is 40/10,000 or greater.
- All infants (0-12 months) where one or more parent or grandparent was born in a country where the annual incidence of TB is 40/100,000 or greater.

University Hospital Trust is responsible for antenatal identification of babies who meet the criteria for neonatal BCG and for referring these babies at birth.

Responsibilities:
Midwives, obstetricians, paediatricians, neonatologists, and management team are responsible for following and ensuring compliance with the protocol.

Neonatal BCG Immunisation Programme:
The aim is to protect newborn babies at increased risk of exposure to or developing human tuberculosis (TB) which may result in serious illness and premature death. The BCG vaccine is offered to infants most at risk from TB.

BCG Vaccination Pathway:
Includes antenatal and postnatal pathways for identifying and referring babies for BCG vaccination.

Neonatal BCG Vaccination Service:
Delivered by Sussex Community Trust under specific arrangements to ensure timely and accurate immunisation of babies.

Failsafe Procedures:
Includes regular checks on the BCG vaccination database and investigation of any missed referrals.

Reporting Requirements:
Local and national reporting requirements are in place to ensure proper documentation and data collection.

Neonatal BCG Immunisation Programme: Togo, Brazil, Ethiopia, Lithuania, Papua New Guinea, Turkmenistan, Brunei Darussalam, Fiji, Madagascar, Paraguay, Tuvalu, Burkina Faso, Gabon, Malawi, Peru, Uganda, Burundi, Gambia, Malaysia, Philippines, Ukraine, Cabo Verde, Georgia, Mali, Rep. Korea, UR Tanzania, Cambodia, Ghana, Marshall Islands, Republic of Moldova, Uzbekistan, Cameroon, Greenland, Mauritania, Romania, Vanuatu, Central African Republic, Guam, Micronesia (FSO), Russian Federation, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Chad, Guinea, Mongolia, Rwanda, Viet Nam, China, Guinea -Bissau, Morocco, Sao Tome & Principe, Yemen, China, Hong Kong, Guyana, Mozambique, Senegal, Zambia, China, Macao SAR, Haiti, Myanmar, Sierra Leone, Zimbabwe, Congo, India, Namibia, Singapore.