Neonatal Resuscitation Newborn life support MP066 (Term and Pre-term) (RSCH PRH only) University Hospital's Sussex NHS Trust East

Key Principles:
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope:
This protocol applies to any newborn babies who require resuscitation at birth and any babies born with meconium stained liquor.

Responsibilities:
Maternity, neonatal, and A&E staff are responsible for accessing, reading, understanding, and following this guidance. Management is responsible for ensuring the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National recommendations.

Introduction:
Resuscitation is called for when the circulation or established regular breathing is suboptimal or both. A healthy newborn baby is designed to undertake the passage through the birth canal, and some may require help to establish breathing at birth.

Preparation & Equipment:
Preparation and anticipation will aid successful resuscitation, and appropriate equipment and a warm environment should be available for all births.

Homebirth:
All midwives undertaking home birth should be competent to carry out first-line treatment in regards to neonatal resuscitation. In the event of the baby being born in poor condition, the midwife should dial 999 for a paramedic ambulance.

Process for Availability of Staff Trained in Advanced Neonatal Resuscitation:
All midwives are trained in newborn life support skills, and every delivery will be attended by midwives with newborn life support skills. Staff availability is outlined for both RSCH and PRH.

Resuscitation Process:
If the newborn fails to establish respiration, or is in distress prior to birth, specific steps should be followed to assess and support the baby's breathing and circulation. Continual reassessment of the baby's condition is essential.

If there is no increase in heart rate or saturations remain low, despite effective ventilation, increase the oxygen concentration to achieve adequate pre-ductal oxygen saturations.

If at home, transfer the baby by ambulance as swiftly as possible while maintaining a good airway during transfer.

Ensure the baby is kept warm during transfer. Label the baby appropriately. Following resuscitation, document techniques and procedures used. Consider therapeutic hypothermia for infants with moderate to severe hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy. Do not passively cool. Meconium-stained liquor occurs in 10-20% of deliveries. Do not suction the airway of a vigorous baby born in meconium-stained liquor. For non-vigorous babies, dry and wrap them, assess color, tone, heart rate, and breathing. Do not lavage the trachea. Preterm babies less than 32 weeks gestation should receive blended oxygen and air judiciously. Preterm babies of less than 30 weeks gestation should be completely covered in a plastic wrap immediately after birth. Staff training is required for all involved in deliveries and neonatal resuscitation. Attend annual updates and NLS courses. Involvement in skills drills will be logged.