Pregnancy Loss > 14 Weeks Maternity Protocol: MP073 Date agreed: April 2022

Key Principles:
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope:
This protocol applies to any woman experiencing a fetal loss (at any gestation after 14 weeks) including TOPs, mid-trimester losses, stillbirths, or neonatal death.

Responsibilities:
Midwives, gynaecology staff, and medical staff are responsible for accessing, reading, understanding, and following this guidance. Management teams are responsible for ensuring the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National recommendations.

Introduction:
This document provides guidance on maternity management of women and their families through a pregnancy loss. The protocol has been divided into two parts to assist in the care for these women.

Part One:
Section One - Over 14 weeks:
Clinical and emotional care for pregnancy losses are primarily the same regardless of gestation. An unexpected intrauterine death over 14 weeks should be handled with immediate steps including informing the Registrar/Consultant, performing an ultrasound scan, and offering support to the woman.

Section Two - Mode of delivery:
Recommendations about labour and birth should take into account the mother's preferences and medical condition. Vaginal birth is recommended, but caesarean birth may be considered based on individual circumstances.

Section Three - Expectant Management:
Expectant management should be supported as long as there are no complications. Women should be advised about the risks and benefits of expectant management.

Section Four - Inducing labour:
Induction of labour should be arranged in consultation with the woman and labour ward coordinator. Adequate explanation and support should be provided throughout the process.

Section Five - Mifepristone & misoprostol:
Specific drug regimens are outlined for different gestational ages to induce labour effectively.

Section Six - Previous Caesarean:
Women with previous caesarean sections should have a discussion about the safety and benefits of induction of labour.

Section Seven - On Admission/during induction:
Room preparation, checklist completion, and discussions with parents about the process and options are essential during admission and induction. Birth plans and creating memories should be discussed and documented.

PM is recommended but parents have a choice. Support discussion with SANDS leaflet. Funeral arrangements should be discussed with options provided. Offer chaplaincy services. Care in labor should include manual palpation if necessary. Liberal analgesia should be provided. Regional anesthesia and patient-controlled analgesia should be available. Active management is recommended for the third stage. Parents should be supported in seeing, holding, and dressing their baby. Placenta should be sent for histology. Full post-mortem examination should be offered. Options for funeral arrangements should be discussed. Paperwork should be completed for all pregnancy losses. Parents should be offered the option to take the baby home. Follow-up care should be provided within the first week of discharge. Consider the wishes of the woman and her partner for follow-up. Community midwife care should continue. Support for staff should be provided.

Pregnancy Loss (RSCH PRH only) MP073
University Hospital Sussex NHS Trust East Page 21 of 82

A stillborn baby is defined as a child born after the twenty-fourth week of pregnancy that did not show signs of life. Stillbirth must be certified by a doctor or midwife present at the birth. If there are doubts about signs of life, the coroner must be contacted. Babies born before 24 weeks with signs of life should be registered as live births. Parents are responsible for registering the birth of a stillborn baby within 42 days. Neonatal deaths must be registered by a doctor, and the coroner must be informed. Grief and mourning are normal after a loss, and staff should prepare parents for triggers and anniversary effects. Religious and cultural beliefs should be respected, and resources like chaplaincy and memory boxes are available. Creating memories, such as handprints and photographs, can help parents cope with their loss. Families can also seek support from organizations like Chestnut Tree House for additional assistance during this difficult time. In cases of multiple pregnancies, families may face additional challenges and anxiety about the surviving baby.

Parents usually welcome the opportunity to discuss the loss of a twin. They value empathy from staff when one twin dies and find comfort in memory-making. Butterfly stickers can be used to identify surviving twins. Parents are entitled to maternity/paternity rights after stillbirth or neonatal death. Sick leave for miscarriage before 24 weeks is protected. Parents can take their baby home or arrange a funeral. Fathers also grieve and need support. Siblings and other relatives should be involved in the process. Staff caring for bereaved families may need support themselves. A Datix should be completed for review. Bereavement support may be provided by voluntary organizations. Grandparents may also need support.

- No time requirements for the funeral, bodies are cremated not buried.
- Special considerations for Christians, Hindus, Muslims, Jews, Pagans, Rastafarians, Sikhs.
- Requirements following death for each religion outlined.
- Support options available for families.

Section 3: Genetic testing  
To examine the baby’s/child’s chromosomes or DNA for a possible genetic disorder or condition, the pathologist takes small samples of skin, other tissue, and/or samples from the placenta. With your agreement, this material may be kept as part of the medical record for possible re-examination to find out more if new tests or information become available. 

Section 4: Keeping tissue samples for training professionals and for research  
With your agreement, tissue samples may be used for quality assurance and audit of pathology services, for professional training, and for ethically approved medical research. 

Section 5: Keeping one or more organs for diagnostic purposes  
In some cases, organs may be kept for further examination to understand why your baby/child died. You can decide what should be done with the organ(s) after the examination, including disposal, separate cremation or burial, or donation for training or research purposes. 

You can withdraw consent for any of the above at any time in the future. Contact the hospital's histopathology department for more information.

Patients should consult with local council's Environmental Health Department and the Environment Agency for advice on home burials. The hospital will take back the container if the seal is intact. Patients must agree to safely store and dispose of the container and its contents. They must also indemnify the Trust against any claims. Patients are required to sign and date the agreement letter.

Ambulance team witnessing epileptic seizure on platform at Seven Sisters Underground; any family concerns regarding care; location where deceased currently lies. If reporting doctor is able to issue MCCD, proposed cause of death must be reproduced on the MCCD exactly as agreed with the coroner's officer. Pregnancy Loss - Giving Birth: Discuss options with midwife and senior doctor, aim for vaginal birth for faster recovery and future pregnancy safety. Induction of labor involves tablet, pessary, and support from midwife. Decision to wait for natural labor supported with regular check-ups. Offered support and information on important decisions.