Inducing labour 
NICE guideline 
Published: 4 November 2021 

The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences, and values of their patients or the people using their service. 

All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme. 

Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. 

Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 

Overview: This guideline covers the circumstances for inducing labour, methods of induction, assessment, monitoring, pain relief, and managing complications. It aims to improve advice and care for pregnant women who are thinking about or having induction of labour. 

Who is it for? Healthcare professionals, commissioners and providers, pregnant women, their families, and carers. 

Recommendations: People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care. 

1.1 Information and decision making: Discuss preferences about mode of birth with women early on in their pregnancy. Take into account their individual circumstances and discuss the options for birth. Record these discussions and the woman's preferences in her notes. Confirm a woman's preferences for birth at antenatal visits towards the end of pregnancy, as these may have changed since earlier discussions. Explain to women that induction of labour is a medical intervention that will affect their birth options and their experience of the birth process. 

1.2 Induction of labour in specific circumstances: Give women with uncomplicated pregnancies every opportunity to go into spontaneous labour. Explain to women that labour usually starts naturally before 42 weeks. Discuss with women the risks associated with a pregnancy continuing beyond 41 weeks and the potential benefits of induction of labour. Be aware of the increased risk of stillbirth for women from some minority ethnic backgrounds or living in deprived areas. Offer additional fetal monitoring for women who choose not to have their labour induced if they wish to have monitoring from 42 weeks. Offer women who choose to await the spontaneous onset of labour the opportunity.

Advise women to contact their midwife or maternity unit if they change their mind before their next appointment or have concerns about their baby. Do not carry out induction of labor before 34+0 weeks for preterm prelabor rupture of membranes unless there are additional obstetric indications. Offer expectant management until 37+0 weeks. Discuss the options of expectant management or induction of labor for preterm prelabor rupture of membranes after 34+0 weeks but before 37+0 weeks. Consider risks to the woman and baby, availability of neonatal intensive care facilities, and the woman's individual circumstances and preferences. If a woman has preterm prelabor rupture of membranes after 34+0 weeks and has had a positive group B streptococcus test, offer immediate induction of labor or cesarean birth. Offer women with prelabor rupture of membranes at term a choice of expectant management for up to 24 hours or induction of labor as soon as possible. Respect the woman's decision if she chooses to wait for spontaneous onset of labor for over 24 hours after prelabor rupture of membranes at term. If a woman has prelabor rupture of membranes at term and has had a positive group B streptococcus test, offer immediate induction of labor or cesarean birth. Discuss methods of induction with a woman who has had a previous cesarean birth to make an informed decision about the most appropriate choice. Consider requests for induction of labor after discussing the benefits and risks with the woman. Induction of labor is not generally recommended if a woman's baby is in the breech position. Consider induction of labor for babies in the breech position if birth needs to be expedited and external cephalic version is unsuccessful, declined, or contraindicated, and the woman chooses not to have a planned cesarean birth. Do not induce labor if there is fetal growth restriction with confirmed fetal compromise. Do not routinely offer induction of labor to women with a history of precipitate labor to avoid a birth unattended by healthcare professionals. In the event of an intrauterine fetal death, offer support to help women and their partners and family cope with the emotional and physical consequences of the death. If a woman with an intrauterine fetal death chooses induced labor, follow the recommendations on monitoring of uterine contractions and provide one-to-one midwifery care of the woman during labor and birth. Explain to women what a membrane sweep is and that it might make it more likely that labor will start without the need for additional methods of induction. Discuss with women if they would like a vaginal examination for membrane sweeping after 39+0 weeks. Discuss with women if they would like to have additional membrane sweeping if labor does not start spontaneously following the first sweep. Explain to women that a vaginal examination to assess the readiness of the cervix will help decide which method of induction they will be offered first and discuss the risks and benefits of different methods to induce labor. Include that both dinoprostone and misoprostol can cause hyperstimulation.

Uterine activity and fetal condition must be monitored regularly. If hyperstimulation occurs, the induction treatment will be stopped. Different vaginal products have varying ease of removal. Hyperstimulation can be treated with tocolysis. Mechanical methods are less likely to cause hyperstimulation than pharmacological methods. Follow manufacturers' guidance on the use of dinoprostone and misoprostol preparations for induction of labor. Consider induction options based on Bishop score. Offer induction with amniotomy and oxytocin infusion for Bishop score of more than 6. Assess fetal wellbeing and uterine contractions during induction. Offer pain relief options and discuss with women. Consider outpatient induction with appropriate monitoring. Monitor fetal wellbeing and progress during induction. Manage complications like uterine hyperstimulation, unsuccessful induction, cord prolapse, and other issues. Definitions provided for Bishop score, Dinoprostone, and Expectant management.

Hyperstimulation is the overactivity of the uterus as a result of labor induction. It is defined by increased contractions and may be associated with changes in fetal heart rate. Membrane sweeping involves separating membranes to induce labor. Mothers and babies are audited to reduce risks. Precipitate labor is a very quick labor. Suspected fetal macrosomia is when a baby is large for its gestational age. Unsuccessful induction is when labor does not start after treatment. Research recommendations include optimal timing of induction and management of preterm prelabor rupture of membranes. Inducing labor for suspected fetal macrosomia requires informed decision-making. Inducing labor after intrauterine fetal death after a previous cesarean birth needs further research.

The committee recommends discussing different birth options with women after intrauterine fetal death if they have had a previous cesarean birth. Women with IUFD should be cared for on a one-to-one basis and monitored. Women with a scarred uterus are at increased risk of uterine rupture after IUFD. Mechanical methods of induction may be safe to use in women with a previous cesarean birth. Inducing labor methods depend on the readiness of the cervix, with options including vaginal dinoprostone, misoprostol, and mechanical methods. The aim is to provide advice to healthcare professionals and pregnant women on the information and support needed to make decisions about induction of labor.