Endometriosis: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Published: 6 September 2017 
Last updated: 16 April 2024 

The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. Professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences, and values of their patients. 

1.1 Organisation of care 
1.2 Endometriosis information and support 
1.3 Endometriosis symptoms and signs 
1.4 Referral for women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis 
1.5 Diagnosing endometriosis 
1.6 Staging systems 
1.7 Monitoring for women with confirmed endometriosis 
1.8 Pharmacological pain management 
1.9 Non-pharmacological management 
1.10 Surgical management 
1.11 Management if fertility is a priority 

Terms used in this guideline 

Recommendations for research 

Overview 
Who is it for? 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information

Assess the extent of deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter. Ensure that pelvic MRI scans are interpreted by a healthcare professional with specialist expertise in gynaecological imaging. Consider laparoscopy to diagnose endometriosis in women with suspected endometriosis, even if the ultrasound was normal. For women with suspected deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter, consider a pelvic ultrasound or MRI before an operative laparoscopy. During a diagnostic laparoscopy, a gynaecologist with training and skills in laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis should perform a systematic inspection of the pelvis. Consider taking a biopsy of suspected endometriosis during a diagnostic laparoscopy. Offer endometriosis treatment according to the woman's symptoms, preferences, and priorities rather than the stage of the endometriosis. Consider outpatient follow-up for women with confirmed endometriosis, particularly women with deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter or large endometrioma. For women with endometriosis-related pain, discuss the benefits and risks of analgesics. Consider hormonal treatment for women with suspected, confirmed, or recurrent endometriosis. Discuss surgical management options with women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis. Perform surgery for endometriosis laparoscopically unless there are contraindications. Consider excision rather than ablation to treat endometriomas. Offer excision or ablation of endometriosis plus adhesiolysis for endometriosis not involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter to improve the chance of spontaneous pregnancy. Offer laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy or drainage and ablation to improve the chance of spontaneous pregnancy in women with endometriomas. Discuss the benefits and risks of laparoscopic surgery as a treatment option for women with deep endometriosis trying to conceive. Do not offer hormonal treatment alone or in combination with surgery to women trying to conceive as it does not improve spontaneous pregnancy rates. Terms used in this guideline: Chronic pelvic pain, Paediatric and adolescent gynaecology service, Ovarian cystectomy, Managed clinical networks. Recommendations for research: Pain management programs - Are pain management programs a clinically and cost-effective intervention for women with endometriosis?

Provide an additional or alternative treatment option for women experiencing endometriosis-related pain. Groups of particular interest are women for whom hormonal and surgical options have been exhausted, women who would prefer an alternative to a pharmacological or surgical approach, and women who may be prioritizing trying to conceive.

Is laparoscopic treatment (excision or ablation) of peritoneal disease in isolation effective for managing endometriosis-related pain? Isolated peritoneal endometriosis can be an incidental finding in women who may or may not experience pain or other symptoms. Research is needed to determine whether laparoscopic treatment of isolated peritoneal endometriosis in women with endometriosis-related pain results in a clinical and cost-effective improvement in symptoms.

Are specialist lifestyle interventions (diet and exercise) effective, compared with no specialist lifestyle interventions, for women with endometriosis? Endometriosis is a long-term condition that can cause acute and chronic pain, and fatigue. It has a significant and sometimes severe impact on the woman's quality of life and activities of daily living, including relationships and sexuality, ability to work, fertility, fitness, and mental health.

What information and support interventions are effective to help women with endometriosis deal with their symptoms and improve their quality of lives? This guideline has identified that women with endometriosis and their partners feel that information and support is not always provided in the way that best meets their needs. However, the direct effectiveness of different types or formats of information and support interventions on measurable outcomes such as health-related quality of life and level of function has not been tested.

What is the effect of different doses and durations of hormonal treatments given either before, after, or both before and after surgery on fertility outcomes in people with endometriosis where fertility is a priority?