Endome triosis: diagnosis 
and manag emen t 
NICE guideline 
Published: 6 Sept ember 2017 
Last updat ed: 11 No vember 202 4 
www .nice.or g.uk/guidance/ng7 3 
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Your r esponsi bility 
The r ecommendations in t his guideline r epresent t he view of NICE, arriv ed at aft er car eful 
consideration of t he evidence a vailable. When e xercising t heir judgement, pr ofessionals 
and practitioners ar e expect ed to tak e this guideline fully int o account, alongside t he 
individual needs, pr eferences and v alues of t heir patient s or t he people using t heir ser vice. 
It is not mandat ory to apply t he recommendations, and t he guideline does not o verride t he 
responsibility t o mak e decisions appr opriat e to the cir cumstances of t he individual, in 
consultation wit h them and t heir f amilies and car ers or guar dian. 
All pr oblems (adv erse e vents) related to a medicine or medical de vice used f or treatment 
or in a pr ocedur e should be r epor ted to the Medicines and Healt hcare product s Regulat ory 
Agency using t he Yellow Car d Scheme . 
Local commissioners and pr oviders of healt hcare have a responsibility t o enable t he 
guideline t o be applied when individual pr ofessionals and people using ser vices wish t o 
use it. The y should do so in t he cont ext of local and national priorities f or funding and 
developing ser vices, and in light of t heir duties t o have due r egar d to the need t o eliminat e 
unlawful discrimination, t o adv ance equality of oppor tunity and t o reduce healt h 
inequalities. Not hing in t his guideline should be int erpreted in a wa y that w ould be 
inconsist ent wit h complying wit h those duties. 
Commissioners and pr oviders ha ve a responsibility t o promot e an en vironmentally 
sustainable healt h and car e syst em and should assess and r educe t he en vironmental 
impact of implementing NICE r ecommendations wher ever possible. Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 of
33Contents 
Overview ...................................................................................................................................... 5 
Who is it f or? .......................................................................................................................................... 5 
Recommendations ....................................................................................................................... 6 
1.1 Organisation of car e ......................................................................................................................... 6 
1.2 Endometriosis inf ormation and suppor t ........................................................................................ 8 
1.3 Endometriosis sympt oms and signs .............................................................................................. 9 
1.4 Pharmacological tr eatment f or women and people wit h suspect ed or confirmed 
endometriosis ........................................................................................................................................ 10 
1.5 Diagnosis and r eferral f or women or people wit h suspect ed or confirmed endometriosis .....12 
1.6 Staging syst ems .............................................................................................................................. 15 
1.7 Monit oring f or women wit h confirmed endometriosis ................................................................. 15 
1.8 Non-pharmacological management .............................................................................................. 15 
1.9 Sur gical management ..................................................................................................................... 16 
1.10 Management if f ertility is a priority .............................................................................................. 18 
Terms used in t his guideline ................................................................................................................. 19 
Recommendations f or resear ch ................................................................................................. 21 
1 Pain management pr ogrammes ........................................................................................................ 21 
2 Lapar oscopic tr eatment of perit oneal endometriosis ( excision or ablation) ................................ 21 
3 Lifestyle int erventions ( diet and e xercise) ...................................................................................... 22 
4 Inf ormation and suppor t .................................................................................................................... 23 
5 Hormonal tr eatment s for people wit h endometriosis wher e fertility is a priority ........................ 23 
Rationale and impact ................................................................................................................... 24 
Endometriosis signs and sympt oms .................................................................................................... 24 
Diagnosis of endometriosis .................................................................................................................. 25 
Management of endometriosis when f ertility is a priority ................................................................. 28 
Cont ext ......................................................................................................................................... 30 
Finding mor e information and committ ee details ..................................................................... 32 Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 3 of
33Updat e information ..................................................................................................................... 33 Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 4 of
33This guideline is t he basis of QS172. 
Overview 
This guideline co vers diagnosing and managing endometriosis, including wher e fertility is a 
priority . It aims t o raise awar eness of endometriosis sympt oms, and t o provide clear advice 
on referral, diagnosis and t he range of tr eatment s available. 
Who is i t for? 
• Healt hcare professionals 
• Commissioners and pr oviders 
• Women and people wit h suspect ed or confirmed endometriosis, t heir f amilies and 
carers Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 5 of
33Recommenda tions 
People ha ve the right t o be in volved in discussions and mak e informed decisions 
about t heir car e, as described in NICE's inf ormation on making decisions about y our 
care. 
Using inclusiv e language in healt hcare is impor tant f or saf ety, and t o promot e equity , 
respect and eff ectiv e communication wit h everyone. This guideline does not use 
inclusiv e language in whole or in par t because: 
• the evidence has not been r eview ed, and it is not cer tain fr om e xper t opinion 
which gr oups t he advice co vers, or 
• the evidence has been r eview ed, but t he inf ormation a vailable f or some gr oups 
was t oo limit ed to mak e specific r ecommendations, or 
• only a v ery limit ed number of r ecommendations ha ve been updat ed in dir ect 
response t o new e vidence or t o reflect a change in practice. 
Healt hcare professionals should use t heir clinical judgement when implementing 
recommendations, taking int o account t he individual's cir cumstances, needs and 
preferences, and ensuring all people ar e treated wit h dignity and r espect t hroughout 
their car e. 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains ho w we use w ords to sho w the 
strengt h (or cer tainty) of our r ecommendations, and has inf ormation about 
prescribing medicines (including off -label use), pr ofessional guidelines, standar ds 
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and saf eguar ding. 
1.1 Or ganisa tion o f care 
1.1.1 Set up a managed clinical netw ork for women wit h suspect ed or confirmed 
endometriosis, consisting of community ser vices (including GPs, practice nurses, 
school nurses and se xual healt h ser vices), gynaecology ser vices (see t he 
recommendation on gynaecology ser vices ) and specialist endometriosis ser vices Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 6 of
33(see t he recommendation on specialist endometriosis ser vices [ endometriosis 
centr es]). [2017] 
1.1.2 Community , gynaecology and specialist endometriosis ser vices ( endometriosis 
centr es) should: 
• provide coor dinat ed car e for women wit h suspect ed or confirmed 
endometriosis 
• have processes in place f or pr ompt diagnosis and tr eatment of 
endometriosis, because dela ys can aff ect quality of lif e and r esult in disease 
progression. [2017] 
Gynae cology ser vices for w omen wi th suspe cted or c onfirme d 
endome triosis 
1.1.3 Gynaecology ser vices f or women wit h suspect ed or confirmed endometriosis 
should ha ve access t o: 
• a gynaecologist wit h exper tise in diagnosing and managing endometriosis, 
including training and skills in lapar oscopic sur gery 
• a gynaecology specialist nurse wit h exper tise in endometriosis 
• a multidisciplinar y pain management ser vice 
• a healt hcare professional wit h an int erest in gynaecological imaging 
• fertility ser vices. [2017] 
Specialist endome triosis ser vices (endome triosis c entres) 
1.1.4 Specialist endometriosis ser vices ( endometriosis centr es) should ha ve access t o: 
• gynaecologist s wit h exper tise in diagnosing and managing endometriosis, 
including adv anced lapar oscopic sur gical skills 
• a color ectal sur geon wit h an int erest in endometriosis Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 7 of
33• a urologist wit h an int erest in endometriosis 
• an endometriosis specialist nurse 
• a multidisciplinar y pain management ser vice wit h exper tise in pelvic pain 
• a healt hcare professional wit h specialist e xper tise in gynaecological imaging 
of endometriosis 
• advanced diagnostic f acilities (f or example, radiology and hist opat hology) 
• fertility ser vices. [2017] 
1.2 E ndome triosis inf orma tion and suppor t 
1.2.1 Be awar e that endometriosis can be a long-t erm condition, and can ha ve a 
significant ph ysical, se xual, psy chological and social impact. W omen ma y have 
comple x needs and r equir e long-t erm suppor t. [2017] 
1.2.2 Assess t he individual inf ormation and suppor t needs of w omen wit h suspect ed or 
confirmed endometriosis, taking int o account t heir cir cumstances, sympt oms, 
priorities, desir e for fertility, aspect s of daily living, w ork and study , cultural 
back ground, and t heir ph ysical, psy chose xual and emotional needs. [2017] 
1.2.3 Provide inf ormation and suppor t for women or people wit h suspect ed or 
confirmed endometriosis, which should include: 
• what endometriosis is 
• endometriosis sympt oms and signs 
• how endometriosis is diagnosed and t he pat hway of car e, including r eferral 
criteria 
• treatment and management options 
• local suppor t groups, online f orums and national charities, and ho w to access 
them. Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 8 of
33Ensur e that inf ormation is pr ovided and updat ed throughout t he w oman or 
person's car e journe y, and t hat it is appr opriat e for the stage t hey are at in 
their car e. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.2.4 If women agr ee, in volve their par tner (and/or ot her f amily members or people 
impor tant t o them) and include t hem in discussions. F or mor e guidance on 
providing inf ormation t o people and in volving f amily members and car ers, see t he 
NICE guideline on patient e xperience in adult NHS ser vices . [2017] 
1.3 E ndome triosis sym ptoms and signs 
1.3.1 Suspect endometriosis in w omen (including y oung w omen aged 17 and under) 
presenting wit h 1 or mor e of t he following sympt oms or signs: 
• chronic pelvic pain 
• period-r elated pain ( dysmenorrhoea) aff ecting daily activities and quality of 
life 
• deep pain during or aft er se xual int ercourse 
• period-r elated or cy clical gastr ointestinal sympt oms, in par ticular , painful 
bowel mo vement s 
• period-r elated or cy clical urinar y sympt oms, in par ticular , blood in t he urine or 
pain passing urine 
• infertility in association wit h 1 or mor e of t he abo ve. [2017] 
1.3.2 Ask if an y first -degr ee relativ es ha ve a hist ory of endometriosis, as t his incr eases 
the lik elihood of endometriosis. [202 4] 
1.3.3 Inform w omen wit h suspect ed or confirmed endometriosis t hat k eeping a pain 
and sympt om diar y can aid discussions. [2017] 
1.3.4 Take into account t hat e very person's e xperience of pain is unique t o them and 
may be e xpressed in diff erent wa ys, bot h verbally and non-v erbally . In par ticular , Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 9 of
33this ma y vary because of: 
• their cultural back ground and belief s 
• their socioeconomic status 
• any neur odiverse conditions t hey ma y have. [202 4] 
1.3.5 Offer an abdominal and pelvic (int ernal v aginal) e xamination t o women and 
people wit h suspect ed endometriosis t o identify abdominal masses and pelvic 
signs, such as r educed or gan mobility and enlar gement, t ender nodularity in t he 
posterior v aginal f ornix, and visible v aginal endometriotic lesions. [2017 , 
amended 202 4] 
1.3.6 Offer an abdominal e xamination t o exclude abdominal masses if a pelvic (int ernal 
vaginal) e xamination is declined, or not suitable f or the person. [2017 , amended 
202 4] 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t he new and updat ed 202 4 
recommendations and ho w they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact 
section on endometriosis signs and sympt oms. 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview B: 
diagnosing endometriosis . 
1.4 P harmac ological treatmen t for w omen and 
people wi th suspe cted or c onfirme d endome triosis 
Initial tr eatmen ts 
Analgesics 
1.4.1 For women wit h endometriosis-r elated pain, discuss t he benefit s and risks of 
analgesics, taking int o account an y comorbidities and t he w oman's pr eferences. 
[2017] Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 10 of
331.4.2 Consider a shor t trial (f or example, 3 mont hs) of paracetamol or a non-st eroidal 
anti-inflammat ory drug (NSAID) alone or in combination f or first -line management 
of endometriosis-r elated pain. [2017] 
1.4.3 If a trial of paracetamol or an NSAID (alone or in combination) does not pr ovide 
adequat e pain r elief, consider ot her f orms of pain management and r eferral f or 
further assessment. [2017] 
Neur omodulat ors and neur opat hic pain tr eatment s 
1.4.4 For recommendations on using neur omodulat ors t o treat neur opat hic pain, see 
the NICE guideline on neur opat hic pain in adult s. [2017] 
Hormonal tr eatment 
1.4.5 Explain t o women wit h suspect ed or confirmed endometriosis t hat hormonal 
treatment f or endometriosis can r educe pain and has no permanent negativ e 
effect on subsequent f ertility. [2017] 
1.4.6 Offer hormonal tr eatment (f or example, t he combined oral contraceptiv e pill or a 
progest ogen) t o women wit h suspect ed, confirmed or r ecurr ent endometriosis. 
[2017] 
In Sept ember 2017 , this was off -label use f or some combined oral contraceptiv e 
pills or pr ogest ogens. See NICE's inf ormation on pr escribing medicines . 
Further tr eatmen ts 
Gonadotr ophin-r eleasing hormone antagonist s 
1.4.7 For gonadotr ophin-r eleasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist s recommended as 
options in NICE t echnology appraisal guidance f or treating endometriosis 
sympt oms in adult s of r eproductiv e age aft er medical or sur gical tr eatment, see 
the guidance on: Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 11 of
33• linzagolix wit h hormonal add-back t herap y (TA1067 , June 2025) 
• relugolix–estradiol–nor ethisterone (T A1057 , April 2025) . 
1.5 D iagnosis and r eferral for w omen or pe ople wi th 
suspe cted or c onfirme d endome triosis 
1.5.1 Carry out additional in vestigations such as ultrasound and r eferral (if necessar y, 
see r ecommendations 1 .5.5 to 1.5.7) in parallel wit h each ot her, and in conjunction 
with initial pharmacological tr eatment. [202 4] 
Ultrasound 
1.5.2 Offer a transv aginal ultrasound scan t o all w omen or people wit h suspect ed 
endometriosis, e ven if pelvic or abdominal e xamination is normal, t o: 
• identify o varian endometriomas and deep endometriosis, including t hat 
involving t he bo wel, bladder or ur eter 
• identify or rule out ot her pat hology which ma y be causing sympt oms 
• guide management options and enable r eferral t o an appr opriat e ser vice, 
depending on t he ultrasound findings. See r ecommendations 1 .5.5 to 1.5.7. 
This ultrasound scan should be or ganised b y the person's general practice. 
[202 4] 
1.5.3 If a transv aginal ultrasound scan is declined or not suitable f or the person, 
consider a transabdominal ultrasound scan of t he pelvis. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.5.4 Do not e xclude t he possibility of endometriosis if t he abdominal or pelvic 
examination and ultrasound scan ar e normal, and r ecognise t hat r eferral ma y still 
be necessar y even wit h a normal scan. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.5.5 Refer women or people wit h sympt oms of , or confirmed, endometriosis t o a Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 12 of
33gynaecology ser vice (see t he recommendation on gynaecology ser vices ) for 
further in vestigation and management if: 
• initial tr eatment is not eff ectiv e, is not t olerat ed or is contraindicat ed, or 
• they have sympt oms of endometriosis which ha ve a detrimental impact on 
activities of daily living, or 
• they have persist ent or r ecurr ent sympt oms of endometriosis, or 
• they have pelvic signs of endometriosis, but deep endometriosis is not 
suspect ed. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.5.6 Refer women or people t o a specialist endometriosis ser vice (see t he 
recommendation on specialist endometriosis ser vices [ endometriosis centr e]) if 
they have suspect ed or confirmed: 
• endometrioma, or 
• deep endometriosis, including t hat in volving t he bo wel, bladder or ur eter, or 
• endometriosis out side t he pelvic ca vity. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.5.7 Refer young w omen or people (aged 17 and under) wit h suspect ed or confirmed 
endometriosis t o a paediatric and adolescent gynaecology ser vice or specialist 
endometriosis ser vice ( endometriosis centr e) for fur ther in vestigation and 
management. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
Serum C A125 
1.5.8 Do not use serum CA 125 t o diagnose endometriosis. [2017] 
MRI 
1.5.9 Consider specialist transv aginal ultrasound scan or pelvic MRI scan t o diagnose 
deep endometriosis and assess it s extent. [2017 , amended 202 4] Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 13 of
331.5.10 Ensur e that specialist transv aginal ultrasound scans and pelvic MRI scans ar e 
planned and int erpreted by a healt hcare professional wit h specialist e xper tise in 
gynaecological imaging. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
Diagnostic lapar oscopy 
Also r efer to the section on sur gical management and t he section on management if 
fertility is a priority . 
1.5.11 Consider lapar oscop y to diagnose endometriosis in w omen or people wit h 
suspect ed endometriosis, e ven if t he ultrasound scan or MRI scan was normal. 
[2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.5.12 For women or people wit h suspect ed deep endometriosis consider a specialist 
pelvic ultrasound scan or MRI scan bef ore an operativ e lapar oscop y. [2017 , 
amended 202 4] 
1.5.13 During a diagnostic lapar oscop y, a gynaecologist wit h training and skills in 
lapar oscopic sur gery for endometriosis should per form a syst ematic inspection of 
the pelvis and r ecord the findings (including normal and abnormal ar eas and 
intra-operativ e imaging). [2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.5.14 During a diagnostic lapar oscop y, consider taking a biopsy of suspect ed 
endometriosis: 
• to confirm t he diagnosis of endometriosis (be awar e that a negativ e 
histological r esult does not e xclude endometriosis) 
• to exclude malignancy if an endometrioma is tr eated but not e xcised. [2017] 
1.5.15 If a syst ematic lapar oscop y wit h recorded findings of normal and abnormal ar eas 
and intra-operativ e imaging is per formed and is normal, e xplain t o the w oman or 
person t hat it is unlik ely that t hey have endometriosis, and off er alt ernativ e 
management of t heir sympt oms. [2017 , amended 202 4] Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 14 of
33For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t he new and updat ed 202 4 
recommendations and ho w they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact 
section on diagnosis of endometriosis . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview B: 
diagnosing endometriosis . 
1.6 Staging systems 
1.6.1 Offer endometriosis tr eatment accor ding t o the w oman's sympt oms, pr eferences 
and priorities, rat her t han t he stage of t he endometriosis. [2017] 
1.6.2 When endometriosis is diagnosed, t he gynaecologist should document a detailed 
description of t he appearance and sit e of endometriosis. [2017] 
1.7 Monitoring f or w omen wi th confirme d 
endome triosis 
1.7.1 Consider outpatient f ollow-up (wit h or wit hout e xamination and pelvic imaging) 
for women wit h confirmed endometriosis, par ticularly w omen who choose not t o 
have sur gery, if they have: 
• deep endometriosis in volving t he bo wel, bladder or ur eter or 
• 1 or mor e endometrioma t hat is lar ger t han 3 cm. [2017] 
1.8 N on-pharmac ological manag emen t 
1.8.1 Advise w omen t hat t he available e vidence does not suppor t the use of traditional 
Chinese medicine or ot her Chinese herbal medicines or supplement s for treating 
endometriosis. [2017] Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 15 of
331.9 S urgical manag emen t 
1.9.1 Ask w omen wit h suspect ed or confirmed endometriosis about t heir sympt oms, 
preferences and priorities wit h respect t o pain and f ertility, to guide sur gical 
decision-making. [2017] 
1.9.2 Discuss sur gical management options wit h women wit h suspect ed or confirmed 
endometriosis. Discussions ma y include: 
• what a lapar oscop y involves 
• that lapar oscop y ma y include sur gical tr eatment (wit h prior patient consent) 
• how lapar oscopic sur gery could aff ect endometriosis sympt oms 
• the possible benefit s and risks of lapar oscopic sur gery 
• the possible need f or fur ther sur gery (for example, f or recurr ent 
endometriosis or if complications arise) 
• the possible need f or fur ther planned sur gery for deep endometriosis 
involving t he bo wel, bladder or ur eter. [2017] 
1.9.3 Perform sur gery for endometriosis lapar oscopically , unless t here are 
contraindications. R ecord the result s wit h intra-operativ e imaging. [2017 , 
amended 202 4] 
1.9.4 During a lapar oscop y to diagnose endometriosis, consider lapar oscopic tr eatment 
of the following, if pr esent: 
• perit oneal endometriosis not in volving t he bo wel, bladder or ur eter 
• uncomplicat ed ovarian endometriomas. [2017] 
1.9.5 As an adjunct t o sur gery for deep endometriosis in volving t he bo wel, bladder or 
ureter, consider 3 mont hs of gonadotr ophin-r eleasing hormone agonist s bef ore 
surgery. [2017] 
In Sept ember 2017 , this was off -label use f or some gonadotr ophin-r eleasing 
hormone agonist s. See NICE's inf ormation on pr escribing medicines . Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 16 of
331.9.6 Consider e xcision rat her t han ablation t o treat endometriomas, taking int o 
account t he w oman's desir e for fertility and her o varian r eserve. Also see t he 
section on o varian r eserve testing in t he NICE guideline on f ertility pr oblems . 
[2017] 
1.9.7 After lapar oscopic e xcision or ablation of endometriosis, consider hormonal 
treatment (wit h, for example, t he combined oral contraceptiv e pill), t o prolong t he 
benefit s of sur gery and manage sympt oms. [2017] 
In Sept ember 2017 , this was off -label use f or some hormonal tr eatment s 
(including some combined oral contraceptiv e pills). See NICE's inf ormation on 
prescribing medicines . 
1.9.8 For gonadotr ophin-r eleasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist s recommended as 
options in NICE t echnology appraisal guidance f or treating endometriosis 
sympt oms in adult s of r eproductiv e age aft er medical or sur gical tr eatment, see 
the guidance on: 
• linzagolix wit h hormonal add-back t herap y (TA1067 , June 2025) 
• relugolix–estradiol–nor ethisterone (T A1057 , April 2025) . 
Hyster ectomy in c ombina tion wi th sur gical manag emen t 
1.9.9 If hysterectomy is indicat ed (f or example, if t he w oman has adenom yosis or 
heavy menstrual bleeding t hat has not r esponded t o other tr eatment s), excise all 
visible endometriotic lesions at t he time of t he hysterectomy. [2017] 
1.9.10 Perform h ysterectomy (wit h or wit hout oophor ectomy) lapar oscopically when 
combined wit h sur gical tr eatment of endometriosis, unless t here are 
contraindications. [2017] 
1.9.11 For women t hinking about ha ving a h ysterectomy, discuss: 
• what a h ysterectomy involves and when it ma y be needed 
• the possible benefit s and risks of h ysterectomy Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 17 of
33• the possible benefit s and risks of ha ving oophor ectomy at t he same time 
• how a h ysterectomy (wit h or wit hout oophor ectomy) could aff ect 
endometriosis sympt oms 
• that h ysterectomy should be combined wit h excision of all visible 
endometriotic lesions 
• endometriosis r ecurr ence and t he possible need f or fur ther sur gery 
• the possible benefit s and risks of hormone r eplacement t herap y aft er 
hysterectomy wit h oophor ectomy (also see t he NICE guideline on 
menopause ).[2017] 
1.10 M anag emen t if fertility is a priori ty 
The r ecommendations in t his section should be int erpreted wit hin the cont ext of NICE's 
guideline on f ertility pr oblems . The management of endometriosis-r elated subf ertility 
should ha ve multidisciplinar y team in volvement wit h input fr om a f ertility specialist and 
access t o fertility ser vices. Depending on t he se verity of t he endometriosis t his ma y be in 
a secondar y car e gynaecology ser vice or a t ertiary car e specialist endometriosis ser vice. 
This should include t he recommended diagnostic f ertility t ests or pr eoperativ e tests, as 
well as ot her r ecommended f ertility tr eatment s such as assist ed reproduction t hat ar e 
included in t he NICE guideline on f ertility pr oblems . 
1.10.1 Offer excision or ablation of endometriosis plus adhesiolysis f or endometriosis 
not in volving t he bo wel, bladder or ur eter, because t his impr oves the chance of 
spontaneous pr egnancy . [2017] 
1.10.2 Offer lapar oscopic ovarian cyst ectomy with excision of t he cyst wall, or 
lapar oscopic drainage and ablation, t o women or people wit h endometriomas, 
because t his impr oves the chance of spontaneous pr egnancy . Take into account: 
• the possible impact on o varian r eserve 
• that ablation and drainage ma y preserve ovarian r eserve mor e than Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 18 of
33cystectomy (also see t he section on o varian r eserve testing in t he NICE 
guideline on f ertility pr oblems ). [2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.10.3 Discuss t he benefit s and risks of lapar oscopic sur gery as a tr eatment option wit h 
women or people who ha ve deep endometriosis (including endometriosis t hat 
involves the bo wel, bladder or ur eter) and who ar e trying t o conceiv e so t hey can 
make an inf ormed decision on it s use. T opics t o discuss ma y include: 
• the possible impact of deep endometriosis on pr egnancy out comes 
• whet her lapar oscopic sur gery ma y alter the chance of futur e pregnancy 
• the possible impact on f ertility if complications arise 
• alternativ es to sur gery 
• other f ertility f actors. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
1.10.4 Do not off er hormonal tr eatment alone or in combination wit h sur gery to women 
or people wit h endometriosis who ar e trying t o conceiv e, because it does not 
improve spontaneous pr egnancy rat es. [2017 , amended 202 4] 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t he updat ed 202 4 
recommendations and ho w they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact 
section on tr eatment of endometriosis when f ertility is a priority . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview A: 
treatment of endometriosis when f ertility is a priority . 
Terms use d in this guideline 
Chronic pel vic pain 
Defined as pelvic pain lasting f or 6 mont hs or longer . Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 19 of
33Paediatric and ado lescent gynae cology ser vice 
Paediatric and adolescent gynaecology ser vices ar e hospital-based, multidisciplinar y 
specialist ser vices f or girls and y oung w omen (usually aged under 18). 
Ovarian c ystectomy 
Ovarian cyst ectomy is a sur gical e xcision of an o varian endometriotic cyst. An o varian 
endometrioma is a cystic mass arising fr om ect opic endometrial tissue wit hin the ovary. 
Manag ed clinic al ne tworks 
Linked gr oups of healt hcare professionals fr om primar y, secondar y and t ertiary car e 
providing a coor dinat ed patient pat hway. Responsibility f or setting up t hese netw orks will 
depend on e xisting ser vice pr ovision and location. Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 20 of
33Recommenda tions f or research 
The guideline committ ee has made t he following r ecommendations f or resear ch. 
1 Pain manag emen t programmes 
Are pain management pr ogrammes a clinically and cost -effectiv e intervention f or women 
with endometriosis? 
Why this is im portant 
Pain is one of t he most debilitating sympt oms of endometriosis. Endometriosis-r elated 
pain can be acut e or chr onic, and can adv ersely aff ect t he w oman's quality of lif e, ability t o 
work, and can aff ect par tners and t heir f amilies. 
Pain management pr ogrammes ha ve been f ound t o be eff ectiv e in managing chr onic pelvic 
pain, and can impr ove quality of lif e. Ho wever, it is unclear ho w much of t his small 
evidence base can be generalised t o women wit h endometriosis f or which e vidence is 
lacking. F urthermor e, pain management pr ogrammes ha ve not been compar ed wit h other 
treatment s available f or endometriosis. Pain management pr ogrammes pr omot e self -
management and ar e oft en pr ovided in t he community . 
If found t o be eff ectiv e for endometriosis, pain management pr ogrammes w ould pr ovide an 
additional or alt ernativ e treatment option f or women e xperiencing endometriosis-r elated 
pain. Gr oups of par ticular int erest ar e women f or whom hormonal and sur gical options 
have been e xhaust ed, w omen who w ould pr efer an alt ernativ e to a pharmacological or 
surgical appr oach, and w omen who ma y be prioritising tr ying t o conceiv e. 
2 Lapar oscopic tr eatmen t of peri tone al 
endome triosis ( excision or ab lation) 
Is lapar oscopic tr eatment ( excision or ablation) of perit oneal disease in isolation eff ectiv e 
for managing endometriosis-r elated pain? Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 21 of
33Why this is im portant 
Isolat ed perit oneal endometriosis can be an incidental finding in w omen who ma y or ma y 
not e xperience pain or ot her sympt oms. 
Resear ch is needed t o det ermine whet her lapar oscopic tr eatment of isolat ed perit oneal 
endometriosis in w omen wit h endometriosis-r elated pain r esult s in a clinical and cost -
effectiv e impr ovement in sympt oms. 
The curr ent lit eratur e does not pr ovide a clear answ er because t he stage of endometriosis 
is oft en not sufficient ly clearly defined in r esear ch studies, and t he tr eatment modalities 
used ar e multiple and v aried. The r esultant amalgamation of v arious stages of 
endometriosis and v ariable tr eatment modalities leads t o loss of cer tainty of out come in 
this specific gr oup of w omen. 
Establishing whet her tr eating isolat ed perit oneal endometriosis is cost eff ectiv e is 
impor tant, because t his forms a lar ge par t of t he w orkload in general gynaecology , and 
uses considerable r esour ces. 
3 Lif estyle in terventions ( diet and e xercise) 
Are specialist lif estyle int erventions ( diet and e xercise) eff ectiv e, compar ed wit h no 
specialist lif estyle int erventions, f or women wit h endometriosis? 
Why this is im portant 
Endometriosis is a long-t erm condition t hat can cause acut e and chr onic pain, and f atigue. 
It has a significant and sometimes se vere impact on t he w oman's quality of lif e and 
activities of daily living, including r elationships and se xuality , ability t o work, f ertility, 
fitness and mental healt h. 
Suppor ting self -management is critical t o impr oving quality of lif e for women living wit h 
endometriosis. In or der t o successfully self -manage t he condition, w omen need e vidence-
based, easily accessible inf ormation about t he condition and wa ys of managing it t hat 
suppor t surgical and medical tr eatment. Ho wever, no high-quality r esear ch was identified 
on the eff ectiv eness of lif estyle int erventions such as diet or e xercise and ot her non-
medical tr eatment s in r educing pain, f atigue and ot her sympt oms. Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 22 of
33Studies should aim t o provide e vidence-based options t o suppor t self -management of 
endometriosis. This w ould impr ove the quality of lif e of w omen wit h endometriosis, 
enabling t hem t o manage pain and f atigue, and r educing t he negativ e impact on t heir 
career, relationships, se x lives, fertility, and ph ysical and emotional w ellbeing. 
4 Informa tion and suppor t 
What inf ormation and suppor t interventions ar e eff ectiv e to help w omen wit h 
endometriosis deal wit h their sympt oms and impr ove their quality of liv es? 
Why this is im portant 
This guideline has identified t hat w omen wit h endometriosis and t heir par tners f eel that 
information and suppor t is not alwa ys pr ovided in t he wa y that best meet t heir needs. 
However, the dir ect eff ectiv eness of diff erent types or f ormat s of inf ormation and suppor t 
interventions on measurable out comes such as healt h-related quality of lif e and le vel of 
function (f or example, activities of daily living) ha ve not been t ested. Good practice in t his 
area in non-specialist and specialist settings can impr ove satisf action wit h the car e 
provided. It ma y also impr ove quality of lif e and positiv ely aff ect r elationships betw een 
healt hcare professionals and t he w oman wit h endometriosis, as w ell as t he w oman's 
personal f amily r elationships. 
5 Hormonal tr eatmen ts for pe ople wi th 
endome triosis w here fertility is a priori ty 
What is t he eff ect of diff erent doses and durations of hormonal tr eatment s giv en eit her 
before, aft er, or bot h bef ore and aft er sur gery on f ertility out comes in people wit h 
endometriosis wher e fertility is a priority? 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t he recommendation f or resear ch, 
see t he rationale section on tr eatment of endometriosis when f ertility is a priority . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview A: 
treatment of endometriosis when f ertility is a priority . Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 23 of
33Rationale and im pact 
This section briefly e xplains wh y the committ ee made t he recommendations and ho w they 
might aff ect practice. The y link t o details of t he evidence and a full description of t he 
committ ee's discussion. 
Endome triosis signs and sym ptoms 
Recommendations 1 .3.2 and 1 .3.4 to 1.3.6 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Based on t heir kno wledge and e xperience t he committ ee agr eed t hat a f amily hist ory of 
endometriosis should be tak en int o account when assessing a person wit h signs or 
sympt oms suggesting endometriosis, as t here was an incr eased lik elihood of 
endometriosis if t here was a positiv e hist ory in a first -degr ee relativ e. 
Based on stak eholder f eedback and inf ormation in t he 2018 All Par ty Parliamentar y Repor t 
on endometriosis t hat man y ethnic minority gr oups do not f eel belie ved when r epor ting 
their sympt oms, and based on t he committ ee's kno wledge and e xper tise, a 
recommendation was added t o highlight t he need tak e div ersity int o account when 
assessing pain sympt oms. 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
Knowling t hat t here is a f amily hist ory of endometriosis ma y incr ease t he suspicion of 
endometriosis, which ma y lead t o investigations such as ultrasound being used sooner , 
and consequent ly an earlier diagnosis. 
Increased awar eness of t he need t o tak e div ersity issues int o account when assessing 
pain sympt oms will help minority gr oups f eel that t heir pain sympt oms ar e belie ved. 
Return t o recommendations Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 4 of
33Diagnosis o f endome triosis 
Recommendations 1 .5.1 to 1.5.13 and 1 .5.15 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Based on t he committ ee's kno wledge and e xperience, an additional r ecommendation has 
been added t o clarify t hat initial pharmacological tr eatment, a non-specialist ultrasound 
and r eferral do not need t o happen sequentially and can happen in parallel so t hat t he 
overall pat hway of car e is mor e timely . 
Ultrasound 
Ther e was e vidence t hat transv aginal ultrasound was, in t he majority of studies, 
moderat ely to highly sensitiv e at det ecting deep endometriosis, par ticularly when in volving 
the ovaries. Ho wever, the committ ee w ere awar e that t hese data w ere when t he 
ultrasound was carried out b y a specialist operat or, and t hat ultrasounds carried out in a 
non-specialist setting ma y not achie ve this degr ee of sensitivity . The committ ee also 
agreed, ho wever, that non-specialist ultrasound was still a useful t ool that w ould help 
identify deep endometriosis or endometrioma or ot her pat hology . The y therefore 
recommended t hat all w omen or people wit h suspect ed endometriosis should ha ve an 
ultrasound e xamination as t his will allo w identification of o varian endometriomas or deep 
endometriosis, ma y identify ot her pat hology which could be leading t o the sympt oms 
(such as fibr oids or malignancy), and will help det ermine t he need f or a r eferral and t he 
most appr opriat e referral option. The committ ee agr eed t hat an ultrasound should be 
offered to all w omen or people pr esenting wit h sympt oms suggesting endometriosis as 
part of t he standar d diagnostic w ork-up, as f ailure to diagnose endometriosis was a 
common pr oblem. 
The r ecommendation on alt ernativ es to transv aginal ultrasound has been amended t o 
clarify t hat t he reasons f or not carr ying out a transv aginal ultrasound ma y be because t he 
woman or person wit h suspect ed endometriosis does not wish t o have this int ernal scan, 
or if t here are other r easons which mean it is not suitable f or the person. This clarifies t hat 
it is not just t he healt hcare professional who mak es a decision on t he use of a transv aginal 
ultrasound. 
Based on t he committ ee's kno wledge and e xperience, t he recommendation on r eferral t o a 
gynaecology ser vice aft er ultrasound has been updat ed to 'refer' inst ead of 'consider Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 25 of
33referring' as in t he pr evious v ersion of t his guideline, as t he committ ee agr eed t hat t here 
was no ot her option but t o refer people who met t he list ed crit eria f or referral so t hat t hey 
can r eceiv e appr opriat e fur ther in vestigations and tr eatment. P eople w ould still ha ve the 
option t o decline t he referral. In addition, t he crit eria f or referral t o a specialist 
endometriosis ser vice w ere amended t o include t he pr esence of an endometrioma and t he 
location of deep endometriosis has been clarified. Endometriomas ar e oft en associat ed 
with deep endometriosis or se vere endometriosis, and management, par ticularly if f ertility 
is a priority , can be complicat ed so specialist ser vices ar e most appr opriat e for this. The 
recommendation on r eferral of y oung w omen or people has similarly also been updat ed. 
Serum C A125 
Ther e was some new e vidence f or the sensitivity and specificity of CA 125 t o diagnose 
endometriosis, but t he committ ee agr eed t hat t his was insufficient t o change t he existing 
recommendation which advised t hat it was not a suitable t ool to diagnose endometriosis. 
MRI 
Ther e was e vidence fr om t he majority of studies t hat MRI was moderat ely to highly 
sensitiv e at det ecting deep endometriosis. The e vidence f or the use of transv aginal 
ultrasound f or the diagnosis of deep endometriosis in volving a number of locations 
(vaginal, r ectosigmoid, r ectovaginal, ut erosacral ligament s, pouch of Douglas, bo wel, 
bladder and ur eters) sho wed that, in t he majority of studies, it was moderat ely sensitiv e, 
although t he committ ee agr eed t his ma y depend on operat or experience, and t hat 
sensitivity w ould be optimal wit h mor e experienced operat ors who w ould be lik ely to be 
carrying out ultrasounds in gynaecology or specialist endometriosis ser vices. Based on 
this, t he committ ee agr eed t hat suspect ed deep endometriosis could be diagnosed and 
assessed b y specialist ultrasound or MRI, and t he choice of imaging t echnique should be a 
clinical decision based on a vailable r esour ces. 
The committ ee agr eed, based on t heir kno wledge and e xperience, t hat bot h specialist 
ultrasound and MRI scans should be bot h planned and int erpreted by someone wit h 
exper tise in gynaecological imaging t o maximise diagnostic accuracy . 
Diagnostic lapar oscop y 
The committ ee agr eed t hat lapar oscop y (which had been consider ed the gold standar d 
diagnostic t echnique in t he evidence r eview) could be used as an option f or women or Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 26 of
33people wit h sympt oms of endometriosis e ven if ultrasound or MRI r esult s were normal. The 
committ ee not ed, based on t heir kno wledge and e xperience, t here was a need t o ensur e 
the imaging r esult s were recorded when carr ying out a diagnostic lapar oscop y. 
The committ ee not ed that e ven a normal lapar oscop y could not rule out endometriosis 
fully, as t here was a possibility of micr oscopic endometriosis causing t he sympt oms. The 
committ ee therefore updat ed the existing r ecommendation and clarified t hat management 
of sympt oms was t he aim of tr eatment. 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
Ultrasound 
Early in vestigation using ultrasound r eflect s what is no w curr ent best practice but it is 
possible t here will be some incr ease in t he use of early transv aginal ultrasound. An early 
ultrasound scan ma y replace t he need f or a transv aginal ultrasound scan aft er referral t o 
gynaecology ser vices f or some w omen or people (par ticularly t hose who ar e referred and 
then seen wit hout undue dela y), and so is unlik ely to greatly incr ease t he total number of 
transv aginal ultrasounds f or diagnosis of endometriosis. This change is t herefore not 
expect ed to lead t o a lar ge incr ease in r esour ce use in t erms of t he number of ultrasound 
scans, but t here will be a need f or additional training of sonographers t o incr ease t heir 
compet ency t o det ect f eatur es associat ed wit h endometriosis. 
The change t o referring all w omen and people wit h sympt oms of , or confirmed 
endometriosis who meet t he specified crit eria, compar ed to considering r eferral in t he 
previous v ersion of t his guideline ma y lead t o mor e people being r eferred, but t his will 
improve the diagnosis and management of endometriosis, and is lik ely to lead t o earlier 
diagnosis and tr eatment and less damage t o organs and structur es from t he disease, and 
therefore reduce subsequent tr eatment cost s. 
MRI 
The use of specialist ultrasound as an alt ernativ e to MRI t o diagnose deep endometriosis 
may lead t o cost -savings in t he NHS, as MRI is mor e expensiv e than ultrasound. The 
specialist planning and int erpretation of scans ma y incr ease t he number of people whose 
endometriosis is successfully identified. Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 27 of
33Serum C A125 and diagnostic lapar ascop y 
These r ecommendations r einforce curr ent practice. 
Return t o recommendations 
Manag emen t of endome triosis w hen f ertility is a 
priori ty 
Recommendations 1 .10.2 to 1.10.4 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Ther e was no e vidence of an impor tant diff erence in t he pr egnancy rat e betw een 
lapar oscopic cyst ectomy and lapar oscopic ablation and drainage of o varian 
endometriomas lar ger t han 3 cm, but drainage and ablation ma y lead t o incr eased o varian 
reserve (measur ed in t erms of anti-Mullerian hormone le vels, o varian v olume and antral 
follicle count) compar ed to lapar oscopic cyst ectomy, so ablation and drainage has been 
included as an option if o varian r eserve is a priority . 
Based on t he committ ee's kno wledge and e xperience and stak eholder f eedback, t he 
definition of deep endometriosis has been clarified t o stat e that it includes endometriosis 
involving t he bo wel, bladder or ur eter but is not limit ed to these sit es, so t hat people ar e 
not e xcluded fr om tr eatment inappr opriat ely. The need t o discuss t hat deep endometriosis 
can impact on pr egnancy out comes has been added t o the topics t o discuss t o provide a 
broader consideration of t he benefit s and risks of sur gery. 
Ther e was some limit ed evidence of incr eased rat es of clinical pr egnancy and liv e bir th 
with combinations of hormonal tr eatment s wit h lapar oscopic sur gery compar ed to sur gery 
alone, but t he evidence was mix ed, wit h other e vidence sho wing no diff erence. As t here 
was mix ed evidence, t he committ ee made a recommendation f or resear ch on hormonal 
treatment s. The committ ee clarified t hat t his recommendation applied t o hormonal 
treatment alone or in combination wit h sur gery. 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
The inclusion of ablation and drainage as a tr eatment option is not e xpect ed to have a Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 28 of
33resour ce impact as t he cost of t he 2 tr eatment options ( cystectomy and ablation/drainage) 
are similar . This change will allo w the option of a tr eatment which ma y have less of an 
impact on o varian r eserve. 
Return t o recommendations Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 29 of
33Context 
Endometriosis is one of t he most common gynaecological diseases needing tr eatment. It is 
defined as t he gr owth of endometrial-lik e tissue (t he w omb lining) out side t he ut erus 
(womb). Endometriosis is mainly a disease of t he reproductiv e years and, alt hough it s 
exact cause is unkno wn, it is hormone mediat ed and is associat ed wit h menstruation. 
Endometriosis is typically associat ed wit h sympt oms such as pelvic pain, painful periods 
and subf ertility. Endometriosis is also associat ed wit h a lo wer quality of lif e. Women wit h 
endometriosis r epor t pain, which can be fr equent, chr onic and/or se vere, as w ell as 
tiredness, mor e sick da ys, and a significant ph ysical, se xual, psy chological and social 
impact. Endometriosis is an impor tant cause of subf ertility and t his can also ha ve a 
significant eff ect on quality of lif e. 
Women ma y also ha ve endometriosis wit hout sympt oms, so it is difficult t o kno w ho w 
common t he disease is in t he population. It is also unclear whet her endometriosis is 
alwa ys pr ogressiv e or can r emain stable or impr ove wit h time. 
Delayed diagnosis is a significant pr oblem f or women wit h endometriosis. Patient self -help 
groups emphasise t hat healt hcare professionals oft en do not r ecognise t he impor tance of 
sympt oms or consider endometriosis as a possibility . In addition, w omen can dela y 
seeking help because of a per ception t hat pelvic pain is normal. Dela ys of 4 to 10 years 
can occur betw een first r epor ting sympt oms and confirming t he diagnosis. Man y women 
repor t that t he dela y in diagnosis leads t o incr eased personal suff ering, pr olonged ill 
healt h and a disease stat e that is mor e difficult t o treat. 
Diagnosis can only be made definitiv ely b y lapar oscopic visualisation of t he pelvis, but 
other, less in vasive met hods ma y be useful in assisting diagnosis, including ultrasound. 
Management options f or endometriosis include pharmacological, non-pharmacological and 
surgical tr eatment s. Endometriosis is an oestr ogen-dependent condition. Most drug 
treatment s for endometriosis w ork b y suppr essing o varian function, and ar e contraceptiv e. 
Surgical tr eatment aims t o remove or destr oy endometriotic lesions. The choice of 
treatment depends on t he w oman's pr eferences and priorities in t erms of pain 
management and/or f ertility. 
Endometriosis can be a chr onic condition aff ecting w omen t hroughout t heir r eproductiv e 
lives (and sometimes be yond). W omen's priorities and pr eferences ma y change o ver time, Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 30 of
33and management strat egies should change t o reflect t his. 
Women wit h endometriosis typically pr esent t o community ser vices (including GPs, 
practice nurses, school nurses and se xual healt h ser vices) wit h pain, and ma y then be 
referred to gynaecology ser vices f or diagnosis and management. Some w omen ma y 
present t o fertility ser vices. Comple x sur gical tr eatment is carried out in specialist 
endometriosis ser vices ( endometriosis centr es), which incorporat e a multidisciplinar y 
team. 
This guideline mak es recommendations f or the diagnosis and management of 
endometriosis in community ser vices, gynaecology ser vices and specialist endometriosis 
services ( endometriosis centr es). 
The guideline also co vers t he car e of w omen wit h confirmed or suspect ed endometriosis, 
including r ecurr ent endometriosis. It includes w omen who do not ha ve sympt oms but ha ve 
endometriosis disco vered incidentally . Special consideration was giv en to young w omen 
(aged 17 and under). The guideline does not co ver the in vestigation of f ertility pr oblems 
related to endometriosis, car e of w omen wit h endometriosis occurring out side t he pelvis, 
nor postmenopausal w omen. Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 31 of
33Finding mor e inf orma tion and c ommi ttee 
details 
To find NICE guidance on r elated topics, including guidance in de velopment, see t he NICE 
topic pages on gynaecological conditions and fertility. 
For full details of t he evidence and t he guideline committ ee's discussions, see t he 
evidence r eviews and full guideline . You can also find inf ormation about how the guideline 
was de veloped , including details of t he committ ee. 
NICE has pr oduced tools and r esour ces t o help y ou put t his guideline int o practice . For 
general help and advice on putting NICE guidelines int o practice, see resour ces t o help 
you put guidance int o practice . Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 32 of
33Update inf orma tion 
November 202 4: We have review ed the evidence f or, and updat ed and made new 
recommendations on, diagnosis of endometriosis. As par t of t his updat e some 
recommendations on signs and sympt oms w ere also amended. These new and updat ed 
recommendations ar e mark ed [2017 , amended 202 4] or [202 4]. Additionally , the 
diagnosis and r eferral section has been r eview ed and r eordered to bett er reflect curr ent 
clinical practice and t he car e pat hway. Unless ot herwise indicat ed no changes ha ve been 
made t o recommendations t hat ha ve been r eordered. 
We have also made an edit orial updat e to a recommendation on inf ormation and suppor t to 
clarify what inf ormation should be pr ovided and when. This r ecommendation is mark ed 
[2017 , amended 202 4]. 
April 202 4: We have review ed the evidence and updat ed some r ecommendations, and 
made a r ecommendation f or resear ch, on tr eatment of endometriosis when f ertility is a 
priority . These r ecommendations ar e mark ed [2017 , amended 202 4]. We have also 
amended t he heading 'Sur gical management when f ertility is a priority' t o 'Management if 
fertility is a priority' t o recognise t hat t his section also co vers non-sur gical options. 
Minor changes since publication 
Sept ember 2025: We added links t o relevant t echnology appraisal guidance in t he 
sections on gonadotr ophin-r eleasing hormone antagonist s and surgical management . 
December 2021: We amended t he recommendations on r eferral to clarify t hat w omen wit h 
endometriosis out side t he pelvic ca vity should be r eferred to a specialist endometriosis 
centr e. For mor e information, see t he surveillance r epor t. 
ISBN: 9 78-1-47 31-6595- 3 Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG7 3)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 33 of
33