Heavy menstrual b leeding: 
assessmen t and 
manag emen t 
NICE guideline 
Published: 14 Mar ch 2018 
Last updat ed: 2 4 Ma y 2021 
www .nice.or g.uk/guidance/ng88 
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Your r esponsi bility 
The r ecommendations in t his guideline r epresent t he view of NICE, arriv ed at aft er car eful 
consideration of t he evidence a vailable. When e xercising t heir judgement, pr ofessionals 
and practitioners ar e expect ed to tak e this guideline fully int o account, alongside t he 
individual needs, pr eferences and v alues of t heir patient s or t he people using t heir ser vice. 
It is not mandat ory to apply t he recommendations, and t he guideline does not o verride t he 
responsibility t o mak e decisions appr opriat e to the cir cumstances of t he individual, in 
consultation wit h them and t heir f amilies and car ers or guar dian. 
All pr oblems (adv erse e vents) related to a medicine or medical de vice used f or treatment 
or in a pr ocedur e should be r epor ted to the Medicines and Healt hcare product s Regulat ory 
Agency using t he Yellow Car d Scheme . 
Local commissioners and pr oviders of healt hcare have a responsibility t o enable t he 
guideline t o be applied when individual pr ofessionals and people using ser vices wish t o 
use it. The y should do so in t he cont ext of local and national priorities f or funding and 
developing ser vices, and in light of t heir duties t o have due r egar d to the need t o eliminat e 
unlawful discrimination, t o adv ance equality of oppor tunity and t o reduce healt h 
inequalities. Not hing in t his guideline should be int erpreted in a wa y that w ould be 
inconsist ent wit h complying wit h those duties. 
Commissioners and pr oviders ha ve a responsibility t o promot e an en vironmentally 
sustainable healt h and car e syst em and should assess and r educe t he en vironmental 
impact of implementing NICE r ecommendations wher ever possible. Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 of
32Contents 
Overview ...................................................................................................................................... 4 
Who is it f or? ........................................................................................................................................... 4 
Recommendations ....................................................................................................................... 5 
1.1 Impact of hea vy menstrual bleeding (HMB) on w omen ................................................................ 5 
1.2 Hist ory, physical e xamination and laborat ory tests ...................................................................... 5 
1.3 Investigations f or the cause of HMB .............................................................................................. 7 
1.4 Inf ormation f or women about HMB and tr eatment s ..................................................................... 10 
1.5 Management of HMB ....................................................................................................................... 12 
Recommendations f or resear ch ................................................................................................. 19 
1 Hyst eroscop y compar ed wit h ultrasound or empirical pharmacological tr eatment in t he 
diagnosis and management of hea vy menstrual bleeding (HMB) ..................................................... 19 
2 Eff ectiv eness of t he pr ogest ogen-only pill, injectable pr ogest ogens, or pr ogest ogen 
implant s in alle viating HMB ................................................................................................................... 20 
3 Long-t erm out comes of pharmacological and ut erine-sparing sur gical tr eatment s for HMB 
associat ed wit h adenom yosis ............................................................................................................... 20 
4 Hyst eroscopic r emoval of submucosal fibr oids compar ed wit h other ut erine-sparing 
treatment s for HMB ................................................................................................................................ 21 
5 Second-generation endometrial ablation f or HMB associat ed wit h myometrial pat hology ........ 21 
Rationale and impact ................................................................................................................... 23 
Investigations f or the cause of HMB .................................................................................................... 23 
Management of HMB ............................................................................................................................. 25 
Cont ext ......................................................................................................................................... 29 
Finding mor e information and committ ee details ..................................................................... 31 
Updat e information ..................................................................................................................... 32 Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 3 of
32This guideline r eplaces CG44 . 
This guideline is t he basis of QS47 . 
Overview 
This guideline co vers assessing and managing hea vy menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia). It 
aims t o help healt hcare professionals in vestigat e the cause of hea vy periods t hat ar e 
affecting a w oman's quality of lif e and t o off er the right tr eatment s, taking int o account t he 
woman's priorities and pr eferences. 
Who is i t for? 
• Healt hcare professionals 
• Commissioners and pr oviders of hea vy menstrual bleeding ser vices 
• Women wit h hea vy menstrual bleeding, t heir f amilies and car ers Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 4 of
32Recommenda tions 
People ha ve the right t o be in volved in discussions and mak e informed decisions 
about t heir car e, as described in making decisions about y our car e. 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains ho w we use w ords to sho w the 
strengt h (or cer tainty) of our r ecommendations, and has inf ormation about 
prescribing medicines (including off -label use), pr ofessional guidelines, standar ds 
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and saf eguar ding. 
1.1 Impact of heavy menstrual b leeding (HMB ) on 
women 
1.1.1 Recognise t hat hea vy menstrual bleeding (HMB) has a major impact on a 
woman's quality of lif e, and ensur e that an y intervention aims t o impr ove this 
rather t han f ocusing on blood loss. [200 7] 
1.2 H istor y, physical examina tion and labor atory 
tests 
Histor y 
1.2.1 Take a hist ory from t he w oman t hat co vers: 
• the natur e of t he bleeding 
• related sympt oms, such as persist ent int ermenstrual bleeding, pelvic pain 
and/or pr essur e sympt oms, t hat might suggest ut erine ca vity abnormality , 
histological abnormality , adenom yosis or fibr oids 
• impact on her quality of lif e Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 5 of
32• other f actors t hat ma y affect tr eatment options (such as comorbidities or 
previous tr eatment f or HMB). [200 7, amended 2018] 
1.2.2 Take into account t he range and natural v ariability in menstrual cy cles and blood 
loss when diagnosing HMB, and discuss t his v ariation wit h the w oman. If t he 
woman f eels t hat she does not f all wit hin the normal ranges, discuss car e 
options. [200 7] 
1.2.3 If the w oman has a hist ory of HMB wit hout ot her r elated sympt oms (see 
recommendation 1 .2.1), consider pharmacological tr eatment wit hout carr ying out 
a physical e xamination (unless t he tr eatment chosen is le vonor gestr el-releasing 
intraut erine syst em [LNG IUS]). [200 7, amended 2018] 
Note that t his is an off -label use f or some LNG-IUSs. See NICE's inf ormation on 
prescribing medicines . 
Physical examina tion 
1.2.4 If the w oman has a hist ory of HMB wit h other r elated sympt oms (see 
recommendation 1 .2.1) off er a ph ysical e xamination. [200 7, amended 2018] 
1.2.5 Carry out a ph ysical e xamination bef ore all in vestigations or LNG-IUS fittings. 
[200 7] 
Note that t his is an off -label use f or some LNG-IUSs. See NICE's inf ormation on 
prescribing medicines . 
Labor atory tests 
1.2.6 Carry out a full blood count t est for all w omen wit h HMB, in parallel wit h any HMB 
treatment off ered. [200 7] 
1.2.7 Testing f or coagulation disor ders (f or example, v on Willebrand's disease) should 
be consider ed for women who: Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 6 of
32• have had HMB since t heir periods star ted and 
• have a personal or f amily hist ory suggesting a coagulation disor der. [200 7] 
1.2.8 Do not r outinely carr y out a serum f erritin t est for women wit h HMB. [200 7] 
1.2.9 Do not carr y out f emale hormone t esting f or women wit h HMB. [200 7] 
1.2.10 Do not carr y out t hyroid hormone t esting f or women wit h HMB unless ot her signs 
and sympt oms of t hyroid disease ar e present. [200 7] 
1.3 Investig ations f or the c ause o f HMB 
Before star ting in vestig ations 
1.3.1 Consider star ting pharmacological tr eatment f or HMB wit hout in vestigating t he 
cause if t he w oman's hist ory and/or e xamination suggest s a lo w risk of fibr oids, 
uterine ca vity abnormality , hist ological abnormality or adenom yosis. [2018] 
1.3.2 If cancer is suspect ed, see t he NICE guideline on suspect ed cancer: r ecognition 
and r eferral . [200 7] 
Investig ations 
1.3.3 Take into account t he w oman's hist ory and e xamination when deciding whet her 
to off er hysteroscop y or ultrasound as t he first -line in vestigation. [2018] 
Women wit h suspect ed submucosal fibr oids, polyps or endometrial pat hology 
1.3.4 Offer outpatient h ysteroscop y to women wit h HMB if t heir hist ory suggest s 
submucosal fibr oids, polyps or endometrial pat hology because: 
• they have sympt oms such as persist ent int ermenstrual bleeding or Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 7 of
32• they have risk f actors f or endometrial pat hology (see r ecommendation 
1.3.10). [2018] 
1.3.5 Ensur e that outpatient h ysteroscop y ser vices ar e organised and t he pr ocedur e is 
performed accor ding t o best practice, including: 
• advising w omen t o tak e oral analgesia bef ore the pr ocedur e 
• vaginoscop y as t he standar d diagnostic t echnique, using miniatur e 
hysteroscopes (3 .5 mm or smaller). [2018] 
1.3.6 Ensur e that h ysteroscop y ser vices ar e organised t o enable pr ogression t o 'see-
and-tr eat' h ysteroscop y in a single setting if f easible. [2018] 
1.3.7 Explain t o women wit h HMB who ar e off ered outpatient h ysteroscop y what t he 
procedur e involves and discuss t he possible alt ernativ es. [2018] 
1.3.8 If a w oman declines outpatient h ysteroscop y, offer hysteroscop y under general 
or regional anaest hesia. [2018] 
1.3.9 For women who decline h ysteroscop y, consider pelvic ultrasound, e xplaining t he 
limitations of t his technique f or det ecting ut erine ca vity causes of HMB. [2018] 
1.3.10 Consider endometrial biopsy at t he time of h ysteroscop y for women who ar e at 
high risk of endometrial pat hology , such as: 
• women wit h persist ent int ermenstrual or persist ent irr egular bleeding, and 
women wit h infr equent hea vy bleeding who ar e obese or ha ve poly cystic 
ovary syndr ome 
• women taking tamo xifen 
• women f or whom tr eatment f or HMB has been unsuccessful. [200 7, 
amended 2018] 
1.3.11 Obtain an endometrial sample only in t he cont ext of diagnostic h ysteroscop y. Do 
not off er 'blind' endometrial biopsy t o women wit h HMB. [2018] Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 8 of
32Women wit h possible lar ger fibr oids 
1.3.12 Offer pelvic ultrasound t o women wit h HMB if an y of t he following apply: 
• their ut erus is palpable abdominally 
• history or e xamination suggest s a pelvic mass 
• examination is inconclusiv e or difficult, f or example in w omen who ar e obese. 
[2018] 
Women wit h suspect ed adenom yosis 
1.3.13 Offer transv aginal ultrasound (in pr eference t o transabdominal ultrasound or MRI) 
to women wit h HMB who ha ve: 
• significant dysmenorrhoea (period pain) or 
• a bulky , tender ut erus on e xamination t hat suggest s adenom yosis. [2018] 
1.3.14 If a w oman declines transv aginal ultrasound or it is not suitable f or her , consider 
transabdominal ultrasound or MRI, e xplaining t he limitations of t hese t echniques. 
[2018] 
1.3.15 Be awar e that pain associat ed wit h HMB ma y be caused b y endometriosis rat her 
than adenom yosis (see NICE's guideline on endometriosis ). [2018] 
Other diagnostic too ls 
1.3.16 Do not use saline infusion sonograph y as a first -line diagnostic t ool for HMB. 
[200 7] 
1.3.17 Do not use MRI as a first -line diagnostic t ool for HMB. [200 7] 
1.3.18 Do not use dilatation and cur ettage alone as a diagnostic t ool for HMB. [200 7] Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 9 of
32For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t he 2018 r ecommendations and 
how they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on in vestigations 
for the cause of HMB . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview A: 
diagnostic t est accuracy in in vestigation f or women pr esenting wit h hea vy menstrual 
bleeding . 
1.4 Informa tion f or w omen abou t HMB and 
treatmen ts 
1.4.1 Provide w omen wit h information about HMB and it s management. F ollow the 
principles in t he NICE guidelines on patient e xperience in adult NHS ser vices and 
shared decision making in relation t o communication, inf ormation and shar ed 
decision-making. [2018] 
1.4.2 Provide inf ormation about all possible tr eatment options f or HMB and discuss 
these wit h the w oman (see section 1 .5). Discussions should co ver: 
• the benefit s and risks of t he various options 
• suitable tr eatment s if she is tr ying t o conceiv e 
• whet her she want s to retain her f ertility and/or her ut erus. [2018] 
Levonor gestrel-releasing in trauterine system (LN G-IUS ) 
1.4.3 Explain t o women who ar e off ered an LNG-IUS: 
• about anticipat ed changes in bleeding patt ern, par ticularly in t he first f ew 
cycles and ma ybe lasting longer t han 6 mont hs 
• that it is advisable t o wait f or at least 6 cycles t o see t he benefit s of t he 
treatment. [200 7] Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 10 of
32Note that t his is an off -label use f or some LNG-IUSs. See NICE's inf ormation 
on pr escribing medicines . 
Impact of treatmen ts on f ertility 
1.4.4 Explain t o women about t he impact on f ertility t hat an y planned sur gery or ut erine 
artery embolisation ma y have, and if a pot ential tr eatment (h ysterectomy or 
ablation) in volves loss of f ertility t hen oppor tunities f or discussion should be 
made a vailable. [200 7] 
1.4.5 Explain t o women t hat ut erine ar tery embolisation or m yomect omy ma y 
potentially allo w them t o retain t heir f ertility. [200 7] 
Endome trial ab lation 
1.4.6 Advise w omen t o avoid subsequent pr egnancy and use eff ectiv e contraception, if 
needed, aft er endometrial ablation. [200 7] 
Hyster ectomy 
1.4.7 Have a full discussion wit h all w omen who ar e considering h ysterectomy about 
the implications of sur gery bef ore a decision is made. The discussion should 
include: 
• sexual f eelings 
• impact on f ertility 
• bladder function 
• need f or fur ther tr eatment 
• treatment complications 
• her e xpectations Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 11 of
32• alternativ e sur gery 
• psychological impact. [200 7] 
1.4.8 Inform w omen about t he incr eased risk of serious complications (such as 
intraoperativ e haemorrhage or damage t o other abdominal or gans) associat ed 
with hysterectomy when ut erine fibr oids ar e present. [200 7] 
1.4.9 Inform w omen about t he risk of possible loss of o varian function and it s 
consequences, e ven if t heir o varies ar e retained during h ysterectomy. [200 7] 
1.5 M anag emen t of HMB 
1.5.1 When agr eeing tr eatment options f or HMB wit h women, tak e into account: 
• the w oman's pr eferences 
• any comorbidities 
• the pr esence or absence of fibr oids (including siz e, number and location), 
polyps, endometrial pat hology or adenom yosis 
• other sympt oms such as pr essur e and pain. [2018] 
Treatmen ts for w omen wi th no iden tified pa thology, fibroids less 
than 3 cm in diame ter, or suspe cted or diagnose d adenom yosis 
1.5.2 Consider an LNG-IUS as t he first tr eatment f or HMB in w omen wit h: 
• no identified pat hology or 
• fibroids less t han 3 cm in diamet er, which ar e not causing dist ortion of t he 
uterine ca vity or 
• suspect ed or diagnosed adenom yosis. [2018] 
Note that t his is an off -label use f or some LNG-IUSs. See NICE's inf ormation Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 12 of
32on pr escribing medicines . 
1.5.3 If a w oman wit h HMB declines an LNG-IUS or it is not suitable, consider t he 
following pharmacological tr eatment s: 
• non-hormonal: 
－ trane xamic acid 
－ NSAIDs (non-st eroidal anti-inflammat ory drugs) 
• hormonal: 
－ combined hormonal contraception 
－ cyclical oral pr ogest ogens. [2018] 
Note that t his is an off -label use f or NSAIDs and some combined 
hormonal contraceptiv es. See NICE's inf ormation on pr escribing 
medicines . 
1.5.4 For gonadotr ophin-r eleasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist s recommended as 
options in NICE t echnology appraisal guidance f or treating moderat e to severe 
sympt oms of ut erine fibr oids in some people, see t he guidance on: 
• linzagolix (T A996 , 202 4) 
• relugolix–estradiol–nor ethisterone acetat e (TA832, 2022) . 
1.5.5 Be awar e that pr ogest ogen-only contraception ma y suppr ess menstruation, 
which could be beneficial t o women wit h HMB. [2018] 
1.5.6 If treatment is unsuccessful, t he w oman declines pharmacological tr eatment, or 
sympt oms ar e severe, consider r eferral t o specialist car e for: 
• investigations t o diagnose t he cause of HMB, if needed (see section 1 .3) 
taking int o account an y investigations t he w oman has alr eady had and 
• alternativ e treatment choices, including: 
－ pharmacological options not alr eady tried Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 13 of
32－ surgical options: 
◇ second-generation endometrial ablation 
◇ hysterectomy. [2018] 
Fluid-filled t hermal balloon and micr owave endometrial ablation ar e 
recommended as options in NICE t echnology appraisal guidance 
when t he w oman and her clinician ha ve decided t hat sur gical 
intervention is appr opriat e. For full details, see t he guidance on fluid-
filled t hermal balloon and micr owave endometrial ablation t echniques 
for hea vy menstrual bleeding (T A78, 2004) . 
1.5.7 For women wit h submucosal fibr oids, consider h ysteroscopic r emoval. [2018] 
Treatmen ts for w omen wi th fibroids o f 3 cm or mor e in diame ter 
1.5.8 Consider r eferring w omen t o specialist car e to under take additional in vestigations 
and discuss tr eatment options f or fibr oids of 3 cm or mor e in diamet er. [2018] 
1.5.9 If pharmacological tr eatment is needed while in vestigations and definitiv e 
treatment ar e being or ganised, off er trane xamic acid and/or NSAIDs. [200 7] 
Note that t his is an off -label use f or NSAIDs. See NICE's inf ormation on 
prescribing medicines . 
1.5.10 Advise w omen t o continue using NSAIDs and/or trane xamic acid f or as long as 
they are found t o be beneficial. [200 7] 
Note that t his is an off -label use f or NSAIDs. See NICE's inf ormation on 
prescribing medicines . 
1.5.11 For women wit h fibr oids of 3 cm or mor e in diamet er, take into account t he siz e, 
location and number of fibr oids, and t he se verity of t he sympt oms and consider 
the following tr eatment s: 
• pharmacological: Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 14 of
32－ non-hormonal: 
◇ trane xamic acid 
◇ NSAIDs 
－ hormonal: 
◇ LNG-IUS 
◇ combined hormonal contraception 
◇ cyclical oral pr ogest ogens 
◇ ulipristal acetat e (this is only indicat ed for some pr emenopausal 
women; see r ecommendations 1 .5.13 and 1 .5.14 for mor e information) 
[amended 2021] 
• uterine ar tery embolisation f or fibr oids 
• surgical: 
－ myomect omy 
－ hysterectomy. 
Note that t his is an off -label use f or NSAIDs and some LNG-IUSs. See 
NICE's inf ormation on pr escribing medicines . [2018] 
1.5.12 For GnRH antagonist s recommended as options in NICE t echnology appraisal 
guidance f or treating moderat e to severe sympt oms of ut erine fibr oids in some 
people, see t he guidance on: 
• linzagolix (T A996 , 202 4) 
• relugolix–estradiol–nor ethisterone acetat e (TA832, 2022) . 
1.5.13 Only t hink about ulipristal acetat e for the int ermitt ent tr eatment of moderat e to 
severe sympt oms of ut erine fibr oids in pr emenopausal w omen if: 
• surgery and ut erine ar tery embolisation f or fibr oids ar e not suitable, f or 
example, because t he risks t o a w oman outw eigh t he possible benefit s, or Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 15 of
32• surgery and ut erine ar tery embolisation f or fibr oids ha ve failed, or 
• the w oman declines sur gery and ut erine ar tery embolisation f or fibr oids. 
See t he MHRA drug saf ety updat e on ulipristal acetat e. [2021] 
1.5.14 Discuss wit h the w oman t he risks and possible benefit s of int ermitt ent tr eatment 
with ulipristal acetat e. 
• Advise t hat ulipristal acetat e can be associat ed wit h serious liv er injur y 
leading t o liver failure, and t he signs and sympt oms t o look out f or. 
• Measur e liver function bef ore star ting ulipristal acetat e, mont hly for the first 2 
courses and once bef ore each new tr eatment course when clinically 
indicat ed. 
• If there is no underlying liv er injur y, and sur gery and ut erine ar tery 
embolisation f or fibr oids ar e unsuitable or ha ve failed, consider ulipristal 
acetat e 5 mg (up t o 4 courses) f or pr emenopausal w omen wit h hea vy 
menstrual bleeding and fibr oids of 3 cm or mor e in diamet er, par ticularly if 
the haemoglobin le vel is 102 g per litr e or belo w. 
• If a w oman sho ws signs and sympt oms of liv er failure, stop ulipristal acetat e 
and per form liv er function t ests urgent ly. [2021] 
1.5.15 Be awar e that t he eff ectiv eness of pharmacological tr eatment s for HMB ma y be 
limited in w omen wit h fibr oids t hat ar e substantially gr eater than 3 cm in 
diamet er. [2018 , amended 2020] 
1.5.16 Prior t o scheduling of ut erine ar tery embolisation or m yomect omy, the w oman's 
uterus and fibr oid(s) should be assessed b y ultrasound. If fur ther inf ormation 
about fibr oid position, siz e, number and v ascularity is needed, MRI should be 
consider ed. [200 7] 
1.5.17 Consider second-generation endometrial ablation as a tr eatment option f or 
women wit h HMB and fibr oids of 3 cm or mor e in diamet er who meet t he crit eria 
specified in t he manuf actur ers' instructions. [2018] 
Fluid-filled t hermal balloon and micr owave endometrial ablation ar e Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 16 of
32recommended as options in NICE t echnology appraisal guidance when t he 
woman and her clinician ha ve decided t hat sur gical int ervention is appr opriat e. 
For full details, see t he guidance on fluid-filled t hermal balloon and micr owave 
endometrial ablation t echniques f or hea vy menstrual bleeding (T A78, 2004) . 
1.5.18 If treatment is unsuccessful: 
• consider fur ther in vestigations t o reassess t he cause of HMB (see section 
1.3), taking int o account t he result s of pr evious in vestigations and 
• offer alt ernativ e treatment wit h a choice of t he options described in 
recommendation 1 .5.11. [2018] 
1.5.19 Pretreatment wit h a gonadotr ophin-r eleasing hormone analogue bef ore 
hysterectomy and m yomect omy should be consider ed if ut erine fibr oids ar e 
causing an enlar ged or dist orted ut erus. [200 7, amended 2020] 
Note that t his is an off -label use f or some gonadotr ophin-r eleasing hormone 
analogues. See NICE's inf ormation on pr escribing medicines . 
Route and me thod o f hyster ectomy 
1.5.20 When discussing t he route of h ysterectomy (lapar oscop y, lapar otomy or v aginal) 
with the w oman, carr y out an individual assessment and tak e her pr eferences 
into account. [200 7, amended 2018] 
1.5.21 Discuss t he options of t otal h ysterectomy (removal of t he ut erus and t he cer vix) 
and subt otal h ysterectomy (removal of t he ut erus and r etention of t he cer vix) 
with the w oman. [200 7, amended 2018] 
Remo val of ovaries ( oophorectomy) with hyster ectomy 
1.5.22 Only r emove ovaries wit h hysterectomy wit h the express wish and inf ormed 
consent of t he w oman, aft er discussion of all associat ed risks and benefit s. 
[200 7, amended 2018] Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 17 of
32Dilatation and cur ettage 
1.5.23 Do not off er dilatation and cur ettage as a tr eatment option f or HMB. [200 7] 
1.5.24 If dilatation is needed f or non-h ysteroscopic endometrial ablation: 
• confirm t hat t here is no e vidence of ut erine per foration or f alse passage 
• use h ysteroscop y bef ore inser ting t he ablation de vice, t o establish t he 
condition of t he ut erus 
• ultrasound ma y be used t o ensur e corr ect ut erine placement of t he ablation 
device; if t he de vice uses a balloon, k eep t his inflat ed during t he ultrasound 
scan. [200 7, amended 2018] 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t he 2018 r ecommendations and 
how they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on management 
of HMB . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview B: 
management of hea vy menstrual bleeding . Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 18 of
32Recommenda tions f or research 
The guideline committ ee has made t he following r ecommendations f or resear ch. 
1 Hyster oscopy compared wi th ul trasound or 
empiric al pharmac ological treatmen t in the 
diagnosis and manag emen t of heavy menstrual 
bleeding (HMB ) 
Is initial t esting using h ysteroscop y mor e eff ectiv e than t esting wit h pelvic ultrasound or 
empirical pharmacological tr eatment in t he diagnosis and management of HMB? 
Why this is im portant 
Ther e is no consensus about t he best t est-and-tr eat strat egy f or women wit h HMB, and 
empirical pharmacological tr eatment is oft en initiat ed as a first tr eatment wit hout 
investigation. Paramet ers of diagnostic accuracy giv e useful inf ormation about a t est's 
ability t o det ect a condition ( or the absence of a condition). But accurat e diagnosis does 
not aut omatically r esult in a bett er overall out come f or the w oman, because t his also 
depends on tr eatment decisions aft er the diagnosis is made. Ho wever, it is t hought t hat 
optimal tr eatment depends on accurat e diagnosis of t he underlying pat hology causing 
HMB. 
In the absence of clinical trials, decision analytical economic models e valuating all possible 
outpatient t esting algorit hms ha ve indicat ed that using ultrasound or h ysteroscop y for 
initial diagnostic t esting f or women wit h HMB ar e the most eff ectiv e diagnostic strat egies. 
Pelvic ultrasound has been most commonly used because it has been mor e widely 
available and is consider ed less intrusiv e than h ysteroscop y. However, adv ances in 
technology mean t hat t he hysteroscop y is w ell tolerat ed in t he outpatient setting, and it 
can pot entially be per formed out side t he traditional hospital en vironment in a community 
setting. Mor eover, in contrast wit h ultrasound, h ysteroscop y allo ws concomitant tr eatment 
of intraut erine pat hologies such as submucosal fibr oids and endometrial polyps. It also 
facilitat es the fitting of le vonor gestr el-releasing intraut erine syst ems (LNG-IUS). 
A test-and-tr eat randomised contr olled trial wit h cost -effectiv eness analysis could help t o Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 19 of
32answ er the crucial question of whet her h ysteroscop y impr oves out comes f or women and 
result s in mor e eff ectiv e use of NHS r esour ces. 
2 Effectiveness o f the pr ogestog en-only pill, 
injectable pr ogestog ens, or pr ogestog en im plants in 
alleviating HMB 
How eff ectiv e are the pr ogest ogen-only pill, injectable pr ogest ogens or pr ogest ogen 
implant s in alle viating HMB? 
Why this is im portant 
Many women use LNG-IUS as t he first -line pharmacological tr eatment f or HMB, but it is 
not acceptable t o all w omen. Combined oral contraceptiv es ha ve also been sho wn to be 
effectiv e for treating HMB, but t heir use is contraindicat ed in some w omen. Ot her 
progest ogens used f or contraception ha ve far fewer contraindications t han combined 
contraceptiv es, but t heir eff ectiv eness as a tr eatment f or HMB has not been studied. 
A randomised contr olled trial or cohor t prospectiv e obser vational study could compar e the 
effectiv eness of pr ogest ogens wit h other pharmacological tr eatment s for HMB. 
3 Long-term ou tcomes o f pharmac ological and 
uterine-sparing sur gical treatmen ts for HMB 
associa ted wi th adenom yosis 
What ar e the long-t erm clinical out comes of pharmacological and ut erine-sparing sur gical 
treatment s in w omen wit h HMB associat ed wit h adenom yosis? 
Why this is im portant 
Adenom yosis is common, and t he sympt oms cause significant morbidity , including 
restriction of daily activities. A wide range of incidences ha ve been suggest ed, but most 
studies r epor t a pr evalence of betw een 20 and 35%. Despit e this, t here is litt le evidence 
about t he impact of adenom yosis on sympt oms of HMB or t he best tr eatment f or this 
condition. Optimising tr eatment can lead t o bett er patient satisf action and t he avoidance Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 20 of
32of unnecessar y investigations and tr eatment s. In or der t o do t his, a bett er understanding 
of the impact of adenom yosis in causing HMB, pain and subf ertility is needed. 
A prospectiv e clinical r egistr y would allo w long-t erm clinical out comes such as patient 
satisf action and r e-int ervention f or refract ory sympt oms, t o be r ecorded aft er 
pharmacological and ut erine-sparing sur gical tr eatment s for women wit h adenom yosis. 
4 Hyster oscopic r emo val of subm ucosal fi broids 
compared wi th other u terine-sparing tr eatmen ts 
for HMB 
Is hysteroscopic r emoval of submucosal fibr oids mor e eff ectiv e and cost -effectiv e than 
other ut erine-sparing tr eatment s for the management of HMB? 
Why this is im portant 
HMB is t hought t o be caused b y submucosal fibr oids in ar ound 15% of w omen. Such 
fibroids ar e amenable t o minimally in vasive sur gical r emoval ('h ysteroscopic 
myomect omy'), a voiding t he need f or sur gical incision. Non-comparativ e data ha ve 
repor ted impr ovement in HMB sympt oms and t he avoidance of fur ther pharmacological or 
surgical tr eatment in 7 0 to 80% of w omen tr eated wit h hysteroscopic m yomect omy. 
Specific h ysteroscopic sur gical skills ar e necessar y to optimise sur gical success and 
minimise complications. Ho wever, recent adv ances in endoscopic t echnologies ha ve made 
hysteroscopic m yomect omy pot entially saf er and mor e feasible. 
A randomised contr olled trial comparing t his technique wit h long-t erm pharmacological 
therap y or mor e invasive sur gical int ervention w ould pr ovide inf ormation on long-t erm 
outcomes. 
5 Second-gener ation endome trial ab lation f or HMB 
associa ted wi th m yome trial pa thology 
Are out comes aft er second-generation endometrial ablation f or women wit h HMB 
associat ed wit h myometrial pat hology (adenom yosis and/or ut erine fibr oids) equiv alent t o 
those f or women wit hout m yometrial pat hology? Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 21 of
32Why this is im portant 
With the wider a vailability of high-r esolution transv aginal pelvic ultrasound, adenom yosis 
and fibr oids ha ve been r ecognised as 2 of t he most common ut erine pat hologies in w omen 
presenting wit h HMB. Pharmacological tr eatment s appear t o be less eff ectiv e in t he 
presence of t hese conditions, making r eferral t o specialist car e for sur gery mor e likely. 
Second-generation endometrial ablation is a minimally in vasive, uterine-sparing sur gical 
procedur e, but it s effectiv eness in w omen wit h adenom yosis or ut erine fibr oids is unclear . 
Thus w omen wit h these conditions ma y be denied second-generation endometrial ablation 
and under go unnecessar y invasive sur gery such as h ysterectomy. On t he ot her hand, 
women ma y be subject ed to ineff ectiv e second-generation endometrial ablation t hat 
delays mor e eff ectiv e treatment such as h ysterectomy. It is t herefore impor tant t o evaluat e 
the eff ectiv eness of second-generation endometrial ablation in w omen wit h these 
conditions, and a cohor t contr olled study is suggest ed as t he best appr oach f or doing t his. Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 22 of
32Rationale and im pact 
Investig ations f or the c ause o f HMB 
Recommendations 1 .3.1 to 1.3.14 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Before star ting in vestigations 
The committ ee agr eed t hat in vestigation is not necessar y bef ore star ting tr eatment when 
history and e xamination do not suggest structural abnormalities or endometrial pat hology . 
Investigations 
The choice of first -line in vestigation should depend on t he w oman's hist ory and 
examination findings. The committ ee made r ecommendations f or using h ysteroscop y or 
ultrasound t hat w ere based on t he available e vidence f or diagnostic accuracy . 
Women wit h suspect ed submucosal fibr oids, polyps or endometrial pat hology 
Outpatient h ysteroscop y is r ecommended f or women wit h HMB if ut erine ca vity 
abnormalities or endometrial pat hology ar e suspect ed because: 
• the evidence sho wed that it is mor e accurat e (higher sensitivity and specificity) in 
identifying t hem t han pelvic ultrasound 
• it is saf e and has a lo w risk of complications 
• it is acceptable t o women if done accor ding t o best practice guidelines 
• women can ha ve submucosal fibr oids and polyps r emoved during t he pr ocedur e, and 
targeted biopsy if needed 
• it is cost -effectiv e as par t of a diagnosis and tr eatment strat egy. 
For women who decline outpatient h ysteroscop y, the committ ee agr eed t hat h ysteroscop y Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 23 of
32under general or r egional anaest hetic should be off ered, because t he benefit s of accurat e 
identification outw eigh t he risks of anaest hesia. 
Pelvic ultrasound can be consider ed for women who decline h ysteroscop y, provided t hat 
they understand and accept t hat it is less accurat e in det ecting ut erine ca vity 
abnormalities and endometrial pat hology . 
Endometrial biopsy should only be tak en in t he cont ext of h ysteroscop y and only fr om 
women who a ha ve a high risk of endometrial pat hology , to avoid unnecessar y and painful 
biopsies. 'Blind' endometrial biopsy is not r ecommended because it ma y not identify 
treatable lesions. 
Women wit h possible lar ger fibr oids 
Hyst eroscop y is not able t o det ect abnormalities out side t he ut erine ca vity, such as 
subser ous or intramural fibr oids, or adenom yosis. If an e xamination suggest s a lar ge 
fibroid or se veral fibr oids, pelvic ultrasound (transv aginal or transabdominal) is 
recommended inst ead of h ysteroscop y and is lik ely to be par ticularly cost -effectiv e in t his 
context. 
The committ ee agr eed t hat if abdominal or v aginal e xamination is difficult t o per form or 
inconclusiv e (for example, because t he w oman is obese), pelvic ultrasound w ould be 
helpful t o identify an y abnormalities t hat might ha ve otherwise been suggest ed by 
examination. 
Women wit h suspect ed adenom yosis 
The e vidence sho wed that transv aginal ultrasound is mor e accurat e than transabdominal 
ultrasound or MRI f or det ecting adenom yosis. Alt hough transv aginal ultrasound is mor e 
intrusiv e than t he ot her in vestigations, t he committ ee's e xperience suggest s that man y 
women find it acceptable. It is also widely a vailable in secondar y car e, and sometimes in 
primar y car e. 
Transv aginal ultrasound ma y not be acceptable t o or suitable f or some w omen, such as 
women who ha ve not been se xually activ e or w omen wit h female genital mutilation. The 
committ ee agr eed t hat transabdominal ultrasound or MRI can be consider ed for these 
women, pr ovided t hat t hey understand and accept t hat t hey are less accurat e for 
detecting adenom yosis. Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 4 of
32How the 2018 r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
Hyst eroscop y 
Hyst eroscop y, in pr eference t o pelvic ultrasound, is r ecommended f or women wit h HMB 
who ar e suspect ed of ha ving submucosal fibr oids, polyps or endometrial pat hology based 
on their hist ory and e xamination. This change in practice will ha ve a resour ce impact on 
service or ganisation and training. 
Ultrasound is a vailable t hrough dir ect booking in primar y car e, wher eas h ysteroscop y is 
not. Changes t o ser vices will be needed t o allo w dir ect access booking int o one-st op 
hysteroscop y ser vices and ideally t o incr ease deliv ery in community-based clinics. 
Specialist s could off er mor e ser vices in t he community , or GPs and nurses could be 
trained t o per form h ysteroscop y in primar y car e. Ho wever, there should be ongoing 
savings because t he number of unnecessar y investigations is r educed and w omen ar e 
offered eff ectiv e treatment as a r esult of mor e accurat e diagnosis. 
To ensur e that outpatient h ysteroscop y is acceptable t o women, it is essential t hat t he 
procedur e is done accor ding t o best practice guidelines, including t echniques and 
equipment t o minimise discomf ort and pain in w omen; adequat ely siz ed, equipped, and 
staff ed facilities; staff wit h necessar y training, skills and e xper tise; and t he need f or audit 
and benchmarking of out comes. 
Ultrasound 
Transv aginal and transabdominal ultrasound ar e already widely a vailable in secondar y car e 
and sometimes in primar y car e. 
The committ ee not ed that clinicians might need additional training and e xperience in 
interpreting transv aginal ultrasound scans t o identify signs of adenom yosis. 
For full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion see evidence r eview A: 
diagnostic t est accuracy in in vestigation f or women pr esenting wit h hea vy menstrual 
bleeding . 
Manag emen t of HMB 
Recommendations 1 .5.1 to 1.5.18 Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 25 of
32Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
The committ ee emphasised t he impor tance of talking t o the w oman about her needs and 
preferences when deciding on tr eatment s for HMB. This includes an y plans f or pr egnancy 
and whet her she want s to retain her ut erus or f ertility. The committ ee also highlight ed that 
the cause of HMB and ot her sympt oms should be tak en int o account. This is t o ensur e that 
the most appr opriat e management strat egy is off ered to the w oman. 
Treatment s for w omen wit h no identified pat hology , fibr oids less t han 3 cm in 
diamet er, or suspect ed or diagnosed adenom yosis 
In curr ent practice LNG-IUS is a first -line tr eatment f or HMB in t hese w omen. Evidence 
suppor ted this, sho wing t hat it is as eff ectiv e as, or mor e eff ectiv e than, ot her tr eatment s 
in impr oving healt h-related quality of lif e and satisf action wit h treatment. It also off ered 
the best balance of benefit s and cost s. Ho wever, the committ ee agr eed t hat mor e 
resear ch is needed t o det ermine t he benefit t o women of in vestigations bef ore treatment 
with LNG-IUS as a management strat egy (see r esear ch recommendation 1). 
The a vailable e vidence did not sho w clinically impor tant diff erences in eff ectiv eness and 
acceptability among t he ot her pharmacological tr eatment s, so t here are several options 
that ma y be consider ed if a w oman declines LNG-IUS or it is not suitable. 
For women wit h severe sympt oms and t hose f or whom initial tr eatment is unsuccessful, 
the committ ee agr eed t hat r eferral t o specialist car e ma y be consider ed, because some 
women ma y benefit fr om fur ther in vestigations (in par ticular t hose who star ted tr eatment 
without in vestigations) or fr om specialist management. 
Ther e was a lack of e vidence about second-line tr eatment, so a choice of pharmacological 
and sur gical options can be consider ed. 
The committ ee agr eed t hat w omen who decline pharmacological tr eatment and ask f or 
surgery as a first tr eatment ma y be r eferred to specialist car e for consideration of fur ther 
investigations and sur gical tr eatment. The e vidence sho wed that r eduction in blood loss 
and satisf action wit h treatment was gr eater for hysterectomy and second-generation 
endometrial ablation t echniques t han f or first -generation endometrial ablation. 
No e vidence was f ound about h ysteroscopic r emoval of submucosal fibr oids, but t he 
committ ee agr eed t hat it is an eff ectiv e treatment t hat is acceptable t o man y women. It Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 26 of
32can be done at t he same time as diagnostic h ysteroscop y if facilities ar e available. 
Treatment s for w omen wit h fibr oids of 3 cm or mor e in diamet er 
The committ ee emphasised t he impor tance of taking int o account t he siz e, number and 
location of fibr oids, and se verity of sympt oms, when tr eating fibr oids of 3 cm or mor e in 
diamet er. This is because w omen wit h fibr oids t hat ar e substantially gr eater than 3 cm in 
diamet er ma y benefit fr om mor e invasive treatment, such as ut erine ar tery embolisation or 
surgery. Ther efore, referral t o specialist car e to discuss all tr eatment options wit h the 
woman should be consider ed. 
Ther e was limit ed evidence t hat did not f avour an y one tr eatment o ver ot hers f or women 
with fibr oids of 3 cm or mor e in diamet er. However, the evidence f or pharmacological 
treatment options was mainly f or fibr oids not substantially gr eater than 3 cm in diamet er, 
wher eas t he evidence f or int erventional or sur gical tr eatment s was mainly f or fibr oids 
substantially gr eater than 3 cm in diamet er. The committ ee agr eed t hat pharmacological 
treatment is not alwa ys the best option f or fibr oids t hat ar e substantially gr eater than 3 cm 
in diamet er because of t heir ph ysical eff ect on t he ut erine ca vity. In addition, some w omen 
may prefer not t o have pharmacological tr eatment. Ther efore uterine ar tery embolisation 
and sur gery are included as first -line tr eatment options. 
Evidence on ulipristal acetat e was not r eview ed as par t of t his guideline updat e, but t he 
committ ee agr eed t hat it is an option f or these w omen. 
The committ ee agr eed t hat second-generation endometrial ablation ma y be suitable f or 
some w omen wit h fibr oids t hat ar e substantially gr eater than 3 cm in diamet er in t he 
absence of associat ed pr essur e-related fibr oid sympt oms. The y were unable t o define 
criteria f or eligibility , because t hese diff er for the diff erent t echniques (in t erms of t he siz e, 
shape, unif ormity and int egrity of t he ut erine ca vity) and ar e specified b y the 
manuf actur ers. 
Ther e was a lack of e vidence about specific second-line tr eatment s, so t he committ ee 
agreed t hat alt ernativ e pharmacological and sur gical options should be consider ed if initial 
treatment is unsuccessful, aft er reviewing whet her fur ther in vestigation is needed. 
How the 2018 r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
The committ ee not ed that t he recommendations should r einforce curr ent best practice Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 27 of
32and help t o reduce v ariation in clinical practice f or the tr eatment of HMB. 
In curr ent practice, h ysterectomy is a second-line tr eatment strat egy f or hea vy menstrual 
bleeding, f or which w omen need t o have tried first -line tr eatment strat egies, and f or these 
to be unsuccessful, bef ore being off ered a h ysterectomy. Offering h ysterectomy as a first -
line tr eatment option ma y result in an incr ease in h ysterectomies. Ho wever, only a small 
group of w omen ar e expect ed to choose t he pr ocedur e as first -line tr eatment. 
For full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion see evidence r eview B: 
management of hea vy menstrual bleeding . Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 28 of
32Context 
Heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB) is defined as e xcessiv e menstrual blood loss which 
interferes wit h a w oman's ph ysical, social, emotional and/or mat erial quality of lif e. It can 
occur alone or in combination wit h other sympt oms. 
HMB is one of t he most common r easons f or gynaecological consultations in bot h primar y 
and secondar y car e. About 1 in 20 w omen aged betw een 30 and 49 y ears consult t heir GP 
each y ear because of hea vy periods or menstrual pr oblems, and menstrual disor ders 
comprise 12% of all r eferrals t o gynaecology ser vices. 
The f ocus of t his guideline is on w omen of r eproductiv e age (aft er puber ty and bef ore the 
menopause) wit h HMB, including w omen wit h suspect ed or confirmed fibr oids, and w omen 
with suspect ed or confirmed adenom yosis. The guideline does not primarily co ver women 
with gynaecological bleeding ot her t han HMB (f or example, int ermenstrual bleeding or 
postcoital bleeding) or wit h gynaecological conditions in which HMB is not t he main 
sympt om (such as endometriosis). 
Since t he publication of t he original guideline in 200 7, equipment and softwar e for 
transv aginal ultrasound ha ve impr oved. Outpatient h ysteroscop y has become mor e widely 
available, and is mor e acceptable t o women wit h the adv ent of modern equipment such as 
miniatur e hysteroscopes. Ther efore the relativ e clinical and cost eff ectiv eness of 
diagnostic strat egies ha ve changed. Impr ovement s in diagnostic imaging in r ecent y ears 
have result ed in an incr ease in t he repor ted pr evalence of adenom yosis. Adenom yosis, 
which is associat ed wit h abnormal ut erine bleeding, pelvic pain and inf ertility, was not 
included in t he pr evious v ersion of t he guideline. 
This guideline mak es recommendations on a range of pharmacological and sur gical 
treatment options f or HMB. Outpatient management comprising inser tion of a 
levonor gestr el-releasing intraut erine syst em (LNG-IUS) has incr eased in popularity in 
recent y ears, and t here has been a r eduction in sur gical pr ocedur es. Ho wever, some 
endometrial ablation t echniques (such as micr owave endometrial ablation) ar e no longer 
available in t he UK. 
The guideline aims t o help healt hcare professionals advise each w oman wit h HMB about 
the tr eatment s that ar e right f or her , with a clear f ocus on t he w oman's choice. It should be 
borne in mind t hat it is t he w oman herself who decides whet her a tr eatment has been Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 29 of
32successful. Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 30 of
32Finding mor e inf orma tion and c ommi ttee 
details 
To find NICE guidance on r elated topics, including guidance in de velopment, see NICE's 
topic pages on endometriosis and fibr oids and gynaecological conditions . 
For full details of t he evidence and t he guideline committ ee's discussions on t he 2018 
recommendations, see t he evidence r eviews . Evidence f or the 200 7 recommendations is 
in the full v ersion of t he 200 7 guideline . You can also find inf ormation about how the 
guideline was de veloped , including details of t he committ ee. 
NICE has pr oduced tools and r esour ces t o help y ou put t his guideline int o practice . For 
general help and advice on putting our guidelines int o practice, see resour ces t o help y ou 
put NICE guidance int o practice . Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 31 of
32Update inf orma tion 
Major changes since publication 
May 2021: We reinstat ed and amended r ecommendations in line wit h updat ed MHRA 
safety advice on t he risk of serious liv er injur y wit h ulipristal acetat e (Esm ya). 
March 2020: In response t o updat ed MHRA advice on t he use of ulipristal acetat e 
(Esm ya), we amended or wit hdrew recommendations r eferring t o ulipristal acetat e. 
March 2018: We added new r ecommendations on in vestigations f or hea vy menstrual 
bleeding (HMB) and management. These r ecommendations ar e mark ed as [2018] . 
Some changes w ere made t o recommendation w ording wit hout an e vidence r eview . These 
recommendations ar e mark ed as [200 7, amended 2018] . These changes w ere mainly f or 
ease of r eading and consist ency , or t o reflect curr ent practice or drug saf ety advice. 
Minor changes since publication 
December 202 4: We added links t o relevant t echnology appraisal guidance in t he section 
on management of HMB . 
October 2021: We added a link t o NICE's shar ed decision making guideline in 
recommendation 1 .4.1. 
ISBN: 9 78-1-47 31-2777-7 Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management (NG88)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 32 of
32