BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology
RCOG GUIDELINE
Management of Thyroid Disorders in Pregnancy
Green- top Guideline No. 76
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
• Trimester-  and manufacturer-  specific pregnancy reference ranges for serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine (fT4) are recommended for correct interpretation of thyroid function tests.
• Consideration should be given to increasing dietary intake of iodine-  rich foods or consuming daily oral supplementation of 150μg iodine in the form of potassium iodide during pregnancy and breastfeeding.
• Subpopulations with specific risk factors for thyroid disorders should be tested in the first trimester of pregnancy.
• Titration of levothyroxine to achieve a preconception TSH ≤ 2.5 mU/L is recommended for women with overt hypothyroidism.
• Women treated with levothyroxine should increase their dose upon a positive pregnancy test.
• TSH and fT4 concentrations should be checked regularly during pregnancy for women treated with levothyroxine.
• Treatment with levothyroxine should be considered for women with subclinical hypothyroidism.
• Routine testing for TPOAb in euthyroid women is not recommended during pregnancy.
• Levothyroxine treatment is not recommended for women with TPOAb in the absence of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy.

Fertility and recurrent miscarriage should be addressed by clinicians with appropriate experience. Care should be optimized prior to conception, during pregnancy, and after birth. There should be a clear designated primary clinician to ensure continuity of care. Women with thyroid disorders should be seen in joint multidisciplinary clinics. 

Thyroid function tests in pregnancy should use trimester- and manufacturer-specific pregnancy reference ranges for serum TSH and fT4. Treatment targets for TSH and fT4 are recommended for pregnant women on thyroid-related medication. Iodine supplementation of approximately 200-250μg daily is recommended for pregnant and breastfeeding women. Universal testing for thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy is not recommended.

The benefit of treatment is not yet proven. Targeted testing for thyroid dysfunction in pregnant women at risk is recommended for improving pregnancy outcomes. Testing should be carried out in women with specific risk factors, such as a personal history of thyroid disorder, autoimmune conditions, or a history of late miscarriage or stillbirth. Levothyroxine treatment is recommended for pregnant women with severe subclinical hypothyroidism to prevent progression to overt hypothyroidism. Testing and treatment should be initiated as early as possible in pregnancy for optimal outcomes.

To reduce the risk of hypothyroidism in pregnancy, women with low fT4 should be referred for further investigation. Women on levothyroxine therapy should increase their dose by 25%-30% upon a positive pregnancy test. Dose adjustments may be needed during pregnancy. Regular monitoring of TSH and fT4 levels is recommended to maintain thyroid function within normal ranges. Routine testing for TPO antibodies in pregnancy is not recommended unless there is thyroid dysfunction. Untreated hyperthyroidism can lead to adverse outcomes in pregnancy. Pre-pregnancy counseling is advised for women with hyperthyroidism to minimize risks to the mother and fetus. Definitive treatment options should be discussed before conception.

Maintenance of euthyroidism during pregnancy is easier in women who have been rendered hypothyroid by definitive treatment. They would require levothyroxine replacement, with dose titrations in pregnancy. Further, the risk of teratogenicity with antithyroid drugs can be avoided. A persistently increased TSH-receptor antibody (TRAb) level assessed around 6 months post-treatment is associated with increased risk of fetal Graves' disease. Retrospective studies show increased risks of fetal/neonatal Graves' disease with TRAb more than 3 times the assay threshold for positivity. Hyperthyroidism requiring treatment with antithyroid drugs while trying to conceive should use propylthiouracil (PTU) in preference to carbimazole (CMZ), at the lowest effective dose to maintain fT4 concentrations in the upper half of the reference range. All women of childbearing age who develop hyperthyroidism should have a discussion regarding potential future pregnancy. The risks and benefits of all treatment options should be discussed. If the woman is on levothyroxine replacement following definitive thyroid ablation or thyroidectomy, then optimal TSH and fT4 concentrations should be achieved prior to trying conception. Following radioiodine treatment, TRAb concentrations may rise, increasing the risk of fetal Graves' disease. Surgery may be the better option in women with high TRAb concentrations. Women who are in remission from Graves' disease are unlikely to relapse during pregnancy. Antithyroid drugs should be monitored regularly during pregnancy. Titration of antithyroid drugs should target fT4 concentrations in the upper half of the pregnancy reference range. Neonates of women with known Graves' disease should have their thyroid function monitored soon after birth. Treatment with antithyroid drugs is the mainstay of treatment of active hyperthyroidism in pregnancy. Potential teratogenic effects have been linked to antithyroid drugs. The lowest effective dose of antithyroid drugs should be used targeting serum fT4 at the upper half of the pregnancy reference range. In rare cases of isolated fetal hyperthyroidism, a block replace regimen may be indicated. Beta-adrenergic blocking agents may be used temporarily for control of hyperthyroid symptoms.

It is unlikely that antithyroid drugs will affect the fetus. Women with a history of hyperthyroidism in remission do not require additional fetal surveillance. However, in those with active Graves' hyperthyroidism, fetal surveillance is recommended. Gestational transient thyrotoxicosis is self-limiting and does not require treatment. Women with a history of hyperthyroidism should have thyroid function tested postpartum. Antithyroid drugs are safe during breastfeeding. Thyroid nodules in pregnancy should be monitored, and if there is suspicion of malignancy, a fine needle aspiration can be safely performed. Surgical intervention for thyroid enlargement should be considered between 14-22 weeks of gestation.

Women should be counseled that there is no difference in the rate of recurrence or long-term survival with well-differentiated thyroid cancer identified during pregnancy compared with those diagnosed outside of pregnancy. Generally, surgery for most common thyroid cancers diagnosed in pregnancy can be deferred until after birth unless there is substantial growth, significant airway compression, or rapidly progressive disease. Postpartum Thyroiditis is an autoimmune disorder associated with antibodies to TPO and thyroglobulin, occurring in 5%-10% of unselected pregnancies. The classical form of PPT is triphasic with an initial thyrotoxic phase followed by a transient hypothyroid phase and then a return to euthyroidism. Routine testing for PPT is not recommended. In women with risk factors for PPT who experience symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, thyroid function tests should be performed. Levothyroxine replacement is appropriate for women who are very symptomatic during the hypothyroid phase of PPT or actively trying to become pregnant. Antithyroid drugs are not indicated in the management of the thyrotoxic phase of PPT. Consider treatment of symptomatic women in the thyrotoxic phase with beta-blockers. Following restoration of euthyroidism, monitor serum TSH annually in women with a history of PPT as they continue to be at risk of developing permanent hypothyroidism. There is insufficient evidence to recommend levothyroxine prophylaxis, or either iodine or selenium supplementation to prevent or treat PPT.

Importance of Iodine Nutrition During Pregnancy, Placenta as a Compensatory Iodine Storage Organ, Effects of Iodine Deficiency in Pregnancy and Infancy, Thyroid Hormone Action in the Placenta, Neurodevelopmental Actions of Thyroid Hormone, Maternal Thyroid Hormones and Fetal Brain Development, Role of the Placenta in Thyroid Hormone Delivery to the Fetus.

Clinical guideline for the diagnosis and management of thyroid disease during pregnancy and postpartum. It includes information on the importance of iodine supplementation for pregnant women to prevent neurological damage to the fetus. The guideline also discusses the impact of iodine deficiency on child growth and development, emphasizing the need for adequate iodine intake during pregnancy. The guideline recommends routine testing for hypothyroidism during pregnancy and postpartum to ensure optimal thyroid function.

Universal screening detects two times more thyroid disorders in early pregnancy than targeted high-risk case finding. Gestational thyroid function abnormalities in conditions of mild iodine deficiency: early screening versus continuous monitoring of maternal thyroid status. Detection of thyroid dysfunction in pregnant women: universal screening is justified. Perinatal outcome of children born to mothers with thyroid dysfunction or antibodies: a prospective population-based cohort study. Overt and subclinical thyroid dysfunction among Indian pregnant women and its effect on maternal and fetal outcome. Detection of thyroid dysfunction in pregnant women: universal screening is justified. The Colorado Thyroid Disease Prevalence Study. Antenatal thyroid screening and childhood cognitive function. Treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism or hypothyroxinemia in pregnancy. Hypothyroidism: a frequent event after radiotherapy and after radiotherapy with chemotherapy for patients with head and neck carcinoma. Postpartum thyroiditis: long-term follow-up. Postpartum lymphocytic thyroiditis: prevalence, clinical course, and long-term follow-up. A long-term follow-up of postpartum thyroiditis. Postpartum thyroiditis and long-term thyroid status: prognostic influence of thyroid peroxidase antibodies and ultrasound echogenicity. Levothyroxine in women with thyroid peroxidase antibodies before conception. Risk of subclinical hypothyroidism in pregnant women with asymptomatic autoimmune thyroid disorders. De novo clinical hypothyroidism in pregnancies complicated by type I diabetes, subclinical hypothyroidism, and proteinuria: a new syndrome. Thyroid disease in pregnant women with systemic lupus erythematosus: increased preterm delivery. Increased risk of complete congenital heart block in infants born to women with hypothyroidism and anti-Ro and/or anti-La antibodies. Maternal thyroid deficiency and pregnancy complications: implications for population screening. Higher maternal TSH levels in pregnancy are associated with increased risk for miscarriage, fetal or neonatal death. Late intrauterine fetal death and stillbirth. Neonatal thyroxine, maternal thyroid function, and child cognition. TSH levels and risk of miscarriage in women on long-term levothyroxine: a community-based study. Maternal thyroid deficiency during pregnancy and subsequent neuropsychological development of the child. Management of overt hypothyroidism during pregnancy. Serum thyrotropin measurements in the community: five-year follow-up in a large network of primary care physicians. The incidence of thyroid disorders in the community: a twenty-year follow-up of the Whickham Survey. Association between maternal thyroid function and risk of gestational hypertension and pre-eclampsia: a systematic review and individual-participant data meta-analysis. Association of thyroid function test abnormalities and thyroid autoimmunity with preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Association of maternal thyroid function with birthweight: a systematic review and individual-participant data meta-analysis. Relationship between subclinical hypothyroidism in pregnancy and hypertensive disorder of pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Optimal management of hypothyroidism, hypothyroxinaemia, and euthyroid TPO antibody positivity preconception and in pregnancy. Maternal subclinical hypothyroidism, thyroid autoimmunity, and the risk of miscarriage: a prospective cohort study.

"Levothyroxine and the Risk of Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in Women With Subclinical Hypothyroidism: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" - Bein et al. (2021)

10. 1245/ s1043 4- 014- 3858- 4.
157. TSH-Receptor Autoimmunity in Graves' Disease After Therapy With Anti-Thyroid Drugs, Surgery, or Radioiodine: A 5-Year Prospective Randomized Study
158. Low Birth Weight in Children Born to Mothers With Hyperthyroidism and High Birth Weight in Hypothyroidism, Whereas Preterm Birth Is Common in Both Conditions: A Danish National Hospital Register Study
159. Treatment of Graves' Disease With Antithyroid Drugs in the First Trimester of Pregnancy and the Prevalence of Congenital Malformation
160. Thyroid Disease: Assessment and Management (London: NICE, 2019)
161. Radioiodine in the Management of Benign Thyroid Disease (London: Royal College of Physicians, 2007)
162. Side Effects of Anti-Thyroid Drugs and Their Impact on the Choice of Treatment for Thyrotoxicosis in Pregnancy
163. Birth Defects After Early Pregnancy Use of Antithyroid Drugs: A Danish Nationwide Study
164. Antithyroid Drug Use in Early Pregnancy and Birth Defects: Time Windows of Relative Safety and High Risk?
165. Antithyroid Drugs and Congenital Malformations: A Nationwide Korean Cohort Study
166. Effects of Methimazole and Propylthiouracil Exposure During Pregnancy on the Risk of Neonatal Congenital Malformations: A Meta-Analysis
167. Predictors of Outcome and Comparison of Different Drug Regimens for the Prevention of Relapse in Patients With Graves' Disease
168. Hyperthyroidism Incidence Fluctuates Widely in and Around Pregnancy and Is at Variance With Some Other Autoimmune Diseases: A Danish Population-Based Study
169. Graves Hyperthyroidism and Pregnancy: A Clinical Update
170. Antithyroid Drug Therapy for Graves' Disease During Pregnancy. Optimal Regimen for Fetal Thyroid Status
171. Thyroid Disease in Pregnancy: New Insights in Diagnosis and Clinical Management
172. Use of Anti-Thyroid Drugs in Euthyroid Pregnant Women With Previous Graves' Disease
173. Thyroid and Parathyroid Surgery in Pregnancy
174. Oral Beta-Blockers for Mild to Moderate Hypertension During Pregnancy
175. Investigation and Care of a Small-For-Gestational-Age Fetus and a Growth Restricted Fetus
176. Fetal and Neonatal Hyperthyroidism
177. Management of Neonates Born to Women With Graves' Disease: A Cohort Study
178. Predictive Value of Maternal Second-Generation Thyroid-Binding Inhibitory Immunoglobulin Assay for Neonatal Autoimmune Hyperthyroidism
179. Serial In Utero Ultrasonographic Measurements of the Fetal Thyroid: A New Complementary Tool in the Management of Maternal Hyperthyroidism in Pregnancy
180. Use of Ultrasound to Distinguish Between Fetal Hyperthyroidism and Hypothyroidism on Discovery of a Goiter
181. Influences of Age, Gender, Smoking, and Family History on Autoimmune Thyroid Disease Phenotype
182. Serum Human Chorionic Gonadotropin Levels and Thyroid Hormone Levels in Gestational Transient Thyrotoxicosis: Is the Serum hCG Level Useful for Differentiating Between Active Graves' Disease and GTT?
183. Thyroid Function in Patients With Hyperemesis Gravidarum
184. The Effect of Pregnancy on Subsequent Relapse From Graves' Disease After a Successful Course of Antithyroid Drug Therapy
185. Intellectual Development and Thyroid Function in Children Who Were Breast-Fed by Thyrotoxic Mothers Taking Methimazole
186. Effect of Methimazole Treatment of Maternal Thyrotoxicosis on Thyroid Function in Breast-Feeding Infants
187. Excretion of Methimazole in Human Milk
188. Propylthiouracil in Human Milk. Revision of a Dogma
189. Pregnancy in Patients With Mild Thyroid Abnormalities: Maternal and Neonatal Repercussions
190. Cancer Associated With Obstetric Delivery: Results of Linkage With the California Cancer Registry
191. Thyroid Disorders of Pregnancy
192. Thyroid Ultrasound and Ultrasound-Guided FNA
193. Procedure Guideline for Therapy of Thyroid Disease With (131)iodine
194. 2015 American Thyroid Association Management Guidelines for Adult Patients With Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
195. Guidelines for the Management of Thyroid Cancer
196. Thyroid Nodule and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer Management in Pregnancy. An Italian Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (AME) and Italian Thyroid Association (AIT) Joint Statement for Clinical Practice
197. Coexistent Thy

Postpartum thyroid dysfunction can have long-term effects, including hypothyroidism. It is important to monitor thyroid function in pregnant women with thyroid antibodies to prevent postpartum depression. Selenium supplementation may influence postpartum thyroid status in women with thyroid antibodies. Further research is needed to assess the safety of iodine supplementation in these women.

Employers should not use these guidelines as prescriptive directions, but rather as general recommendations. Any deviation from local protocols should be documented in the patient's case notes.