Assisted Vaginal Birth (RSCH PRH only) MP049

Key Principles:
- Protocol is a set of standards for action
- Professional judgement may be used

Scope:
- Applies to any woman or pregnant person in labor needing assistance

Responsibilities:
- Midwives & Obstetricians: follow guidance and use professional judgement
- Management: ensure protocol is reviewed and accessible

Assisted Instrumental Vaginal Birth:
- Goal is to mimic spontaneous birth with minimal morbidity
- Rates have remained stable at 10-15%
- Interventions to reduce need for operative vaginal birth
- Indications and contraindications for offering operative vaginal birth
- Conditions and prerequisites for safe operative vaginal birth

Risks of Instrumental delivery:
- Risks of Ventouse and forceps delivery compared
- Preparation for operative vaginal delivery: clear communication is vital

Informed Consent: Verbal consent is required for operative deliveries in the delivery room, while written consent is needed for deliveries in theatre. 
Location: Operative vaginal births can be performed in the birth room if deemed appropriate. 
Analgesia: Appropriate analgesia options include epidural/spinal analgesia and pudendal block with local anesthetic. 
Bladder Care: An in-out catheter should be recommended prior to the procedure if an indwelling catheter is not in place. 
Hygiene: Aseptic techniques and personal protective equipment should be used. 
Neonatal Resuscitation: Personnel trained in neonatal resuscitation should be present. 
Ventouse/Kiwi Assisted Delivery: Application and method of use of ventouse and Kiwi cups should be followed. 
Non-Rotational Forceps Assisted Delivery: Application and method of use of forceps should be followed. 
Rotational forceps delivery: Application of Keilland forceps for rotational deliveries should be followed. 
Episiotomy/Perineal care: Mediolateral episiotomy should be discussed and performed if necessary. 
Aftercare Following Operative Vaginal Birth: Thorough inspection of perineal and vaginal trauma should be done, antibiotics should be given, and regular analgesia should be considered. 
Care of the bladder after birth: Record timing and volume of first void, educate about the risk of urinary retention, measure post void residual if suspected, offer physiotherapy-directed strategies to reduce the risk of urinary incontinence.

16 Post -Delivery Documentation (see also Appendix A)  
16.1 Documentation of benefits and risks discussed, informed consent obtained pre-delivery  
16.2 Full documentation of indication for operative vaginal birth and procedure performed  
16.3 Documentation in maternal notes ensuring mother had adequate analgesia  
16.4 Swab and instrument count signed by both 'counters'  
16.5 Documentation of instruments used or procedure abandoned with rationale  
16.6 Complete perineal repair documentation  
16.7 Record decision to birth time interval  

17 Debriefing  
17.1 Review on the ward prior to discharge to discuss indication for assisted vaginal birth  
17.2 Encourage aiming for spontaneous vaginal birth in future pregnancies  
17.3 Individualize care for third- or fourth-degree tears or ongoing pelvic floor issues  
17.4 Provide opportunity for woman to ask questions postnatally  
17.5 Offer support to those who had a traumatic birth experience  
17.6 Offer debriefing service prior to discharge