Hypertension and preeclampsia in pregnancy Maternity Protocol: MP019 Date agreed: April 2022

Key Principles: A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope: This protocol applies to all pregnant women/people with Hypertensive Disease

Responsibilities: Midwives & Obstetricians: To access, read, understand and follow this guidance. Management Team: To ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National recommendations.

Definitions: Hypertension is systolic over 140mmHg on two separate occasions in pregnancy. Pre-eclampsia is raised BP on two occasions at >20/40 gestation with significant proteinuria.

Antenatal Management: Assessing proteinuria in hypertensive disorders of pregnancy is important. Referrals and management should be immediate for high-risk individuals. Antihypertensive drugs like labetalol, nifedipine, and methyldopa can be considered.

Management of Chronic Hypertension: Pre-pregnancy advice includes weight management, exercise, and healthy eating. Antihypertensive drugs like labetalol, nifedipine, and methyldopa can be considered based on individual factors. Regular antenatal appointments and timing of birth are crucial.

Do not offer planned early birth before 37 weeks to women/people with chronic hypertension whose blood pressure is lower than 160/110 mmHg, with or without antihypertensive treatment, unless there are other medical indications or fetal growth restriction. For women/people with chronic hypertension whose blood pressure is lower than 160/110 mmHg with or without antihypertensive treatment timing of birth should be agreed after 37 weeks between the woman and the senior obstetrician. If planned early birth is necessary offer a course of antenatal corticosteroids and magnesium sulphate if indicated. Measure blood pressure daily for the first 2 days after birth and at least once between day 3 and day 5 after birth. Aim to keep blood pressure lower than 140/90 mmHg and continue antihypertensive treatment if required. Consider labetalol, nifedipine, or methyldopa for treatment of gestational hypertension. Do not offer planned early birth before 37 weeks to women/people with gestational hypertension whose blood pressure is lower than 160/110 mmHg, unless there are other medical indications or fetal growth restriction. If planned early birth is necessary offer a course of antenatal corticosteroids and magnesium sulphate if indicated. Measure blood pressure daily for the first 2 days after birth and at least once between day 3 and day 5 after birth. Continue antihypertensive treatment if required. Offer labe talol to treat hypertension, nifedipine for women/people in whom labetalol is not suitable, or methyldopa if labetalol or nifedipine are not suitable. Women/people with severe hypertension should be managed in a high dependency unit environment. If a woman in a critical care setting has severe hypertension or severe pre-eclampsia, give intravenous magnesium sulphate. Consider prophylactic magnesium sulphate treatment if certain features of severe pre-eclampsia are present. Recurrent fits should be treated with a further dose of magnesium sulphate. Do not use diazepam, phenytoin, or other anticonvulsants as an alternative to magnesium sulphate in women/people with eclampsia. Treat women/people with blood pressure of 160/110 mmHg or MAP 125 or more during pregnancy or after birth.

Labetalol infusion is the first-line treatment for hypertension in pregnant women due to its effectiveness and rapid onset of action. Initial dose is 200mg orally or 20mg intravenously, with a maximum cumulative dose of 300mg. Continuous IV infusion can also be used. If target blood pressure is not achieved, switch to another class of agent. Labetalol is contraindicated in patients with a history of oral steroid-dependent asthma. Oral nifedipine is the second-line treatment but may cause a precipitous fall in blood pressure. Intravenous hydralazine is the third-line treatment. Monitoring of blood pressure and fetal well-being is essential, and delivery should be considered as the only cure for pre-eclampsia. Postnatal care includes monitoring blood pressure and offering antihypertensive treatment if necessary. Haematological and biochemical monitoring should be conducted postpartum to assess kidney function. Fetal monitoring should also be performed in cases of chronic hypertension.

15.6.2 In women/people with chronic hypertension, only carry out cardiotocography if clinically indicated. 

15.7 Fetal monitoring in gestational hypertension
15.7.1 In women/people with gestational hypertension, carry out an ultrasound for fetal growth and amniotic fluid volume assessment and umbilical artery doppler velocimetry at diagnosis and if normal repeat every 2 to 4 weeks, if clinically indicated. 
15.7.2 In women/people with gestational hypertension, only carry out cardiotocography if clinically indicated. 

15.8 Fetal monitoring in pre-eclampsia or severe gestational hypertension
15.8.1 Carry out cardiotocography at diagnosis of pre-eclampsia or severe gestational hypertension.
15.8.2 If conservative management of pre-eclampsia or severe gestational hypertension is planned, carry out all the following tests at diagnosis:
15.8.2.1 Ultrasound for fetal growth and amniotic fluid volume assessment
15.8.2.2 Umbilical artery doppler velocimetry
15.8.3 If the results of all fetal monitoring are normal in women/people with pre-eclampsia or severe gestational hypertension, do not routinely repeat cardiotocography unless clinically indicated.
15.8.4 In women/people with pre-eclampsia or severe gestational hypertension, repeat cardiotocography if any of the following occur:
15.8.4.1 The woman reports a change in fetal movement
15.8.4.2 Vaginal bleeding
15.8.4.3 Abdominal pain
15.8.4.4 Deterioration in maternal condition
15.8.5 In women/people with pre-eclampsia or severe gestational hypertension, repeat ultrasound for fetal growth and amniotic fluid volume assessment or umbilical artery doppler velocimetry every 2 weeks, with subsequent surveillance and monitoring determined by the findings of these scans.
15.8.6 For women/people with pre-eclampsia or severe gestational hypertension, write a care plan that includes all of the following:
15.8.6.1 The timing and nature of future fetal monitoring
15.8.6.2 Fetal indications for birth and if and when antenatal corticosteroids should be given
15.8.6.3 Plans for discussion with neonatal paediatricians and obstetric anaesthetists

16 Women/people who need additional fetal monitoring
16.1 Carry out an ultrasound for fetal growth and amniotic fluid volume assessment and umbilical artery doppler velocimetry starting at between 28 and 30 weeks (or at least 2 weeks before previous gestational age of onset if earlier than 28 weeks) and repeating 4 weeks later in women/people with previous:
16.1.1 Severe pre-eclampsia
16.1.2 Pre-eclampsia that resulted in birth before 34 weeks
16.1.3 Pre-eclampsia with a baby whose birth weight was less than the 10th centile
16.1.4 Intrauterine death
16.1.5 Placental abruption
16.2 In women/people who need additional fetal monitoring as above, carry out cardiotocography only if clinically indicated.

17 Intrapartum care
17.1 Give advice and treatment to women/people in line with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care, unless there are recommendations in this guideline on the same topic. Offer care in accordance with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care for women/people with hypertension whether treated or untreated, and not just on the basis of blood pressure in labour. 

17.2 Give women/people with chronic hypertension advice and care in line with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care for women/people with existing medical conditions or obstetric complications and their babies.

17.3 Blood pressure monitoring:
17.3.1 Hourly
17.3.2 Every 15 – 30 minutes if blood pressure greater 160/110 mmHg
17.3.3 Continue use of antenatal antihypertensive

17.4 Control of fluid balance
17.4.1 The woman should have an indwelling urinary catheter with an hourly urometer attached
17.4.2 Total fluid input should be restricted to 80mls/hour (or 1ml/kg/hour)
17.4.3 Hourly fluid balance should be clearly documented on a fluid balance chart
17.4.4 If oliguric (< 20mls/hour) for more than 6 hours, give a fluid challenge with 250mls colloid over 20 mins and check U&Es
17.4.5

Flowchart for midwives in community antenatal clinic settings:

- Systolic ≤140, Diastolic <90: Routine antenatal care/follow up
- Diastolic ≥90: Refer for obstetric opinion
- Any other concerns? Yes: Refer for obstetric opinion
- PET Symptoms? Yes: Refer for obstetric opinion
- Urinalysis - protein: NAD/Trace, +, ++/more: See woman within one week, repeat BP check & urinalysis
- Send MSU: See woman within one week, repeat BP check & urinalysis
- Repeat BP check: BP within normal range, Raised BP >140 mmHg, Systolic >150
- Appendix D: VIP Scoring