Obstetric High Dependency Care (RSCH PRH only) MP056

Key Principles
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol.

Scope
This protocol applies to: Any woman requiring high dependency care or intensive care associated with obstetric event/care.

Responsibilities
Midwives & Obstetricians:
• To access, read, understand and follow this guidance
• To use their professional judgement in application of this protocol

Management:
• To ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National recommendations
• To ensure the protocol is accessible to all relevant staff

1 Introduction
A small but significant number of women have related conditions to their pregnancy that will be life threatening to them and their baby and require High Dependency Care.

2 Categories of HDU Care
Level 0: Patients whose needs can be met through normal ward care in an acute hospital.
Level 1: Patients at risk of their condition deteriorating, or those recently relocated from higher levels of care.
Level 2: Patients requiring more detailed observation or intervention.
Level 3: Patients requiring advanced respiratory support or support of at least two organ systems.

3 Maternity High Dependency Care
Women requiring High Dependency Care within the maternity unit setting fall into the Level 1 category.

4 Requirements of staff when transferring women to HDU/ITU within maternity services
Staff should document their actions when transferring women.

5 General Guidelines for High Dependency Care
All women admitted to HDU must have their level of care stated and clearly documented. One to one nursing/midwifery care must be available.

6 Contacting the Critical Care Outreach team
Contact the department via hospital switchboards or bleep system.

7 Roles and Responsibilities of Staff Groups
Midwives, Obstetricians, and Anaesthetists have specific roles and responsibilities in the care of women in HDU.

8 Guidance for staff on when to involve clinicians from outside the maternity service
Specialist clinicians should be considered for support in certain clinical situations.

9 Equipment and Resources
Each designated HDU bed space must have specific equipment in line with national guidance.

10 Considerations for Transfer to HDU/ITU Outside Maternity Services
Factors influencing the transfer decision include staffing levels and clinical judgment.

11 Agreed criteria for transfer to HDU/ITU outside maternity services
Clinical situations requiring mandatory transfer to ITU are listed, along with possible clinical conditions.

12 Discharge from HDU/ITU
Decision for discharge must be made by senior staff in conjunction with senior midwife.

Obstetric High Dependency Care (RSCH PRH only) MP056  
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals Page 13 of 13 14 References