Local Requirements for PMRT Investigations SOP: This SOP supports the investigation process of stillbirth and neonatal death via the Perinatal Mortality Review Tool (PMRT). It applies to the Clinical Governance Team and Matrons. The PMRT criteria include late fetal losses, stillbirths, neonatal deaths, and post-neonatal deaths. The aim of the PMRT approach is to conduct systematic, multidisciplinary reviews to understand why each baby died and improve future care. The document also outlines reporting requirements to MBRRACE-UK, duty of candor, and communication needs for families.

The Clinical Governance team should review booking information to determine any communication difficulties for the family. Easy access to appropriate British Sign Language (BSL) interpreters is available. Textphone and SMS text messaging are also available to help people with hearing and speech difficulties to communicate over the phone. Face-to-face overseas language interpreters are available. The ReciteMe and CardMedic Services also help people with sensory impairment, learning disability, or where English is not their first language. The interactive toolkit will help staff to decide which service to use and how to access it. If a family cannot read English, the trust Communication team should be contacted to translate any letters sent to the family. Anticipated or unexpected delays should be communicated to parents. All bereavement cases that meet the criteria for PMRT review should be initially classified as serious incident review process. The medical record should be scanned and saved into a secure folder as soon as possible. An initial review of the case should be carried out within 72-hours. HSIB investigates cases of early neonatal deaths under specific criteria. The MDT review team should include at least one professional relevant to the care of the woman and her baby. External panel reviewers should be included in the PMRT review team. Staff should be signposted to support avenues they may require. Group debriefs may be considered on a case-by-case basis. During the investigation, staff may be asked for statements by the coroner. Families are provided with contacts for ongoing support. The PMRT report is shared with the family face-to-face. Monitoring is carried out by quarterly audit in line with NHS Resolution Safety Action 10. Sources of support for families are provided.

Please use this section for comments on and questions about your care, and how your baby was cared for after birth, including if your baby was admitted to a neonatal unit. If you would like to comment on the support you received around the time your baby died, please do so here.

Please use this section to tell us about the care you received from any other team. This may include other medical teams, community midwives, your GP, counsellors, chaplains, The Patient Advice and Liaison Service (PALS), Patient Experience Team, or a hospital complaint system.

Please use this section to tell us about any aspects of your care that were most supportive. Are there any other comments you would like to make?

Dear [ ],

I am/We are [delete as appropriate] sorry for the death of your [insert son/daughter, or name if known]. I/We [delete as appropriate] realise this letter comes at a very difficult time for you and your family. We have tried to reach you by phone/email [delete as appropriate] but have not been successful.

I want/We wanted [delete as appropriate] to be in touch to reassure you that we take the death of a baby at [insert name of Trust/Health Board] seriously. It is important to find out as much as we can about what happened and why your baby/babies [delete as appropriate] has/have [delete as appropriate] died. In the coming weeks, a hospital team will hold a meeting to review your care.

Reviewing your care

The hospital team discussing your care may include doctors who care for women in pregnancy (obstetricians), doctors who look after newborn babies (neonatologists), midwives and nurses. If there are any other health professionals specific to your care we will also invite them. The aim of the review is to try to understand as much as possible about what happened and why your baby/babies [delete as appropriate] died. The team will:

- Look at medical records, tests and results, including post mortem results if you have consented to one
- Answer any questions you may have and address any concerns
- Talk to staff involved
- Look at guidance and policies to ensure the care you received was appropriate

The team will do this using a national review process developed by a group including the parent charity Sands. The review may tell us that we need to change the way we do things or that good and appropriate care was given to your family.

Involving you

As [insert the name/s of the baby/babies] parent/s [if addressing only one parent keep singular], your thoughts and questions are important and it would be extremely helpful if you felt able to share your experience or any questions you have about your care with us before we carry out the review. You can do this through your key contact:

Insert name and contact details of the key contact

I/We [delete as appropriate] enclose a feedback form with this letter to help you think about any aspects of your care you may want to share. These may be about:

- Your care during pregnancy
- Your care during the birth of your baby/babies [delete as appropriate]
- The care of you, your family and your baby/babies [delete as appropriate] after birth

You could post the feedback form back to us, using the self-addressed envelope, or call us to discuss your views, using the details of your key contact above.

Keeping you informed

It may take up to [insert number of weeks] weeks for the review meeting to take place. This is to ensure that all the information is available and that the right professionals can attend. You will not be asked to attend the meeting in person.

We will write a report to summarise the review findings and try to address any questions and comments you have made to the best of our ability. You will then have a meeting with a consultant to discuss the findings of the review, or alternatively we can telephone, email or write to you.

If you have any questions about this letter please do not hesitate to call your key contact on the number or email [adapt as appropriate] in the box above. If you would like to know more about the national review process we use you can go to: https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/pmrt/information-for-bereaved-parents

I/We [delete as appropriate] have included with this letter information about both local and national support organizations should you like any further support.

If we do not hear back from you in the next few weeks, we will keep the review report with your medical notes. You can receive a copy whenever you wish by contacting us on [provide admin contact telephone/email]

Yours sincerely,

[Name]
Role

Dear [ ],

I/We [delete as appropriate] are sorry that there has been a delay in finalizing the review report of your care. We understand