Maternity Education Policy: Local maternity department training plan to ensure delivery and monitoring of Trust Statutory and Mandatory training and maternity departmental training in line with the national maternity agenda. This supports staff in delivering up-to-date and evidence-based care to women, birthing people, and their families. Responsibilities include ensuring staff attend training, reporting compliance, and updating training needs analysis. Staff covered include midwives, nurses, maternity care assistants, obstetricians, and anaesthetists. Training methods include online learning, classroom teaching, clinical skills training, and simulation.

6.8 The Maternity Rota Leads and Maternity Administrators are responsible for providing staff group lists for training bookings. 

6.9 The Maternity Education Administrator will book staff in all disciplines’ mandatory departmental education days. 

6.10 Staff Members are responsible for attending training, informing if unable to attend, and completing mandatory training. 

6.11 Non-Substantive Staff Bank Only Midwives are required to complete statutory and mandatory training. 

6.12 Locum Doctors and Student Midwives have specific training requirements. 

6.13 The Fetal Monitoring Team will provide annual training and competency assessments. 

6.14 Practice Education Facilitators support students in the unit. 

6.15 The Preceptorship Midwife ensures the development of the preceptorship programme. 

6.16 Clinical Skills Facilitators support newly qualified midwives and other staff. 

6.17 Maternity Care Assistants, Maternity Support Workers, and Nursery Nurses must complete all mandatory training. 

6.18 Non-Registered Staff Band 2-4 must attend relevant training and complete the care certificate. 

6.19 Maternity governance leads work with practice development midwives to incorporate learning from incidents into training.

PDT administrators and roster coordinators will allocate protected time for staff to attend annual training. Only extreme circumstances can justify taking staff off training days for clinical care, and decisions must be approved by specific authorities. It is the responsibility of all staff to attend annual updates and training. Monitoring of the Maternity Education Policy will be conducted annually. The policy will be reviewed in line with national recommendations, service user input, and local learning. Compliance with core competency training and fetal monitoring assessment will be monitored regularly. Results will be analyzed, and action plans will be developed collaboratively by the maternity education team. The policy also includes a Due Regard Assessment Screening to ensure that planning, policies, and processes do not discriminate against service users, staff, or stakeholders. If potential discrimination is identified, it should be referred for further review. Staff are required to confirm their compliance with training, attendance at education days, and annual appraisal. A template dissemination, implementation, and access plan is provided to ensure staff awareness and compliance with the policy. Version control and additional guidance and information are also included in the policy.