In pregnancies complicated by diabetes, a key therapeutic goal is avoidance of maternal hyperglycemia to reduce the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. During labor, glycemic targets should be 70 to 125 mg/dL. Factors affecting glycemic management include metabolic demands of labor, food restriction, and dextrose-containing intravenous fluids. Maternal hyperglycemia during labor is linked to fetal hypoxemia and neonatal hypoglycemia. Glucose monitoring and insulin management should be individualized based on the type of diabetes and glucose levels. Continuous glucose monitoring devices may be used, and protocols for intrapartum intravenous insulin are available. Neonatal hypoglycemia may result from maternal hyperglycemia and requires monitoring and management.

Patients on insulin pumps can continue using them during labor and delivery hospitalization. Patients who prefer not to use their pumps should follow the same insulin infusion management as those on multiple daily injections. Hospitals should have policies for patients using their insulin pumps during labor, including moving the infusion site away from the lower abdomen. Before food is restricted, insulin pump users will need prandial insulin coverage. After food is restricted, a constant infusion of dextrose-containing fluids is started for patients with blood glucose ≤ 125 mg/dL. Intrapartum insulin requirements vary for patients with type 2 diabetes. Patients on metformin should hold the medication on admission for delivery.

For scheduled cesarean birth in patients receiving insulin, insulin pump users can continue using their pumps according to hospital policy. Subcutaneous correctional insulin can be used for patients with gestational diabetes during labor. Monitoring glucose levels every hour is recommended for patients on insulin due to the risk of hypoglycemia. Pre- and intraoperative hyperglycemia is treated with insulin. Patients using metformin should hold the medication on the morning of the cesarean. Patients with gestational diabetes managed with nutritional therapy alone are managed similarly to those without diabetes undergoing a scheduled cesarean birth. Induction of labor can be managed similarly to spontaneous labor. Insulin requirements drop immediately after birth for patients with type 1 diabetes, reaching a nadir at approximately 48 hours postpartum. Glycemic monitoring and targets are recommended postpartum. Insulin management is adjusted postpartum based on capillary blood glucose levels.

Initial postpartum insulin dosing is typically 30 to 35 percent of antenatal doses. Insulin degludec may be held after delivery to prevent postpartum hypoglycemia. Basal, prandial, and correctional insulin is given via injections or pump. Close monitoring and adjustment of insulin regimen is necessary postpartum. Breastfeeding mothers may have lower insulin requirements. Metformin is recommended for type 2 diabetes postpartum. Insulin and metformin are compatible with breastfeeding. Additional therapies for type 2 diabetes postpartum may be limited in breastfeeding patients. Gestational diabetes may not require diabetes medications postpartum. Breastfeeding may prevent type 2 diabetes in mothers with a history of gestational diabetes. Close monitoring of glucose levels postpartum is important. Follow-up testing for diabetes postpartum is recommended. Target blood glucose levels may vary during labor and postpartum. Insulin may be adjusted based on individual needs postpartum.

During labor, patients with gestational diabetes can often be managed with subcutaneous correctional insulin. If blood glucose levels are persistently above the goal of 125 mg/dL despite subcutaneous insulin, an insulin infusion can be initiated. Close follow-up for the development of overt diabetes is required.

19.4 mmol/L] 8 units
351 to 400 mg/dL [19.5 to 22.2 mmol/L] 10 units
Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate