Uterine fibroids are common in reproductive-age females and can cause symptoms such as abnormal uterine bleeding, pressure or bulk symptoms, fertility issues, and pain. Treatment options include expectant management, hysteroscopic fibroid resection for heavy menstrual bleeding, and medical therapy with estrogen-progestin contraceptives or progestin-releasing intrauterine devices. Second-tier treatments include GnRH agonists and antagonists, uterine artery embolization, and tranexamic acid. Patients not desiring fertility can choose from various treatment options based on symptom severity and patient preference.

Sustained reduction of menstrual bleeding was shown with the treatment for an additional 6 months, with modest side effects. Elagolix alone improved fibroid-related heavy menstrual bleeding. Relugolix combination therapy was approved for fibroid-related heavy menstrual bleeding. Linzagolix therapy also showed efficacy in reducing menstrual blood loss. GnRH agonists are used for preoperative therapy or transitional therapy for patients in late perimenopause. Uterine artery embolization is a minimally invasive option for managing fibroid symptoms. Less invasive interventional therapies are available for patients who desire uterine preservation. Focused ultrasound surgery is a noninvasive technique for treating fibroids. Endometrial ablation has a limited role in patients with bleeding disorders. Traditional surgery options include hysterectomy and myomectomy.

Hysterectomy is a common surgical treatment for uterine fibroids, but it is associated with long-term risks. Myomectomy is advised as an alternative for patients who desire to preserve their uterus. Patients with bulk or pain symptoms can consider UAE or GnRH analogs. For patients desiring fertility, hysteroscopic myomectomy is recommended for submucosal fibroids, while myomectomy via laparoscopy or open abdominal incision is suggested for other types of fibroids. Laparoscopic myomectomy is preferred for patients with specific criteria such as smaller uterine size and fewer fibroids.

In a systematic review of six randomized trials, laparoscopic myomectomy had a longer operative duration but less blood loss compared to open abdominal myomectomy. The overall risk of complications was lower for laparoscopic myomectomy, with similar rates of major complications and recurrent myomas. Laparoscopic approach may result in less severe adhesive disease and higher surgical complication rates in certain populations. Surgical approach does not affect ovarian reserve. Further randomized trials are needed to compare these procedures. Open abdominal myomectomy is recommended for patients with numerous or larger fibroids. Expectant management can be employed for patients with uterine fibroids. Patients with heavy menstrual bleeding who do not desire future fertility can consider hysteroscopic myomectomy or medical therapy as initial treatment options. Second-tier medical treatments for fibroid-associated HMB include GnRH agonists and antagonists. Aromatase inhibitors and androgenic compounds are not recommended for fibroid treatment.

Invasive treatment options for uterine fibroids include UAE and myomectomy. Patients who do not desire future fertility may consider hysterectomy. For patients with bulk or pain symptoms, GnRH analogs and UAE are options. Patients desiring pregnancy may opt for myomectomy or hysteroscopic myomectomy. Laparoscopic myomectomy is suggested for technically feasible cases. Myomectomy is preferred over UAE and focused ultrasound surgery for patients desiring pregnancy.

Al-Hendy A, Venturella R, Arjona Ferreira JC, et al. LIBERTY randomized withdrawal study:
relugolix combination therapy for heavy menstrual bleeding associated with uterine
fibroids. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2023; 229:662.e1.
MYFEMBREE- relugolix, estradiol hemihydrate, and norethindrone acetate tablet, film coated. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved product information. Revised January 2023. US National Library of Medicine.
Yselty. European Medicines Agency. Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/medicines/human/EPAR/yselty
Donnez J, Taylor HS, Stewart EA, et al. Linzagolix with and without hormonal add-back therapy for the treatment of symptomatic uterine fibroids: two randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trials. Lancet 2022; 400:896.

Endometrial polyps and their implication in the pregnancy rates of patients undergoing intrauterine insemination: a prospective, randomized study. Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview. Clinical studies comparing different approaches for myomectomy. Association of Myomectomy With Anti-Müllerian Hormone Levels and Ovarian Reserve. High cumulative incidence of uterine leiomyoma in black and white women. Management of Uterine Fibroids. Restricting use of ulipristal acetate for uterine fibroids. Health-Related Quality of Life With Ulipristal Acetate for Treatment of Uterine Leiomyomas. Different treatment options for uterine fibroids. A Feasibility Study on Treatment of Uterine Fibroids with Tung's Acupuncture. Classification system for leiomyomas based on location and characteristics.