AI: OpenAI (gpt-3.5-turbo)

Q: {
  "prompt": "Create a fictional dictation of a clinical interaction between a healthcare professional and a patient. \nThis dictation is for testing purposes only and should include various topics that might be discussed in a healthcare setting. \nPlease ensure the material is entirely fictional and does not provide any real medical advice or information. \nPlease ensure variables such as age, weight and history are varied.\nThe clinician should ensure the history and examination findings are incomplete, leaving out some pertinent questions.\nIn response to their history and examination findings, the clinician should  provide management advice and guidance.\nThe clinical scenario should be the following: \n\nMake the age 46, the BMI 32.8 and the number of prior pregnancies 2\n\nBase the clinical scenario on the following obstetrics issue: Advanced maternal age pregnancy",
  "system_prompt": "Create a fictional dictation of a clinical interaction between a healthcare professional and a patient. \nThis dictation is for testing purposes only and should include various topics that might be discussed in a healthcare setting. \nPlease ensure the material is entirely fictional and does not provide any real medical advice or information. \nPlease ensure variables such as age, weight and history are varied.\nThe clinician should ensure the history and examination findings are incomplete, leaving out some pertinent questions.\nIn response to their history and examination findings, the clinician should  provide management advice and guidance.\nThe clinical scenario should be the following: \n\nMake the age 46, the BMI 32.8 and the number of prior pregnancies 2\n\nBase the clinical scenario on the following obstetrics issue: Advanced maternal age pregnancy"
}

A: Clinician: Good afternoon, Mrs. Smith. I'm Dr. Johnson, your obstetrician. How are you feeling today?

Patient: Hello, Dr. Johnson. I'm doing okay, just a bit nervous about this pregnancy.

Clinician: I understand. It's completely normal to feel that way, especially with the added considerations of advanced maternal age. Can you tell me a bit about your medical history and any previous pregnancies?

Patient: Sure. I'm 46 years old, I have a BMI of 32.8, and this will be my third pregnancy. My first two pregnancies were relatively uneventful, but I did have gestational diabetes with my second child.

Clinician: Thank you for sharing that information. Given your age and BMI, there are some additional risks to consider with this pregnancy. We'll need to monitor you closely for gestational diabetes again, as well as other potential complications. We'll also recommend additional screenings and tests to ensure the health and well-being of both you and the baby.

Patient: That makes sense. I want to do everything I can to ensure a healthy pregnancy and baby. What can I do to help manage these risks?

Clinician: It's great that you're proactive about your health. In addition to regular prenatal care visits, I recommend maintaining a healthy diet, staying physically active (with your doctor's approval), and monitoring your blood sugar levels regularly. We may also need to consider additional interventions or medications depending on how your pregnancy progresses. It's important to stay in close communication with me throughout your pregnancy so we can address any concerns or issues promptly.

Patient: Thank you, Dr. Johnson. I appreciate your guidance and support. I'll do my best to follow your recommendations and take good care of myself and the baby.

Clinician: You're welcome, Mrs. Smith. Remember, we're here to help you every step of the way. If you have any questions or concerns, don't hesitate to reach out. Let's work together to ensure a healthy pregnancy and a positive outcome for both you and your baby.

--- Token Usage Report ---
Prompt tokens: 164
Completion tokens: 422
Total tokens: 586
Estimated cost: $0.001090