Patent Factsheets:  
Description
The basis of a UK patent application is a legal document called a specification. Its contents determine whether 
a patent can be granted. You would be well advised to seek professional assistance when preparing your patent 
application. A patent specification includes:
• a full description of your invention, plus any drawings referred to within your description
• one or more claims.
This factsheet tells you about the description. An example is shown overleaf. Other factsheets in this series explain 
how to prepare claims, drawings,  and an abstract  (which is another essential part of an application).
 Content
The description must explain your invention fully at the 
time of filing because information cannot be added later. 
A patent will not  be granted if your description does 
not contain sufficient information to enable others to 
construct or perform your invention.
Your description should begin with a short title  which 
indicates the general subject of your invention. The title 
should not include the inventor’s name, a trade mark or 
other fictitious name, or the word “patent” or “etc”. Also it 
should not give away the essential details of your invention.
A typical description begins by setting out the 
background  of the invention and often then explains a 
particular problem  that your invention solves , and what 
it does. 
It may then summarise the essential features of your 
invention, and some important but not essential features.
This is then followed by an introduction to the drawings  (if 
any), indicating in a few words what each drawing illustrates. 
The rest of the description describes (with more detailed 
reference to any drawings), one or more particular 
examples  of how the invention may be performed.  
Page 2 of the example overleaf contains a detailed  
outline of the invention. Do not feel that you have 
to limit this part of the description. Most detailed 
descriptions will need to extend to severa l pages. Note 
that descriptions in excess of 35 pages will incur an 
additional fee of £10 per page, later in the process.Important features are indicated in the drawings using 
reference numbers . These numbers are then used in the 
description to refer to those features.
The same reference number should always be used to 
refer to the same feature.
Do not include text that is not directly concerned with  
your invention.
Style and presentation
The description must be in English or Welsh. The Office 
will provide a translation of any material filed in Welsh. 
Type (or print) the pages of your description on one side 
only of separate sheets of white A4 paper.  
Leave margins  of at least 2.0cm. 
Number  the pages of text in order, e.g. 1, 2, 3, 4, at the 
top of each page (but below the margin) in the middle of 
the page.
Submitting by paper 
Join the pages together with a paper clip or bulldog clip 
at the top centre of the pages. Please do not join the 
pages by stapling.
Intellectual Property Office is an operating name of the Patent Office (REV JUL 22)
Description: Typical Example
Page numbering
Title providing an 
indication of the 
invention
Introduction and 
background to the 
invention
Summary of 
the invention, 
also known as 
a ‘statement of 
invention’
Optional features1
Bicycle Stabiliser
This invention relates to a device for stabilising a child’s 
bicycle.
When children are learning how to ride a bicycle, an additional 
pair of stabilising wheels are often fitted either side of the 
bicycle’s rear wheel to prevent toppling of the bicycle.
However, the use of conventional stabilisers can lead to a 
number of difficulties.  If a rigid stabilising unit is fitted 
to a bicycle, the rider can become reliant on the unit and 
will not learn how to balance the bicycle using their own body 
weight.  Furthermore, on uneven ground there is a risk that the 
bicycle will become immobilised if the rear bicycle wheel loses 
contact with the ground, or that the stabilising unit will cause 
jolting of the bicycle.  To overcome these problems, the present 
invention proposes a bicycle stabilising unit with attachment 
means for attaching the unit to a bicycle, a ground-engaging 
wheel which can freely rotate about an axis, and cushioning 
means such that the axis of the wheel can be displaced relative 
to the attachment means.
The cushioning means is preferably provided by a damped suspension 
strut, although the cushioning means may also be provided by 
other means, such as a torsion bar or spring.
The cushioning means may be adjustable so that the degree of 
cushioning can be modified to suit the terrain and the rider’s 
ability.
The stabilising unit may be retractable so that the ground-
engaging wheel may be stored in a non-ground-engaging position.
The invention will now be described solely by way of example and 
with reference to the accompanying drawings in which:
Figure 1  shows a pair of stabilising units, one fitted either side 
of the rear  wheel of a bicycle,
Figure 2  shows a stabilising unit with an alternative 
cushioning mechanism,
Figure 3  shows a stabilising unit with another cushioning 
arrangement.Introduction to the 
detailed description
List of figures
Detailed description 
of an example of 
your invention
Reference numerals 
are used to indicate 
any illustrated 
features 2
In figure 1, a stabilising unit 1 includes a vertical number 2 
which is attached to the side of a bicycle by mounting bolts 3, 
4.  The lower end of the vertical number is freely hinged to a 
substantially horizontal number 5 which carries a ground-engaging 
wheel 6.  The wheel may be solid or may have an inflatable tyre.  
A strut 7 with a sprung shock-absorbing unit 8 is connected 
between the vertical and horizontal members, and this allows 
vertical displacement of the ground-engaging wheel in order to 
cushion impacts from an uneven road surface.
If two stabilising units are fitted, one either side of the 
bicycle’s rear wheel, then the rider will feel supported but 
will also develop confidence in leaning the bicycle over when 
negotiating a bend.  The degree of cushioning can be varied by 
adjusting the compression of the shock-absorbing unit, using  
conventional adjusting means such as a screw-threaded end-stop.
The shock-absorbing strut 7 may be permanently attached to the 
vertical and horizontal numbers 2, 5 for instance using welded 
connections.  Alternatively, the shock-absorbing strut may be 
easily detachable from one or both numbers, for instance by using 
a quick-release mechanism, allowing the ground-engaging wheel and 
the horizontal number to be folded away if the rider is confident 
enough to travel without the assistance of the stabilising unit.
Figure 2 shows an alternative embodiment in which the vertical 
and horizontal numbers 2 and 5 are rigidly attached to each 
other, for instance by using a rigid strut 9.  The cushioning 
means is provided by mounting the ground-engaging wheel 6 in 
a sprung housing 10 on the outer end of horizontal number 5.  
The ground-engaging wheel is therefore vertically displaceable 
relative to the rest of the stabilising unit.
Figure 3 shows a further alternative embodiment in which the 
vertical and horizontal numbers 2 and 5 are connected via a hinge 
which includes a torsion spring 11.  The torsion spring allows 
the horizontal number to rotate through a limited angle range.
Enquiries : You can contact the Intellectual Property Office on: 0300 300 2000 (local call rate).  Alternatively visit our website at www.gov.uk/ipo
We are keen to help all our customers as much as possible, but regret that we cannot assist with the commercial exploitation of your invention. This factsheet is not intended to 
be a comprehensive guide and necessarily omits details which may be relevant in particular circumstances.
WS0055             © Crown Copyright
