Patent Factsheets:  
Filing Abroad
A granted UK patent can stop others making, selling or using your invention in the UK, but has no influence 
elsewhere. Consequently you may feel that you need to apply for patent protection in one or more countries abroad 
so that you can prevent others from making, selling or using your invention in those countries. This factsheet explains 
some of the options open to you once an application for a UK patent has been made.
This factsheet should be treated as an introduction to the topic of foreign filing and not a comprehensive guide. 
Essential Advice
Because of the additional difficulties associated 
with obtaining patent protection abroad, you should 
consider seeking advice from a patent attorney or other 
professional adviser.
When to file
You have 12 months  from the earliest date * of your UK 
application in which to file a foreign application which  
claims priority from it. You may still file abroad after  
this date, but there would be a significant risk that 
publication of your UK application would then invalidate 
your foreign or international application.
* The earliest of your filing date or priority date(s).
Where to File
Once you’ve decided, on a commercial basis, in which 
countries you wish to gain patent protection, you then 
have the following options:
1. Filing a patent application separately in each country 
where protection is required.
2. Filing a single European patent application (EP) 
giving protection in a number of countries in the 
European Patent Convention (EPC).
3. Filing a single application under the Patent 
Cooperation Treaty (PCT) for patent protection in a 
number of countries throughout the world.
The table overleaf provides a comparison of these options.How to file
1. Independent applications –  
Each country has its own fee system and rules 
governing the patent process. Contact details for 
other national patent offices are available from our 
Information Centre on 0300 300 2000.
2. European application –  
Your EP application may be filed at the European 
Patent Office or via the UK office. Further information is 
available from our International Unit on: 01633 814586.
3. International application –  
Your PCT application may be filed at the UK office. 
Further information and forms are available from our 
International Unit on: 01633 814586 and from the 
World Intellectual Property Office (WIPO) website 
www.wipo.int.
Important: If you decide to file abroad without first 
applying for a patent at the Intellectual Property 
Office, you would need to obtain security clearance 
from us if you are resident in the UK and your 
application contains information which relates to 
military technology or would be prejudicial to national 
security or the safety of the public (as required by 
section 23 of the Patents Act 1977). If you think you 
need security clearance, please contact our security 
section on 01633 813558.  
Intellectual Property Office is an operating name of the Patent Office (REV JAN 20)
Filing Abroad: The Options
Applications filed 
separately in individual 
countries.European Patent 
designating (choosing) 
which member countries 
you wish to include.Patent Cooperation Treaty 
application designating 
which countries you wish 
to include.
Fees Every country has its own 
fees.(For up to date information 
on fees, please refer to the 
European Patent Office 
website: www.epo.org.)Typically £2774 up to the 
search stage, and then 
examination fees in each 
country for the national 
phase. (Fees correct as at 1 
January 2017. www.gov.uk/
government/news/1-january-
2017-update-to-the-patent-
cooperation-treaty-pct-fees)
Language of 
applicationLanguage of each individual 
country. English English  
Verified 
TranslationsThe expense of translations 
may be required at a very 
early stage.Translations of claims only 
required into French and 
German just before grant.Translations required by 
many countries during the 
national phase.
Address for 
ServiceIn general you will need 
to supply an address for 
service within each country 
to which you apply.In general, an address for 
service in the UK is sufficient 
for obtaining a European 
Patent.In general you will need 
to supply an address for 
service within each country 
you designate in the national 
phase.
Advantages Greatest flexibility regarding 
where to apply for patent 
protection.With a single application 
you can obtain, at grant, 
patent protection in all the 
countries of the EPC you 
have designated.A single search suffices for 
all PCT countries designated 
giving the opportunity for 
evaluation of the search 
report and amendment of 
the claims prior to further 
commitment.
Disadvantages You will need to pay official 
fees in each country.If your EP application is 
turned down, or successfully 
opposed, you will fail to gain  
protection in any of the states 
designated.There is no single substantive 
examination, so the PCT 
application must then be 
pursued through the national 
offices of each designated 
country separately (national 
phase) with fees and 
translations where necessary.
All fees are approximate and are intended only to be illustrative of the relative costs.  Before filing an EP or PCT 
application please ensure that you have confirmation of the current fees. 
Enquiries : You can contact the Intellectual Property Office on: 0300 300 2000 (local call rate). Alternatively visit our 
website at www.gov.uk/ipo
We are keen to help all our customers as much as possible, but regret that we cannot assist with the commercial 
exploitation of your invention. This factsheet is not intended to be a comprehensive guide and necessarily omits details 
which may be relevant in particular circumstances.
WS0082      © Crown Copyright
