Patent Factsheets: 
Claims
The basis of a UK patent application is a legal document called a specification. Its contents determine whether 
a patent can be granted. You would be well advised to seek professional assistance when preparing your patent 
application. A patent specification includes:
• a full description of your invention, plus any drawings referred to within your description
• one or more claims.
This factsheet tells you about the claims. An example is shown overleaf. Other factsheets in this series explain how to 
prepare a description, drawings, and an abstract (which is another essential part of an application).
Content
A claim is a precise statement of the invention that you 
want to protect. 
Your first claim must define the invention by setting out 
its distinctive technical features. These are the features 
which distinguish your invention from what is already 
known within the same or similar field.
Your first claim should only include the essential features 
of your invention and you should consider how restrictive 
in meaning the terms you need to be. For example, if the 
invention which you have described uses a hook on which 
to hang coats, consider whether it needs to be a hook, or 
if another type of support would fulfil the same function. If 
so, you should consider whether you should call it simply 
“a support for clothes” rather than a “coat hook”.
Subsidiary features may be set out in “dependent 
claims”: these refer to one or more previous claims (as 
shown in the example claims 2-6 overleaf).
Note that if you include more than 25 claims there will be 
an additional fee of £20 per claim, later in the process.
A claim should not contain any statements relating to 
commercial or other advantages or other non-technical 
aspects; e.g. claims of the type “I claim that my invention 
is novel” or “I claim £250 for my clothes stand” or “I 
claim to be the inventor of this clothes stand” or “I claim 
that my clothes stand will make it easier to get access to 
the clothes” will not be accepted.
Do not use a full stop in the middle of any claim as this 
would make it unclear.
Do not put anything in your claims which you have not 
already referred to in your description. The claims must 
be fully supported by the description .The Intellectual Property Office will conduct a search on 
your application based upon the invention defined in your 
claims. If your claims aren’t well written or thought out, 
the results of our search may not be as helpful as they 
could be. Your application cannot be ‘searched’ if it 
has no claims .
Drafting commercially successful claims is not easy.  If 
you are in any doubt about the effectiveness of your 
claims, consult a patent attorney. 
At the substantive examination stage the claims will be 
assessed to determine whether the invention is new 
and inventive. If necessary, you will then be given the 
opportunity to amend your claims.
Style and presentation
Type (or print) the claim(s) on one side only of separate 
sheets of white A4 paper.
Begin your claims on a separate sheet of paper, 
preferably headed “CLAIMS”.  If you decide to write 
more than one claim, number them in order beginning 
with claim 1.
Number the pages of claims in order, to follow on from 
the pages of the description (for example, if your last 
descriptive page is numbered 2, your first claim page will 
be numbered 3).
Leave margins of 2.0cm. 
Join the pages together with a paper clip or bulldog clip 
at the top centre of the pages. Please do not join the 
pages by stapling.
The claims should be in English or Welsh. (The Office will 
provide a translation of any material filed in Welsh).
IMPORTANT: You will need to file your claims at the 
Intellectual Property Office within 12 months of your 
filing date (where no claim to priority is made).
Intellectual Property Office is an operating name of the Patent Office (REV JAN 20)
Claims: Typical example
Use A4 paper
Preferred heading for your claims
Broadest claim - include only the 
essential features.  
The claims must relate to technical 
features of your invention.
Dependent claims relating to 
subsidiary features (these claims 
are optional)Page numbered to follow on  
after the description page(s)
3
Claims
1. A bicycle stabilising unit comprising
attachment means for attaching the unit to a 
bicycle, a ground-engaging wheel which can freely 
rotate about an axis, and cushioning means such 
that the axis of the wheel can be displaced relative 
to the attachment means.
2. A bicycle stabilising unit according to 
claim 1, in which the cushioning means is provided 
by a damped suspension strut.
3.  A bicycle stabilising unit according to 
claim 1, in which the cushioning means is provided 
by a housing which supports the ground-engaging 
wheel, the housing including at least one slot 
which allows linear displacement of the wheel, 
perpendicular to its axis, the housing also having 
at least one spring which controls the displacement 
of the wheel.
4. A bicycle stabilising unit according to 
claim 1, in which the cushioning means is provided 
by a torsion bar or torsion spring.
5 A  bicycle stabilising unit according to any
of the preceding claims,in which the cushioning 
means is adjustable so that the degree of
cushioning can be varied.
6. A bicycle stabilising unit according to 
claim 2, in which the damped suspension strut is 
detachable so that the ground-engaging wheel is  
stored in a non-ground-engaging position.
Enquiries : You can contact the Intellectual Property Office on: 0300 300 2000 (local call rate). Alternatively visit our 
website at www.gov.uk/ipo
We are keen to help all our customers as much as possible, but regret that we cannot assist with the commercial 
exploitation of your invention. This factsheet is not intended to be a comprehensive guide and necessarily omits details 
which may be relevant in particular circumstances.
WS0057      © Crown Copyright
