 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 Patent Factsheets: 
Accelerated Processing 
The normal way of obtaining a patent is set out in Patent Facts: flling in form 1. However, it is possible to speed up 
certain steps in this process. 
This factsheet may be of help if you decide that you require accelerated processing at any stage. 
ACCELERATED PROCESSING: PROS AND CONS 
Type Your Action Advantages Disadvantages 
Early search File fee and form 9A Early indication of Have to draft one or more claims – 
before 12 months previous publications. see Patent Factsheet: Claims. 
Can help you decide 
whether to withdraw/ proceed/fle abroad. 
Combined search and File forms 9A and Early indication of You must pay for both search 
examination 10 and fees at the objections to be and examination at the same 
same time overcome for grant of time. You have to opt for 
patent. Can be used to substantive examination without 
show potential fnancial the beneft of seeing the search 
backer what likely rights report. Citable patent applications 
will exist. fled earlier than yours may not have yet been published. 
Accelerated search File form 9A and Not usually necessary since As early search. 
fee and written search is normally carried out 
request with within six months of request. 
adequate reason 
Accelerated publication Request for Gives early indication to Details of invention are available 
publication earlier the public of the to competitors. Examination fee, 
than normal monopoly sought. due within 6 months of publication, 
18 months Can assist in interesting must be paid earlier. 
manufacturers/licensees. 
Accelerated substantive File form 10 and Can result in earlier grant You may not be able to process 
examination fee and written of patent. equivalent foreign applications at 
request with the same time. 
adequate reason 
Early reply to Offer response to Can result in earlier grant As accelerated 
examination report(s) your examination of patent. substantive examination. 
report before the due date 
SEE OVERLEAF FOR SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES ON THE ABOVE 
Intellectual Property Offce is an operating name of the Patent Offce (REV JAN 20) 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
         SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES ON ACCELERATED PROCESSING 
When asking for any of the accelerated procedures overleaf, the following points should be borne in mind: a. One or more claims must be fled – see Claims Factsheet – and the appropriate fees paid. 
b. Accelerated publication is not available before the search report has issued nor before the necessary formal 
requirements have been met. 
c. If you ask for accelerated publication the application will enter the publication cycle as soon as the search report has issued and formal requirements are met. It is then unlikely that there will be time before publication for you to:w 
i. consider the search report; 
ii. to fle new or amended claims, or 
iii. withdraw the application in order to prevent it being published. 
d. If you request accelerated publication you must make sure that any foreign applications for the same invention are made within 12 months of your fling date. 
e. The normal process of search, publication after 18 months and followed by later examination allows time for patents published after your fling date but with earlier priority dates to enter the search fles and be considered and cited (if relevant) when the substantive examination is carried out. Early examination and grant may result in your patent later being found invalid if such citable patents are published later than the date on which your application is sent for grant. 
f. You must tell us, in writing, why you are requesting accelerated search or accelerated examination. 
g. Applications are not normally sent for grant until at least three months after initial publication of the application in case other people wish to fle observations on your application. 
h. Requests for accelerated publication should be prominently marked “REQUEST FOR ACCELERATED PUBLICATION”. 
i. Requests for accelerated examination should be prominently marked “REQUEST FOR ACCELERATED  EXAMINATION”. If the request for accelerated examination is made before publication it must be made clear if accelerated publication is also required. 
j. Further information about combined search and examination is available from the Intellectual Property Offce – please ask for Patent factsheet: combined search and examination. 
Enquiries: You can contact the Intellectual Property Offce on: 0300 300 2000 (local call rate). Alternatively visit our website at www.gov.uk/ipo 
We are keen to help all our customers as much as possible, but regret that we cannot assist with the commercial 
exploitation of your invention. This factsheet is not intended to be a comprehensive guide and necessarily omits details which may be relevant in particular circumstances. 
WS0060 © Crown Copyright 
