Endometriosis is diagnosed in reproductive-aged women with symptoms like pain and infertility, treated with NSAIDs, hormone therapies (e.g., GnRH agonists), and surgical options like excision over ablation; Danazol and certain drugs are not recommended. Referral to expertise centers is advised for deep endometriosis, while hysterectomy is considered for non-conceiving women unresponsive to other treatments. Laparoscopy may improve pregnancy rates in endometriosis-associated infertility; intrauterine insemination with ovarian stimulation can increase pregnancy rates, with ART as an option. Antibiotic prophylaxis during oocyte retrieval is considered in women with endometrioma. Long-term hormone therapy may prevent endometriosis recurrence, and adolescent diagnosis involves hormonal contraceptives or progestogens as first-line therapy. Early bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy increases risks of bone density loss, dementia, and cardiovascular disease. Surgical removal is preferred for extrapelvic endometriosis, with imaging and laparoscopy aiding diagnosis. Hormone treatments and surgery are recommended for pain relief, with combined hormonal contraceptives effective; GnRH agonists reduce pain but may have side effects, and add-back therapy can prevent bone loss. Excision is preferred over ablation, with PSN beneficial for pain relief and cystectomy recommended for ovarian endometrioma. Segmental bowel resection is an option for deep endometriosis, with no need for regular monitoring. Lifestyle changes may help prevent endometriosis, and early diagnosis can improve quality of life. Patients may benefit from referral to specialized centers for comprehensive management, with surgical interventions improving pain and quality of life, albeit with significant complications, especially with rectal surgery. Hysterectomy may be considered for endometriosis-associated pain, and nerve-sparing laparoscopy can reduce the risk of urinary retention. Excision techniques are preferred over ablation, with patient selection for surgery considering prognostic factors. Medical therapies post-surgery can be considered for pain management, with shared decision-making essential between medical and surgical treatments. Non-medical management strategies may offer relief, though more research is needed. In infertility management, ovarian suppression treatment is not recommended, and postoperative hormone therapy may be considered for pain relief without negatively impacting fertility, with operative laparoscopy an option guided by various factors including the Endometriosis Fertility Index. In ART, both GnRH antagonist and agonist protocols are suitable, with antibiotic prophylaxis recommended during oocyte retrieval in women with endometriomas. Surgical therapies as an adjunct to ART may be effective, particularly for peritoneal endometriosis, and fertility preservation should be discussed in severe cases. Women with endometriosis are at increased risk of pregnancy complications, with surgery-related and patient-related factors as risk factors for recurrence, for which surgical techniques and hormone therapy post-surgery are recommended. For adolescents, hormonal contraceptives or progestogens are first-line therapy, with surgical removal considered if medical treatments fail. Symptoms may persist after menopause, with surgical treatment recommended, and aromatase inhibitors can be considered for postmenopausal pain. Abdominal wall endometriosis is diagnosed using imaging, while thoracic endometriosis syndrome is diagnosed clinically. Surgical removal is preferred for abdominal extrapelvic endometriosis, with hormone treatment for thoracic endometriosis. Asymptomatic endometriosis does not require treatment, and genetic testing should only be done in research settings. Reassurance on low cancer risks and advice on general cancer prevention are recommended, with varying effects of hormone treatments on cancer risk needing further research. Monitoring for ovarian malignancy is not recommended without additional risk factors, and early and meticulous surgical intervention may reduce ovarian cancer risk. Prevention strategies are crucial, and the guideline development process involves evidence collection and consensus meetings, with recommendations graded as 'strong' or 'weak' based on GRADE, and revision set for 2025.