Early diagnosis and treatment of malaria in pregnancy is crucial to prevent mortality; symptoms include flu-like illness with fever, chills, headache, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and malaise. Urgent investigations include thick and thin blood films, malaria rapid antigen tests, and other tests. Treatment for non-falciparum malaria is chloroquine; for falciparum malaria, admit to hospital and use IV artesunate or quinine. Regular monitoring and management of malaria in pregnancy is essential. Severe malaria in pregnancy should be treated with IV artesunate if available, otherwise use IV quinine. Quinine monotherapy is not recommended for uncomplicated malaria in pregnancy; use quinine with clindamycin. Clindamycin is slow-acting and may not add value to IV artesunate. Treatment should not be delayed; seek expert consultation for IV artesunate if needed. IV artesunate is not currently licensed in the UK but can be obtained from specialist centers or Idis Pharma if needed. Clindamycin should not be used in pregnancy. Patients may deteriorate under treatment, at which point, management should be upgraded to account for severity. WHO recommends artemisinin-based combination therapy in the second and third trimesters, ahead of quinine and clindamycin. Atovaquone-proguanil alone and atovaquone-proguanil-artesunate were safe and efficacious for uncomplicated P. falciprum in the second and third trimesters. Artemether-lumefantrine treatment in pregnancy showed disappointing efficacy. Chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine are no longer recommended for P. falciparum treatment due to resistance. Radical cure with primaquine is not recommended in pregnancy. Weekly chloroquine can be given to prevent relapse of P. vivax or P. ovale before delivery. Chloroquine-resistant P. vivax should be treated similarly to chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum. Blood or plasma concentrations of antimalarial drugs are often reduced in late pregnancy, leading to under-dosing. The persistence of Plasmodium falciparum in the placenta after apparently adequate therapy with quinine has been described, emphasizing the need for continued vigilance in monitoring and treatment to prevent adverse outcomes.