# Extracted from: BJOG - 2022 - Girling - Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy.pdf
# Guideline ID: bjog-2022-girling-intrahepatic-cholestasis-of-pregnancy
# Content length: 92577 characters
# Processing date: 1740370221.8533766

BJOG . 2022;129:e95–e114. | e95
 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bjo
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
Green- top Guideline No. 43 June 2022
Joanna Girling | Caroline L. Knight | Lucy Chappell | on behalf of the Royal College of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Published Online 9 August 2022
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.17206 
© 2022 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.Correspondence
Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, 10– 18 Union Street, London 
SE1 1SZ, UK.
Email: clinicaleffectiveness@rcog.org.ukKey recommendations
• The diagnosis of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) should be considered 
in pregnant women who have itching in skin of normal appearance and raised 
peak random total bile acid concentration of 19 micromol/L or more. [Grade D]
• Additional laboratory and/or imaging investigations are not recommended 
unless itch is associated with atypical clinical symptoms, the presence of relevant 
comorbidities, or in early onset severe ICP. Consider additional postnatal 
investigations in women in whom resolution of abnormal liver function tests is 
delayed or does not occur. [Grade C]
• Consider discussing the care of women with severe, very early or atypical presentation 
of what appears to be ICP with a hepatologist. [Grade D]
• Confirm the diagnosis of ICP in the postnatal period at least 4 weeks after birth, 
with resolution of itching and liver function tests returning to normal (including 
bile acids). [Grade D]
• Advise women with isolated ICP and a singleton pregnancy that the risk of 
stillbirth only increases above population rate once their serum bile acid 
concentration is 100 micromol/L or more.
⚬ In women with peak bile acids 19– 39 micromol/L (mild ICP) and no other risk 
factors, advise them that the risk of stillbirth is similar to the background risk. 
Consider options of planned birth by 40 weeks' gestation or ongoing antenatal 
care according to national guidance.
⚬ In women with peak bile acids 40– 99 micromol/L (moderate ICP) and no other 
risk factors, advise them that the known risk of stillbirth is similar to the 
background risk until 38– 39 weeks' gestation. Consider planned birth at 
38– 39 weeks' gestation.
⚬ In women with peak bile acids 100 micromol/L or more (severe ICP), advise them 
that the risk of stillbirth is higher than the background risk. Consider planned 
birth at 35– 36 weeks' gestation. [Grade A]
• Advise women with ICP and a twin pregnancy that the risk of stillbirth is higher 
compared with a twin pregnancy without ICP. [Grade D]
• Clinicians should be aware that fetal ultrasound and/or cardiotocography (CTG) 
do not predict or prevent stillbirth in ICP. [Grade D]This is the third edition of the guideline. 
The first edition was published in 2006 and 
the second in 2011 under the title Obstetric 
Cholestasis .
e96 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
1 | PURPOSE AND SCOPE
This guideline summarises the evidence regarding the di -
agnosis, and the maternal and fetal risks of intrahepatic 
cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP), previously called obstetric 
cholestasis. It provides guidance regarding the different care 
options available. These should be considered in conjunc -
tion with the wishes of the woman, as part of shared and 
informed decision- making.
While some high quality randomised controlled trials 
in ICP have now been completed, many publications do not 
have such a rigorous design, and this limits the ability to pro -
vide detailed evidence- based recommendations for specific 
aspects of care. Areas of uncertainty are highlighted along 
with recommendations for future research in this field.
Within this document we use the terms pregnant woman 
and women's health. However, it is important to acknowl -
edge that it is not only people who identify as women for 
whom it is necessary to access care. Obstetric and gynaecol -
ogy services and delivery of care must therefore be appropri -
ate, inclusive and sensitive to the needs of those individuals 
whose gender identity does not align with the sex they were 
assigned at birth.
2 | INTRODUCTION
The care of women and pregnant people with ICP is driven 
by concern from women and from healthcare professionals 
over the potential increased risk of stillbirth. Reduction of 
stillbirth is a priority in maternity care in the UK.1
Prevalence is influenced by genetic and environmental 
aspects and varies between populations. In the UK, ICP af -
fects 0.7% of pregnancies in multi- ethnic populations, and 
1.2%– 1.5% of women of Indian- Asian or Pakistani- Asian 
origin.2,3
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is a multifactorial 
condition. It is characterised by pruritus in the absence of 
a primary skin condition, with abnormal maternal bile 
acid concentrations. The onset of symptoms is most com -
mon in the third trimester, but can be earlier in pregnancy.4 
Alternative diagnoses (such as pre- eclampsia) should always 
be considered before a diagnosis of ICP is made; it is also possible for other conditions to co- exist. Pruritus and raised 
bile acid concentrations should return to normal after birth.
Ideally, all women with ICP should have liver function 
tests (including bile acids) checked after birth, as a propor -
tion may have persistent abnormalities suggestive of addi -
tional or alternative comorbidities (such as non- alcoholic 
fatty liver). Few studies have reported comprehensive post -
natal follow- up of women to assess for additional diagnoses.
There are no clinical features or laboratory patterns that 
are unique to ICP, as other conditions can cause itching, or 
raised bile acid concentrations in pregnancy. Around 25% of 
pregnant women develop itching2,5; the majority of these do 
not have and do not develop ICP.
Historically, ICP has been diagnosed in women on the 
basis of self- reported itching together with elevation of any 
of a wide range of liver function tests beyond pregnancy- 
specific limits.6 There is now increasing evidence that in 
singleton pregnancies, most liver function tests do not re -
flect risk of fetal demise and that only maternal total bile 
acid concentrations results are associated with the risk of 
stillbirth.
A meta- analysis of 23 studies involving 5557 women 
with ICP and 165 136 healthy controls, and the first indi -
vidual patient data analysis of 5269 women with ICP from 
27 studies7 has been published since this guideline was last 
updated. In singleton pregnancies, stillbirth was associated 
with maximum total bile acid concentration, especially over 
100 micromol/L. In pregnancies with co- morbidities that 
themselves may impact on pregnancy outcome (such as mul -
tifetal, diabetic, pre- eclamptic pregnancies), these must be 
taken into account when considering risks and care options.
Bile acid concentrations are not associated with intensity 
of itching.8 Other liver blood tests, such as alanine trans -
aminase or aspartate transaminase are not associated with 
pregnancy outcome.7 In light of this, the consensus is now 
that the diagnosis of ICP requires elevated maternal bile 
acid concentrations, and that women and pregnant people 
with itching and isolated raised transaminases alone (with 
normal bile acid concentrations) should not be given a di -
agnosis of ICP.9 This is supported by the recent systematic 
review described above, in which there was no association 
between abnormal maternal transaminase concentrations 
and stillbirth.7• Advise women with ICP that the presence of risk factors or co- morbidities (such as 
gestational diabetes and/or pre- eclampsia and/or multifetal pregnancy) appear to 
increase the risk of stillbirth and may influence decision- making around timing of 
planned birth. [Grade D]
• Advise women that there are no treatments that improve pregnancy outcome (or 
raised bile acid concentrations) and treatments to improve maternal itching are of 
limited benefit. [Grade A]
• Do not routinely offer ursodeoxycholic acid for the purpose of reducing adverse 
perinatal outcomes in women with ICP. [Grade A]
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e97
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
2.1 | What terminology should be used to 
describe the conditions?
Most published studies to date have included women with ICP 
diagnosed on the basis of itch and elevated bile acids above the 
laboratory reference range. In a study of 560 women a preg-
nancy specific reference range for non- fasting bile acids was 
calculated with an upper limit of normal of 18 micromol/L.10 
In light of the meta- analysis and individual patient data 
analysis showing that stillbirth risk is not linked with alanine 
transaminase levels, but is linked with peak bile acid concen-
tration,7 the suggested terminology for pregnant women with 
otherwise unexplained itching is outlined in Table  1.
2.2 | What are the clinical issues for women 
with ICP?
The clinical issues for women and pregnant people with 
ICP may include coping with the itching, monitoring op -
tions during the pregnancy, options for controlling mater -
nal symptoms, reducing fetal risk, preterm birth, difficulty 
sleeping, anxiety about the condition, and optimal timing 
of birth. Itching varies in nature between different women 
and for some women at different times, from mild to un -
bearable and from focal to widespread, and for some women 
this can have an adverse impact on their mental wellbeing. 
Liver failure (impaired synthetic function such as prolonged 
prothrombin time, or metabolic dysfunction such as hypo -
glycaemia) is not a typical feature of ICP.
3 | IDENTIFICATION AND 
ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE
The Cochrane Library and electronic databases (DARE, 
EMBASE, Trip, MEDLINE and PubMed) were searched 
looking for the following terms in the title or ab -
stract ‘cholestasis’, ‘intrahepatic cholestasis’, ‘obstetric cholestasis’, ‘bile acids and salts’ and ‘liver function 
test’. The search was restricted to articles published until 
August 2017. The full search strategy is available to view 
online as supporting information. A further search was 
undertaken up to February 2021 and additional arti -
cles included as appropriate. The full literature search 
is available to view online as supporting information 
(Appendices S1 and S2 ).
This Royal College of Obstetricians and Gyneacologists 
(RCOG) guideline was developed in accordance with the 
standard methodology for producing RCOG Green- top 
Guidelines.11
4 | HOW IS ICP DIAGNOSED?
4.1 | How should the diagnosis of ICP be 
made?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
The diagnosis of ICP should 
be considered in pregnant 
women who have itching in 
skin of normal appearance 
and raised peak random 
total bile acid concentration 
of 19 micromol/L or more. 
The diagnosis is more 
likely if it is confirmed that 
itching and raised bile acids 
resolve after birth4 D There is no 
diagnostic test 
for ICP, but this 
definition is 
pragmatic, and is 
used in clinical 
research involving 
women with ICP
If a diagnosis of ICP is 
suspected, carry out a 
structured history and 
examination, so that other 
causes of itching and liver 
dysfunction can be excluded4 D There are other 
potential causes 
of itching and 
abnormalities of 
liver function tests 
in pregnant women
Offer repeat liver function 
tests and bile acid 
measurement (depending 
on gestation and clinical 
context) in women with 
normal blood results whose 
itch persists, and no other 
cause is apparent4 D Women and 
pregnant people 
with gestational 
pruritus may 
develop ICP up 
to 15 weeks after 
initial presentation
If resolution of itching 
is associated with 
normalisation of bile acids 
and liver function tests 
during pregnancy, the 
diagnosis of ICP is unlikely 
to be correct4 D In clinical practice, 
diagnoses should 
be reconsidered 
if the clinical 
presentation 
changes
New onset pruritus in pregnant women, if associated 
with rash is unlikely to be ICP. If the itchy skin looks 
abnormal (other than excoriations) then another cause 
should be considered. Liver function tests and bile acids 
are not required routinely. Clinicians should be aware 
however, that skin conditions (e.g. eczema) and ICP can 
co- exist.TABLE 1 Terminology for pregnant women with itching of normal 
skin
Diagnosis Clinical features
Gestational 
pruritusItching and peak bile acid concentrations 
<19 micromol/La
Mild ICP Itching and raised peak bile acid concentrations 
19– 39 micromol/L
Moderate ICP Itching and raised peak bile acid concentrations 
40– 99 micromol/L
Severe ICP Itching and raised peak bile acid concentrations 
≥100 micromol/L
Note : Peak bile acid concentrations refer to the highest bile acid concentration 
recorded during a woman's pregnancy. Thus a woman's diagnosis may progress in 
severity during pregnancy.
aThe upper limit of normal bile acid concentrations in pregnancy is 
18 micromol/L.10
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e98 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
If the itchy skin looks normal, or there is only skin 
trauma due to scratching, the diagnosis may include ges -
tational pruritus, or ICP (see Table  1); measurement of 
bile acid concentrations and liver function tests should be 
undertaken. Raised bile acid concentration of 19 micro -
mol/L or more in pregnancy supports a diagnosis of ICP. 
[Evidence level 4]
When clinically indicated, bile acid measurements should 
be taken at a convenient time, and do not need to be per -
formed fasting. By taking a non- fasting upper limit of nor -
mal up to 19 micromol/L for bile acid concentrations, almost 
20% of women previously considered to have ICP (as their 
bile acid concentrations are below 19 micromol/L but above 
the standard laboratory cut off) do not have this diagnosis. 
Published data indicate that pregnant women with raised 
bile acids less than 19 micromol/L are not at increased risk 
of stillbirth.10 In addition, as prandial readings are higher 
than fasting, this approach maximises the chance of detect -
ing peak bile acid readings that are of greater clinical impor -
tance for preventing adverse pregnancy outcome.
Itching of normal skin, liver dysfunction and elevated bile 
acid concentrations are non- specific and have a wide range 
of causes. A healthcare professional should carry out a struc -
tured history and examination, and consider other potential 
diagnoses: these may be pregnancy specific (including pre- 
eclampsia) or coincidental to the pregnancy (comprehen -
sively reviewed by Walker et al).12 Drug reactions, allergic 
reactions, and urticaria should form part of the differential 
diagnosis. [Evidence level 4]
In women and pregnant people with persistent itch of 
normal skin and normal blood results, an initial diagnosis of 
gestational pruritus should be considered. Women can go on 
to develop ICP up to 15 weeks after a diagnosis of gestational 
pruritus.13 If itching continues for these women, they should 
be offered review with repeated liver function tests and bile 
acid measurement as clinically indicated. The frequency and 
duration of review and tests should be determined on an in -
dividual basis, but might be based around scheduled care. The 
gestational age is also relevant in determining test frequency, 
particularly later in the third trimester when a diagnosis of ICP 
may change care around the timing of birth (aiming to reduce 
the risk of stillbirth) [see Section  5.2]. Use pregnancy- specific 
reference ranges for liver function tests.6 [Evidence level 4]
Pruritus and biochemical abnormalities usually persist 
throughout pregnancy in women with ICP, although it 
is very common for them to fluctuate. However, in a few 
women, pruritus and biochemical abnormalities will re -
solve completely for the remainder of the pregnancy; clini -
cians may then need to reconsider the cause of the original 
symptoms and why resolution has occurred. There are 
many causes of transient liver function test abnormalities, 
such as drug reactions (e.g. to antibiotics) or non- specific 
viral illnesses. When resolution occurs during pregnancy, 
it is unlikely that the original diagnosis was correct. In dis -
cussion with the woman or pregnant person, ongoing care 
can usually return to normal, and decisions about timing of 
birth should be based on usual obstetric practice, although there should be greater caution if bile acid concentrations 
have been markedly raised (e.g. 100 micromol/L or more). 
[Evidence level 4]
4.2 | What is the role of other investigations 
in the care of women with suspected ICP?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Additional laboratory 
and/or imaging 
investigations are 
not recommended 
in every woman, but 
could be considered 
on an individual 
basis. Consider 
antenatal testing only 
if there are atypical 
clinical symptoms, 
presence of relevant 
comorbidities, 
or early onset 
severe ICP. 
Consider postnatal 
investigations in 
women in whom 
resolution of 
abnormal liver 
function tests is 
delayed or does not 
occur2+ C A cohort study 
showed that 
the likelihood 
that routine 
investigations 
would identify 
other causes of the 
clinical picture was 
extremely low
Previous RCOG guidelines14 have recommended rou -
tine laboratory and imaging investigations to exclude 
other causes for the clinical picture of ICP, including 
viral and autoimmune tests and liver ultrasound. A re -
cent retrospective review of over 500 pregnant women 
with raised bile acid concentrations suggests that the 
likelihood of identifying a viral, autoimmune, or struc -
tural cause for the itching and liver derangement that 
was not suspected on other clinical grounds is extremely 
low as no new diagnoses were made following investi -
gations.15 Therefore, routine use of other investigations 
is no longer recommended. The UK National Screening 
Committee does not recommend routine screening for 
hepatitis C in pregnancy due to lack of evidence of ben -
efit16; the same uncertainties apply to pregnant women 
with ICP. Routine hepatitis C testing is therefore not cur -
rently recommended in women with suspected or proven 
ICP. Additional investigations (including for hepatitis 
C) should be considered in women and pregnant people 
with an atypical or uncertain picture of ICP. This may 
include women with markedly elevated transaminases, 
early onset of ICP in the first or second trimester, a rap -
idly progressive biochemical picture, any features of liver 
failure or evidence of acute infection, or if resolution does 
not occur after birth. [Evidence level 2+]
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e99
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
Three cohort studies of 223 women,17 531 women15 and 
745 women18 with ICP who had routine coagulation testing 
reported no cases of prolonged prothrombin time in women 
with uncomplicated clinical presentations. The small num -
ber of abnormal results were in women with alternative di -
agnoses (such as acute fatty liver of pregnancy). Coagulation 
testing is therefore not recommended routinely for women 
and pregnant people with uncomplicated ICP. It should be 
considered on an individual basis especially when failure of 
liver synthetic function or failure of fat absorption is sus -
pected. [Evidence level 2+]
4.3 | When should specialist hepatology 
advice be sought?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Consider 
discussing the 
care of women 
with severe, very 
early or atypical 
presentation of 
what appears to 
be ICP with a 
hepatologist4 D It is good practice 
to discuss 
complex or 
unusual cases 
with relevant 
specialists
Women who develop pruritus and abnormalities in 
liver function and bile acids in the first or second trimes -
ter and especially in the first trimester are more likely to 
have an underlying genetic predisposition or an alterna -
tive or additional diagnosis. Input from a hepatologist 
and/or a clinician with a special interest in cholestasis to 
discuss investigations and treatment options should be 
considered. A postnatal referral should also be considered 
for women and pregnant people who do not have reso -
lution of itch and biochemical abnormalities after birth. 
[Evidence level 4]
4.4 | What is the usual postnatal resolution?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Confirm the 
diagnosis of ICP 
in the postnatal 
period at least 
4 weeks after birth, 
with resolution 
of itching and 
liver function 
tests returning to 
normal (including 
bile acids)4 D It is good practice 
to ensure that 
women with ICP 
have appropriate 
follow upFor many women with ICP, itching will stop very soon 
after birth; in the majority it stops in the first few hours or 
days.
Liver function tests are non- specific and can become ab -
normal during birth. Alanine transaminase and aspartate 
transaminase are found in smooth muscle, breast and red 
blood cells and may be elevated for other reasons in the im -
mediate post- partum period. [Evidence level 4]
Women with ICP who have no other diagnoses are usu -
ally clinically well; liver function tests and bile acids should 
not be measured until at least 4 weeks after birth, to allow 
time for levels to return to a normal range.19 If the woman 
or pregnant person is clinically unwell, other or additional 
diagnoses should be suspected and liver function testing 
should be repeated sooner, as clinically indicated. [Evidence 
level 4]
5 | MATERNAL AND 
PERINATAL RISKS
5.1 | What is the maternal morbidity?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women 
with ICP that 
the predominant 
symptom is itching. 
This can be severe, 
may fluctuate and may 
markedly affect sleep2+ C It is usual clinical 
practice to discuss 
symptoms with 
women
Women with ICP 
may have a higher 
chance of developing 
pre- eclampsia or 
gestational diabetes. 
They should have 
blood pressure and 
urine monitoring, 
and testing for 
gestational diabetes 
according to national 
guidance1+ B It is important that 
women with ICP 
continue to have 
normal aspects of 
antenatal care
Itching is the main symptom of ICP. The itching is not 
specific to any single location; it is often generalised and may 
affect the palms of the hands and/or the soles of the feet; it 
ay vary in intensity.2 For women and pregnant people with 
gestational pruritus or ICP, there is poor correlation between 
severity of itch and level of bile acids,8 and regardless of the 
diagnosis, itch can be very severe for some women and may 
negatively impact their emotional wellbeing and mental 
health. The itching is often more pronounced at night, which 
can interfere with sleep. [Evidence level 2+]
Additional symptoms of cholestasis, such as dark urine 
and pale stools, are infrequently reported.4 Steatorrhoea 
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e100 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
may occur,20 and women with this symptom may have mal -
absorption of vitamin K. Jaundice is rare, affecting less than 
1% of women with ICP,15 and tends to be mild if it occurs. 
[Evidence level 2+]
The incidence of pre- eclampsia was higher in women 
with ICP (odds ratio [OR] 3.7 [95% CI 3.2– 4.3]): 12.2% 
of women with ICP had pre- eclampsia compared 
with 3.4% of women without ICP (228/1876 versus 
3385/94 386).7 As pre- eclampsia can be diagnosed at any 
gestation from the mid- second trimester, healthcare 
professionals should ensure that women and pregnant 
people with ICP receive ongoing blood pressure and 
urinalysis screening for pre- eclampsia alongside review 
for ICP.21 [Evidence level 1+]
In a meta- analysis of more than 5000 women with ICP, 
rates of gestational diabetes were higher in women with 
ICP (OR 2.4 [95% CI 2.1– 2.8]): 13.2% of women with ICP 
had already been diagnosed with gestational diabetes com -
pared with 5.9% of women without ICP (239/1806 versus 
5571/94 384).7 Additional testing for gestational diabetes is 
not currently recommended; risk assessment and testing 
for gestational diabetes should follow national guidelines.22 
[Evidence level 1+]
A large Swedish population- based study of 11 388 
women with ICP and 113 893 controls found that women 
who have had ICP had an increased likelihood of later 
being diagnosed with hepatobiliary disease (hazard ratio 
(HR) 2.62 [95% CI 2.47– 2.77]); 15% in women with ICP 
versus 6.3% in controls), predominantly due to gall -
stone disease (HR 2.72 [2.55– 2.91]; 11.6% versus 4.6%).23 
However gallstones are common, affecting 5– 25% of 
adults in high income countries,24 and it is unclear 
whether gallstone disease predates ICP in such women. 
[Evidence level 2– ]
The same study found an association between ICP 
and immune- mediated diseases later in life (HR 1.28 
[1.19– 1.38]; 7.2% versus 5.8%). These included diabetes 
(HR 1.47 [1.26– 1.72]; 1.7% versus 1.2%), thyroid disease 
(HR 1.30 [1.14– 1.47]; 2.5% versus 2.0%), psoriasis (HR 
1.27 [1.07– 1.51]; 1.4% versus 1.1%), inflammatory poly -
arthropathies (HR 1.32 [1.11– 1.58]; 1.3% versus 0.9%) 
and Crohn's disease (HR 1.55 [1.14– 2.10]; 0.4% versus 
0.3%), but not ulcerative colitis (HR 1.21 [0.93– 1.58]; 
0.6% versus 0.5%).25 Most of these conditions remain at 
low absolute incidence. The benefit of routine regular 
screening for these conditions is not proven in women 
and pregnant people after ICP and is not currently rec -
ommended. [Evidence level 2– ]
Women with ICP have a reported small increased 
chance of a subsequent diagnosis of other conditions, 
such as hepatitis C. The UK strategy for hepatitis C de -
tection is based on additional investigations on high- risk 
groups (e.g. those who have hepatitis B) and does not at 
present include women with current or previous ICP.26 
In general, after an episode of ICP women do not require 
additional screening nor follow up.5.2 | What is the risk of stillbirth?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women with isolated 
ICP and a singleton 
pregnancy that the risk of 
stillbirth only increases 
above population rate 
once their serum bile 
acid concentration is 
100 micromol/L or more: 
• In women with peak bile 
acids 19– 39 micromol/L 
and no other risk factors, 
advise them that the risk 
of stillbirth is similar to 
the background risk.
• In women with peak bile 
acids 40– 99 micromol/L 
and no other risk factors, 
advise them that the risk 
of stillbirth is similar 
to the background 
risk until 38– 39 weeks' 
gestation.
• In women with peak bile 
acids 100 micromol/L 
or more, advise them 
that the risk of stillbirth 
is higher than the 
background risk1+ A Demonstrated in 
the meta- analysis 
of 23 studies.
Advise women with ICP 
that the presence of risk 
factors or co- morbidities 
(such as gestational diabetes 
and/or pre- eclampsia and/
or multifetal pregnancy) 
appear to increase the risk of 
stillbirth and may influence 
decision- making around 
timing of planned birth2+ to 2– D Reported in 
retrospective 
cohort studies
Advise women with ICP and 
a twin pregnancy that the 
risk of stillbirth is higher 
compared with a twin 
pregnancy without ICP2– D Reported in a 
retrospective 
cohort study from 
China.
Stillbirth remains the major concern for women and 
pregnant people with ICP and for their healthcare prac -
titioners. A large systematic review and individual patient 
data meta- analysis of women with ICP reported that, for 
singleton pregnancies, the risk of stillbirth only increased 
above population rate once serum bile acid concentrations 
were 100 micromol/L or more ( Table  2).7
The national stillbirth rates from 28 weeks' gestation for 
2015 for countries contributing to these ICP data varied 
from 0.18% to 0.72% depending on country; the UK still -
birth rate was 0.29%.7
The pathophysiology of stillbirth in ICP is uncertain, but 
it is thought that bile acids may cause an acute fetal anoxic 
event possibly due to fetal arrhythmia27 or acute placental 
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e101
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
vessel spasm.28 In singleton pregnancies, stillbirth was as -
sociated with peak total bile acid concentration but not with 
alanine transaminase.7 [Evidence level 1+]
A 12- month UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS) 
study in 2010– 2011 reviewed 669 cases of ICP in singleton 
pregnancy with bile acids 40 micromol/L or more across 
the UK which included 10 stillbirths.29 Of these, seven had 
coexistent pregnancy complications (three had gestational 
diabetes; two had pre- eclampsia; two had non- specified 
complications). These differences remained significant 
against national data and suggest that women with ICP 
and other comorbidities warrant additional surveillance. 
[Evidence level 2+]
The aetiology of adverse perinatal outcomes, including 
stillbirth, in multifetal pregnancies is multifactorial. The 
risk of stillbirth in multifetal pregnancies is higher than in 
singleton pregnancies.30 [Evidence level 2– ]
One retrospective cohort study from China specifically 
evaluated ICP in twin pregnancies.31 They reviewed 129 twin 
pregnancies complicated with ICP and 1793 twin pregnan -
cies without ICP (2006– 2014). There was an increased risk of 
stillbirth in twin pregnancies with ICP compared with twin 
pregnancy without ICP (3.9% versus 0.8%, aOR 5.75 [95% 
CI 2.00– 16.6]). This was further stratified as a stillbirth risk 
of 3.3% in women with bile acids of 10– 39 micromol/L and 
5.1% in women with bile acids of 40 micromol/L or more. 
Stillbirths with ICP in twin pregnancies occurred between 
33– 35 weeks' gestation, compared to 36– 38 weeks' gestation 
among singletons. [Evidence level 2– ]
5.3 | What is the risk of perinatal 
morbidity?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women with 
moderate or severe 
ICP that they have 
a higher chance of 
both spontaneous and 
iatrogenic preterm birth1+ A Demonstrated in the 
meta- analysis of 23 
studiesRecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women with 
moderate or severe 
ICP that they have 
an increased chance 
of having meconium 
stained amniotic fluid 
during labour and birth1+ A Demonstrated in the 
meta- analysis of 23 
studies
Advise women with 
moderate or severe 
ICP that their baby is 
more likely to receive 
neonatal care1+ A Demonstrated in the 
meta- analysis of 23 
studies
In the meta- analysis of more than 5000 women with ICP, 
women with bile acids ≥40 micromol/L had an increased 
overall risk of both spontaneous preterm birth (OR 3.47 
[95% CI 3.06– 3.95]) and iatrogenic preterm birth (OR 3.65 
[1.94– 6.85]),7 the latter likely reflecting the policy of ‘active 
management’ with planned early birth (despite a limited ev -
idence base for this approach).32 The percentage of women 
with singleton pregnancies who gave birth before 37 weeks 
increased with increasing bile acid concentration: 16.5% 
of women with bile acids below 40 micromol/L (373/2264), 
19.1% of women with bile acids 40– 99 micromol (261/1368), 
and 30.5% of women with bile acids 100 micromol/L or more 
(157/514). The majority of multifetal pregnancies were born 
preterm.7 [Evidence level 1+]
In the same meta- analysis of more than 5000 women 
with ICP, there was an increased chance of meconium 
stained amniotic fluid (of any grade) in women with 
ICP: OR 2.60 (95% CI 1.62– 4.16).7 The 2010– 2011 UKOSS 
study of 713 women with bile acids 40 micromol/L or 
more found that these women had meconium stained 
amniotic fluid at lower gestational ages, and more com -
monly at 35– 38 weeks, when compared with women with -
out ICP.29 The presence of meconium stained amniotic 
fluid in labour should be managed using national guid -
ance.33 [Evidence level 1+]
ICP is associated with a small increase in admission to 
the neonatal unit: OR 1.47 (95% CI 1.03– 2.10).7 There was, 
however, no difference in the rate of a neonatal 5 min Apgar 
score of less than 7,7 (which is associated with increased TABLE 2 Association between peak bile acid concentration and prevalence of stillbirth in singleton pregnancy (adapted from Ovadia et al.)7
Peak bile acid 
concentrationsPrevalence of stillbirth 
(with 95% CI)Absolute numbers of 
stillbirthsHazard ratio (with 
95% CI)
National UK stillbirth rate from 
28 weeks (2015)– 0.29%a– – 
Mild ICP Raised bile acids 
19– 39 micromol/L0.13% (0.02– 0.38%) 3/2310 Referent
Moderate ICP 40– 99 micromol/L 0.28% (0.08– 0.72%) 4/1412 2.35 (0.52– 10.50) 
p = 0.2642
Severe ICP ≥100 micromol/L 3.44% (2.05– 5.37%) 18/524 30.50 (8.83– 105.30) 
p < 0.0001
a95% confidence intervals not given.
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e102 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
neonatal morbidity and mortality): OR 1.41 (0.95– 2.10).34,35 
[Evidence level 1+]
The 2010– 2011 UKOSS study on 713 UK women with ICP 
(bile acids 40 micromol/L or more) showed that 45% of neonatal 
admissions were due to preterm birth, and 30% due to respira -
tory problems.29 Their study had a preterm birth rate of 25%, 
with a 15% rate of meconium stained liquor, but no cases of me -
conium aspiration. The median duration of stay in the neonatal 
unit was 7 days (IQR 2.25– 13.75 days).29 [Evidence level 1+]
6 | HOW SHOULD WOMEN WITH 
ICP BE MONITORED?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Review women 
with ICP within 
a consultant- led 
maternity unit4 GPP Women with 
ICP may be 
at increased 
likelihood of 
pregnancy 
complications
The frequency and content of monitoring for women and 
pregnant people with ICP should be determined in conjunc -
tion with the woman or pregnant person and based on the 
amount of discomfort or distress they experience, bile acid 
concentrations, gestational age and the presence of other mor -
bidities. This might incorporate review of diagnosis, discus -
sion of maternal and fetal wellbeing, treatment of pruritus, 
and need for further biochemical testing. [Evidence level 4]
6.1 | What maternal monitoring should be 
advised?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
For women with ICP, 
consider repeating 
liver function tests and 
bile acids after 1 week, 
and then determine 
frequency on an 
individual basis4 D Due to the 
unpredictable 
nature of ICP, it is 
good practice to 
offer monitoring
Maternal itch appears to be poorly correlated to the level of 
biochemical abnormality. For women with ICP, ongoing mon -
itoring of symptoms and biochemical monitoring may show: 
• rising bile acid concentrations, and if 100 micromol/L or 
more, the diagnosis of severe ICP,
• fall in bile acids concentrations into a more reassuring cat -
egory, such that frequency of monitoring and/or care can 
be altered accordingly,
• spontaneous resolution of itch and biochemical abnor -
malities returning to normal levels, in which case the di -
agnosis should be reconsidered [see above in Section 4.1 ],• Fluctuating bile acid concentrations but peak concentra -
tions within the boundaries for their current diagnosis. 
[Evidence level 4]
All women with itch and an initial raised bile acid level, 
should have a second bile acid measurement repeated around 
1 week later before any diagnostic or care decisions are deter -
mined, as it is common for women with bile acid levels over 
100 micromol/L and 40– 100 micromol/L to have subsequent 
bile acid concentrations that are much lower.8
The subsequent frequency at which women and pregnant 
people have biochemical assessment will be determined on 
an individual basis and according to the impact that the re -
sult might have on further care (see Section 8.1 ): 
• If the woman has mild ICP with peak bile acids 19– 39 mi-
cromol/L, they could have weekly testing as they approach 
38 weeks' gestation in order to inform timing of birth.
• If the woman has moderate ICP with peak bile acid 40– 99 mi-
cromol/L, especially if they are approaching 35 weeks' gesta -
tion, weekly testing should be considered, as timing of birth 
may be influenced if levels rise to 100 micromol/L or more.
• If the woman has severe ICP with peak bile acid 100 mi-
cromol/L or more, further routine testing of bile acids 
might not impact on decision making and therefore may 
not be routinely required. [Evidence level 4]
6.2 | What fetal monitoring should be 
advised?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Clinicians should 
be aware that fetal 
ultrasound and/or 
cardiotocography 
(CTG) do not predict 
or prevent stillbirth 
in ICP3 D Several case studies 
describe fetal death 
despite close CTG 
and/or ultrasound 
surveillance
Advise women with 
ICP to monitor fetal 
movements and 
present for immediate 
assessment at their 
local maternity unit if 
they have any concerns4 D Recommended in 
Saving Babies' Lives 
Care Bundles version 
2 (2019) for all 
pregnant women
In ICP, there is evidence that cardiotocography (CTG) 
monitoring or biophysical profile do not predict stillbirth. 
Several studies describe fetal death despite close surveillance 
and previously normal ultrasound scans (including fetal 
Doppler measurements), biophysical profile, and/or CTG 
monitoring.31,36,37,38 [Evidence level 3]
ICP is not associated with fetal growth restriction, with 
no difference in birthweight centiles compared with babies 
born to women without ICP,7 and therefore strategies for an -
tenatal monitoring for placental insufficiency are unlikely to 
be beneficial in women with isolated ICP. [Evidence level 3]
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e103
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
All pregnant women and pregnant people should be ad -
vised to monitor the quality and quantity of their fetal move -
ments, and report any reduction or change to their local 
maternity unit immediately, as recommended in national 
guidance. 1 Maternal detection of movements is simple and 
not time consuming for women or staff, but its specific role 
in monitoring pregnancies complicated by ICP has not been 
assessed. [Evidence level 4]
7 | WHAT IS THE ROLE OF DRUG 
TREATMENT IN THE TREATMENT 
OF ICP?
7.1 | What impact on maternal symptoms 
(itch), maternal biochemistry and fetal outcome 
can be expected?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women 
that there are no 
treatments that 
improve pregnancy 
outcome (or 
raised bile acid 
concentrations) 
and treatments to 
improve maternal 
itching are of 
limited benefit1+ A Systematic review has 
shown no clear evidence 
of maternal or perinatal 
benefit with treatments to 
reduce itching or adverse 
perinatal outcomes
The role of drug treatment in ICP is to try to reduce ma -
ternal itching (which may be of variable intensity and is un -
related to bile acid concentrations). There is no evidence that 
routine medical treatment improves maternal raised bile acid 
concentrations or perinatal outcomes.39 [Evidence level 1+]
Topical emollients
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Consider topical 
emollients such as 
aqueous cream (with 
or without menthol 
added) to ameliorate 
skin symptoms4 D Used in clinical 
practice, but not 
formally evaluated 
for evidence 
of benefit in 
reducing itching
Although there is minimal high- quality evidence to en -
dorse topical emollient treatment in women with ICP and it 
is not a disease- modifying drug, there is consensus that such 
treatment may relieve some of the discomfort associated 
with itching and has no known harmful effects. [Evidence 
level 4]Antihistamines
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Consider 
antihistamine 
agents, such as 
chlorphenamine, 
particularly at 
night although the 
effectiveness of 
this treatment is 
uncertain in women 
with ICP4 GPP Used in clinical 
practice, but not 
formally evaluated 
for evidence of 
benefit in reducing 
itching
Chlorphenamine has antihistamine properties and may 
have sedative side- effects in some women. The effective -
ness of the treatment is uncertain in women and pregnant 
people with ICP, and relief may be more related to its seda -
tive action than a direct effect. There is experience of using 
chlorphenamine in other conditions in pregnancy (such as 
hay fever) and harmful effects have not been reported. Other 
common antihistamine agents including loratadine and ce -
tirizine are also used in pregnancy for other indications but 
do not have sedative side- effects. [Evidence level 4]
Ursodeoxycholic acid
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Do not 
routinely offer 
ursodeoxycholic 
acid for the 
purpose of 
reducing adverse 
perinatal outcomes 
in women with ICP1+ A The largest randomised 
controlled trial of 
ursodeoxycholic acid 
showed no evidence of 
significant benefit
Evidence from randomised controlled trials shows that 
there is no reduction in adverse perinatal outcomes in women 
prescribed ursodeoxycholic acid, compared to women in the 
placebo group.39,40 No sub- group (e.g. based on maternal bile 
acid concentrations, or gestational age at presentation) was 
identified that might benefit. [Evidence level 1+]
There is a small (around 5 mm, on a linear 0 to 100 mm 
itch scale with 0 ‘no itch’ and 100 ‘worst imaginable itch’) re -
duction in maternal itch in women taking ursodeoxycholic 
acid.39 Women and clinicians considered that a reduction of 
at least 30 mm on the itch scale would be clinically relevant 
and worthwhile;40 the majority of women would therefore 
not consider this a useful treatment. It remains possible 
that some women's and pregnant people's itching may re -
duce with ursodeoxycholic acid, but it is not clear how such 
women might be identified. A recent secondary analysis of 
the largest trial could not identify a cohort based on bile acid 
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e104 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
concentration or itch score who would benefit.8 [Evidence 
level 1+]
A systematic review and individual participant meta- 
analysis of ursodeoxycholic acid in ICP included four ran -
domised controlled trials of over 800 women (of whom 183 
had bile acid of 40 micromol/L or more) with a primary 
outcome of stillbirth and a composite secondary outcome 
of stillbirth and preterm birth.41 Ursodeoxycholic acid had 
no impact on the primary endpoint. Spontaneous preterm 
birth under 34 weeks' gestation was not reduced (5/387 
women taking ursodeoxycholic acid versus 6/366 women 
taking placebo, aOR 0.75, 95% CI 0.23– 2.51, p  =  0 . 6 5 ) . 
Spontaneous preterm birth under 37 weeks' gestation was 
reduced in women taking ursodeoxycholic acid compared 
with placebo (18/387 versus 32/366 aOR 0.46, 95% CI 0.25– 
0.86, p = 0.015).
In women with bile acid concentrations 40 micromol/L 
or more who are 34– 36 weeks' gestation, ursodeoxycholic 
acid may offer some benefit in reducing late preterm birth. 
However, as with other circumstances where preterm birth 
occurs42 it is not clear that this reduction results in any ben -
efit to the baby. The optimal starting gestation and dosing 
regimen are unclear. Some women and pregnant people with 
bile acid concentrations of 40 micromol/L or more may wish 
to take ursodeoxycholic acid with a view to prolonging ges -
tation, but as this does not prevent stillbirth, the advantage 
of doing so may be less clear, especially for those with bile 
acids over 100 micromol/L.
In the largest trial, maternal bile acid concentrations 
were found to be higher in the group treated with ur -
sodeoxycholic acid,39 possibly as a result of standard 
laboratory assays being unable to distinguish between 
endogenous and exogenous sources. Ursodeoxycholic acid 
cannot therefore be recommended for the purpose of re -
ducing this biochemical marker of disease. In the same 
trial, women treated with ursodeoxycholic acid had lower 
alanine transaminase levels than those taking placebo, 
but the clinical implications of this are uncertain, as al -
anine transaminase levels have no association with still -
birth.7 [Evidence level 1+]
Other agents
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Do not offer 
other agents for 
treatment of 
ICP outside of a 
research study or 
individualised 
specialist 
treatment3 D In the absence of evidence 
of benefit, routine use of 
other treatments is not 
recommendedUse of rifampicin has been reported largely in single 
cases43 and by questionnaire survey of affected women,44 
but there is no evidence from randomised controlled trials 
to support its routine use in ICP. Further research is under -
way to evaluate its use in women with ICP.45 In women and 
pregnant people with early- onset severe disease, an opinion 
from a specialist in ICP should be sought before considering 
rifampicin treatment. [Evidence level 3]
7.2 | Is there a place for vitamin K use?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Consider maternal 
vitamin K treatment 
only if there appears to 
be reduced absorption of 
dietary fats (e.g. presence 
of steatorrhoea) and/or 
evidence of abnormal 
prothrombin time if 
coagulation studies are 
performed4 D Extrapolation 
from other 
clinical scenarios 
where dietary 
fat absorption 
is impaired, but 
routine use in all 
women with ICP is 
lacking an evidence 
base
The experience of experts is that the large majority of 
women with ICP will not have evidence of reduced fat ab -
sorption9 and routine use of vitamin K treatment is not in -
dicated. If women have symptoms such as steatorrhoea,20 
coagulation assessment should be performed and use of vi -
tamin K treatment considered (prescribed as a water- soluble 
formulation such as menadiol sodium phosphate at a dose of 
10 mg daily). [Evidence level 4]
8 | HOW SHOULD WOMEN BE 
ADVISED ON TIMING AND MODE OF 
BIRTH?
8.1 | Timing of birth
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Consider options 
of planned birth by 
40 weeks' gestation or 
ongoing antenatal care 
according to national 
guidance in women with 
mild ICP (peak bile acids 
19– 39 micromol/L) and 
no other risk factors; 
advise women that the 
risk of stillbirth is similar 
to the background risk1+ A Systematic review 
with individual 
patient data meta- 
analysis reporting 
risk of stillbirth, 
stratified by peak 
maternal bile acid 
concentration
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e105
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Consider planned birth 
at 38– 39 weeks' gestation 
in women with moderate 
ICP with peak bile acids 
40– 99 micromol/L and 
no other risk factors; 
advise them that the 
overall risk of stillbirth 
is similar to the 
background risk until 
38– 39 weeks' gestation1+ A Systematic review 
with individual 
patient data meta- 
analysis reporting 
risk of stillbirth, 
stratified by peak 
maternal bile acid 
concentration
Consider planned birth 
at 35– 36 weeks' gestation 
in women with severe 
ICP with peak bile acids 
100 micromol/L or more; 
advise them that the risk 
of stillbirth is higher 
than the background risk1+ A Systematic review 
with individual 
patient data meta- 
analysis reporting 
risk of stillbirth, 
stratified by peak 
maternal bile acid 
concentration
Advise women that 
the presence of co- 
morbidities (such as 
gestational diabetes, 
pre- eclampsia, multifetal 
pregnancy) appear 
to increase the risk 
of stillbirth and may 
influence decision- 
making around timing 
of planned birth2+ C Evidence 
from national 
surveillance case 
control study 
supported by 
other case series 
demonstrating 
increased 
stillbirth risk with 
comorbidities
Active care in ICP, usually referring to planned birth 
around 38 weeks' gestation, came into practice in many set -
tings, including the UK, despite inadequate evaluation of 
its benefit or an understanding of which women with ICP 
might be at increased risk of adverse perinatal outcomes. 
Previous studies had reported on cohorts of women with 
ICP, often after introduction of active care, and speculated 
that low stillbirth risk is related to such a policy,46,47 but few 
had evaluated prognostic factors to allow better stratifica -
tion to tailor timing of birth. [Evidence level 1+]
A large systematic review and individual patient data 
meta- analysis of women with ICP has reported that the 
risk of stillbirth is 0.13% in women with peak bile acids less 
than 40 micromol/L, which is not higher than background 
population risk.7 Although the risk of stillbirth remains 
low throughout gestation for these women, the benefits of 
continuing the pregnancy after 40 weeks' gestation may be 
outweighed by the risk, therefore it is reasonable to discuss 
with the woman or pregnant person whether they wish to 
continue the pregnancy or have a planned birth. [Evidence 
level 1+]The risk of stillbirth in women with peak bile acids of 40– 
99 micromol/L was 0.28%. This was not higher than over -
all background population risk,7 but did appear to increase 
at around 38– 39 weeks' gestation. Although the number of 
affected pregnancies is small and the confidence intervals 
wide, it is reasonable to offer planned birth at this gesta -
tion for women and pregnant people with peak bile acids of 
40– 99 micromol/L, or earlier if other comorbidities (such as 
gestational diabetes or pre- eclampsia) are present. [Evidence 
level 1+]
For women with peak bile acids 100 micromol/L or 
more, the risk of stillbirth is 3.44%, which is higher than 
background population rate, and the risk appears to in -
crease from 35– 36 weeks' gestation. This information 
should be shared with the woman or pregnant person and 
planned birth considered, based on other factors and the 
woman's preferences. This is in keeping with other studies 
using different methodologies, including a retrospective 
cohort study of 1 604 386 pregnancies assessing compos -
ite perinatal mortality risk48 and a decision modelling 
study concluding that 36 weeks' gestation was optimal.49 
[Evidence level 1+]
In women with ICP and peak bile acids 40 micromol/L 
or more, co- morbidities may be associated with a greater 
risk of stillbirth.29 The presence of and risks related to co- 
morbidities should be taken into account when considering 
the timing of planned birth. [Evidence level 1+]
8.2 | Mode of birth
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women 
that ICP in itself 
does not impact 
their choice 
around mode of 
birth and that 
these decisions 
should be based 
on usual obstetric 
practice for that 
woman2+ D Choices around mode 
of birth should follow 
routine obstetric 
practice
Women and pregnant people with ICP do not have in -
creased rates of assisted or operative birth compared with 
women without ICP.50 Mode of birth should therefore be 
based on usual obstetric or medical indications. If planned 
early birth is indicated, induction of labour should be con -
sidered unless other reasons for caesarean birth are present. 
[Evidence level 2+]
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e106 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
8.3 | Monitoring in labour
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
• Offer continuous 
electronic fetal 
monitoring (CEFM) to 
women with peak bile 
acids 100 micromol/L 
or more.
• There is insufficient 
evidence for or against 
CEFM in women with 
peak bile acids below 
100 micromol/L. A 
shared decision can 
be made based on 
co- morbidities and 
preferences.
Advise women that the 
presence of risk factors 
(such as gestational 
diabetes, pre- eclampsia, 
multifetal pregnancy) 
appear to increase the 
risk of adverse perinatal 
outcomes and that these 
conditions themselves 
may necessitate 
monitoring during 
birth or in conjunction 
with ICP may influence 
decision- making 
around monitoring in 
labour.
Advise women that 
meconium- stained 
liquor is more common 
in moderate and severe 
ICP, and that this will 
influence decision- 
making around CEFM4 D Recommendation 
based on 
extrapolation from 
assessment of fetal 
risk associated 
with stillbirth 
and other adverse 
perinatal outcomes, 
highlighted by 
systematic review
If the woman or pregnant person has existing obstet -
ric or medical conditions that influence decision- making 
around fetal monitoring in labour, these should be taken 
into account when planning intrapartum care. In women 
with mild ICP (peak bile acids 19– 39 micromol/L) and no 
other risk factors, intrapartum care can follow national 
guidelines.33 In women with moderate ICP (peak bile 
acids 40– 99 micromol/L), the decision should be made 
on an individualised basis, explaining that the benefit 
of continuous electronic fetal monitoring is uncertain; 
the presence of any other risk factors should be taken 
into account. In women with severe ICP (peak bile acids 
100 micromol/L or more), in light of evidence that there 
is a risk of adverse perinatal outcomes in these women, 
continuous electronic fetal monitoring should be offered. 
Women with moderate and severe ICP are more likely to 
have meconium- stained liquor, and this will influence 
the need for continuous electronic monitoring in labour. 
[Evidence level 4]8.4 | Analgesia in labour
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Offer women with 
uncomplicated ICP 
standard analgesia 
and anaesthesia 
options for birth4 D Choice of analgesia 
should be based 
on routine clinical 
practice
There are no studies that have indicated that women or 
pregnant people with ICP require different options for an -
algesia and anaesthesia for birth and national guidance 
should be followed.33 Three cohort studies of 223 women,17 
531 women15 and 745 women18 with ICP described above in 
Section  4.2, who had routine coagulation testing reported no 
cases of prolonged prothrombin time in women with uncom -
plicated clinical presentations. The small number of abnor -
mal results occurred in women with alternative diagnoses 
(such as acute fatty liver of pregnancy). [Evidence level 4]
8.5 | Third stage of birth
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women that 
there is no evidence 
of an increased 
risk of postpartum 
haemorrhage if they 
have uncomplicated 
ICP2– D Care of third 
stage should 
follow routine 
clinical practice
A case– control study (64 cases)50 and case- cohort study 
(348 cases)51 both showed no increased risk of postpartum 
haemorrhage in women with ICP. Standard care using na -
tional guidance for the third stage of birth should be fol -
lowed.33 [Evidence level 2– ]
9 | WHAT FOLLOW- UP SHOULD BE 
OFFERED TO WOMEN WHO HAVE 
HAD A PREGNANCY AFFECTED BY 
ICP?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
For women who have 
uncomplicated ICP, 
follow- up should be 
arranged at least 4 weeks 
after birth to confirm 
resolution of ICP. Advise 
them that they should 
anticipate itching and 
raised maternal bile acid 
concentrations to resolve 
after birth4 D Good practice to 
arrange follow up
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e107
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
In women who have had ICP, itch usually stops after 
birth, often in the first few days, and liver function tests and 
bile acid concentrations should return to normal within a 
few weeks. At postnatal follow- up, the healthcare profes -
sional should ensure that itching has resolved and should 
confirm that maternal bile acid concentrations and liver 
function tests have normalised. If itching or biochemical 
abnormalities persist beyond 6 weeks postpartum, consider 
other diagnoses depending upon the history and examina -
tion findings. Referral to a hepatologist may be required. 
[Evidence level 4]
9.1 | What advice should be offered for future 
contraceptive or hormonal options?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women that 
ICP itself does not 
influence their choice of 
contraception or hormone 
replacement therapy4 D Choice of 
contraception 
should follow 
UK Medical 
Eligibility 
Criteria 
(UKMEC) 
guidance
For women with 
ICP and previous 
cholestasis secondary 
to combined hormonal 
(oestrogen- containing) 
contraception, advise 
them to use progestogen- 
only or non- hormonal 
methods4 D This is in line 
with UKMEC 
guidance
In women with previous 
ICP requesting HRT, 
consider offering if 
there are no other 
contraindications to use4 D Extrapolated 
from UKMEC 
guidance on 
exogenous 
oestrogen use
As with all women and pregnant people, discussion about 
methods of contraception should begin during the antenatal 
period21 and continue in the early postpartum days.52 This 
should include the health benefits of spacing pregnancies, 
consideration of medical conditions and/or patient char -
acteristics affecting contraceptive choice (such as venous 
thromboemblism risk factors, breastfeeding, medical his -
tory), the reliability and benefits of long- acting reversible 
contraceptive methods, and the additional use of condoms if 
there is a risk of sexually transmitted infections and HIV.53 
[Evidence level 4]
The 2016 UK Medical Eligibility Criteria (UKMEC) for 
Contraceptive Use advises that copper- bearing intra- uterine 
devices, levonorgestrel- releasing intra- uterine systems, 
progestogen- only implant, progestogen- only injectable, and 
progestogen- only pill can be used without restriction in 
women with a history of ICP (UKMEC category 1).53Combined hormonal contraception can be used in 
women with ICP (UKMEC 2) provided they do not also 
have a history of contraception related cholestasis. It was 
previously thought that women with a history of ICP may 
have an increased risk of developing cholestasis when using 
oestrogen- containing hormonal contraception, but this is 
unlikely for the majority of women. The 2016 UKMEC states 
that in women who have had ICP the advantages of using 
these oestrogen- containing methods outweigh this theoreti -
cal risk (UKMEC category 2)53 and women may thus choose 
to use this method. Resolution of itching and liver function 
tests and bile acid concentrations returning to normal lev -
els should be confirmed before commencing this method. 
[Evidence level 4] Advise women to attend for review if recur -
rence of itch and abnormal liver function tests occur while 
using combined hormonal contraception, this would give a 
diagnosis of contraceptive- related cholestasis (UKMEC 3) 
and alternative contraception options should be discussed. 
[Evidence level 4]
For women with an atypical presentation of ICP, atypi -
cal postnatal clinical course, where other diagnoses are sus -
pected, or where itching and liver function tests have not 
resolved, a personalised approach to contraceptive choice 
should be undertaken, with provision of information about 
avoidance of pregnancy with active liver disease.
For menopausal women considering hormonal replace -
ment therapy (HRT), national recommendations should be 
followed.54 Current UKMEC guidance is that oestrogen- 
containing contraception can be used in women with a 
history of ICP. It therefore seems reasonable to offer the 
lower physiological dose of oestrogen found in HRT, with 
review of use if women develop itching or other signs of 
cholestasis.
9.2 | How should women be cared for in 
future pregnancies?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Advise women with 
a history of ICP that 
they have an increased 
chance of recurrence 
of ICP in subsequent 
pregnancies3 D Good practice to 
inform women 
of likelihood of 
recurrence
Perform a baseline 
liver function test and 
bile acid concentration 
with booking blood 
investigations3 D Good practice to 
establish baseline 
values
Women and people of reproductive age who have had a 
pregnancy complicated by ICP have an increased chance of ICP 
in a subsequent pregnancy compared to the general pregnancy 
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e108 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
population, but the precise magnitude of this is unclear, as 
quoted rates of recurrence are based on small studies (e.g. of 18 
women55 and 69 women56) and the results may not be general -
izable to a wider UK population with ICP. At booking in subse -
quent pregnancies, baseline measurement of liver function tests 
and bile acid concentrations should be performed in order to 
establish that these are normal. They should only be repeated if 
clinically indicated. [Evidence level 3]
10 | RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
FUTURE RESEARCH
• In women with ICP: 
⚬ Which maternal or fetal prognostic tools and/or mon -
itoring modalities predict adverse perinatal outcome 
(including preterm birth and stillbirth)?
⚬ Should women with ICP be tested for gestational dia -
betes (and by what method)?
⚬ What is an effective treatment for itching?
⚬ What is an effective treatment to prevent adverse peri -
natal outcomes?
• In pregnant women with raised bile acids, what is the nat -
ural history of bile acid concentrations without treatment?
• What is the ongoing risk of adverse pregnancy outcome in 
women whose bile acid concentrations normalise?
• What is the cause of itching in women without raised bile 
acids, and what is an effective treatment for their itching?
11 | AUDITABLE TOPICS
• Proportion of women with raised bile acid concentrations 
offered timing of birth in line with RCOG Green- top 
Guideline. (>90%)
• Proportion of women with uncomplicated raised bile acid 
concentrations having additional investigations routinely 
performed. (<10%)
• Proportion of women with raised bile acid concentrations 
offered ursodeoxycholic acid in line with RCOG Green- 
top Guideline. (<5%)
• Proportion of women with severe ICP (peak bile acids 
≥100 micromol/L) offered continuous electronic fetal 
monitoring during labour. (>90%)
These targets have been set in recognition of the need for 
individualised care particularly in women with comorbidi -
ties and atypical ICP.
12 | USEFUL LINKS AND 
SUPPORT GROUPS
• Information for healthcare professionals 
⚬ Maternal use of medication in pregnancy (UK 
Teratology Information Service) ( http://www.uktis.
org/html/mater nal_expos ure.html )⚬ http://www.uktis.org/html/mater nal_expos ure.html
• Information for women and families 
⚬ Research based charity and support group ICP Support 
(http://www.icpsu pport.org/ )
⚬ RCOG. Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy . 
Information for you ( https://www.rcog.org.uk/for- the- 
publi c/)
• Information for women and their families on use of med -
icines in pregnancy 
⚬ http://www.medic inesi npreg nancy.org/
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
JG, CLK and LC have declared no conflicts of interest.
FUNDING INFORMATION
All those involved in the development of the Green- 
top Guidelines, including the Guidelines Committee, 
Guidelines Committee co- chairs, guideline developers, 
peer reviewers and other reviewers, are unpaid volunteers 
and receive no direct funding for their work in producing 
the guideline. The exception to this are the RCOG staff 
involved who are salaried employees of the College and 
Guidelines Committee members who receive reimburse -
ment for expenses for attending Guidelines Committee 
meetings. Please see more information on travel expense 
rules on the RCOG website.
REFERENCES
 1. NHS England. Saving babies' lives care bundle version 2019 [cited 
2019 Aug 22]. Available from: https://www.engla nd.nhs.uk/wp- conte 
nt/uploa ds/2019/07/savin g- babie s- lives - care- bundl e- versi on- two- v5.
pdf
 2. Kenyon AP, Tribe RM, Nelson- Piercy C, Girling JC, Williamson C, 
Seed PT, et al. Pruritus in pregnancy: a study of anatomical distri -
bution and prevalence in relation to the development of obstetric 
cholestasis. Obstet Med. 2010;3(1):25– 9.
 3. Abedin P, Weaver JB, Egginton E. Intrahepatic cholestasis of 
pregnancy: prevalence and ethnic distribution. Ethn Health. 
1999;4(1– 2):35– 7.
 4. Geenes V, Williamson C. Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2009;15(17):2049– 66.
 5. Szczech J, Wiatrowski A, Hirnle L, Reich A. Prevalence and relevance 
of pruritus in pregnancy. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:4238139.
 6. Girling JC, Dow E, Smith JH. Liver function tests in pre- eclampsia: 
importance of comparison with a reference range derived for normal 
pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1997;104(2):246– 50.
 7. Ovadia C, Seed PT, Sklavounos A, Geenes V, Di Ilio C, Chambers 
J, et al. Association of adverse perinatal outcomes of intrahe -
patic cholestasis of pregnancy with biochemical markers: results 
of aggregate and individual patient data meta- analyses. Lancet. 
2019;393(10174):899– 909.
 8. Fleminger J, Seed PT, Smith A, Juszczak E, Dixon PH, Chambers 
J, et al. Ursodeoxycholic acid in intrahepatic cholestasis of 
pregnancy: a secondary analysis of the PITCHES trial. BJOG. 
2021;128(6):1066– 75.
 9. Williamson C, Geenes V. Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. 
Obstet Gynecol. 2014;124(1):120– 33.
 10. Mitchell AL, Ovadia C, Syngelaki A, Souretis K, Martineau M, 
Girling J, et al. Re- evaluating diagnostic thresholds for intrahepatic 
cholestasis of pregnancy: case– control and cohort study. BJOG. 
2021;128(10):1635– 44.
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e109
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
 11. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Developing a 
Green- top Guideline. Guidance for developers. London: RCOG; 2020.
 12. Walker I, Chappell LC, Williamson C. Abnormal liver function tests 
in pregnancy. BMJ. 2013;347:f6055.
 13. Kenyon AP, Piercy CN, Girling J, Williamson C, Tribe RM, Shennan 
AH. Pruritus may precede abnormal liver function tests in pregnant 
women with obstetric cholestasis: a longitudinal analysis. BJOG. 
2001;108(11):1190– 2.
 14. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Obstetric 
cholestasis: Green- top Guideline no. 43. London: RCOG; 2011.
 15. Conti- Ramsden F, McEwan M, Hill R, Wade J, Abraham G, Buckeldee 
O, et al. Detection of additional abnormalities or co- morbidities in 
women with suspected intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Obstet 
Med. 2019;13(4):185– 91.
 16. UK National Screening Committee. Antenatal screening for hepatitis 
C virus. 2018 [cited 2020 Jan 13]. Available from: https://legac yscre 
ening.phe.org.uk/hepat itisc - pregn ancy
 17. DeLeon A, De Oliveira GS, Kalayil M, Narang S, McCarthy RJ, Wong 
CA. The incidence of coagulopathy in pregnant patients with intrahe -
patic cholestasis: should we delay or avoid neuraxial analgesia? J Clin 
Anesth. 2014;26(8):623– 7.
 18. Lees J, Al- Rawi S, McPhee H, Southcoast Perioperative A, Research C. 
Coagulopathy in obstetric cholestasis in Wessex Deanery. Int J Obstet 
Anesth. 2019;37:130– 1.
 19. David AL, Kotecha M, Girling JC. Factors influencing postnatal liver 
function tests. BJOG. 2000;107(11):1421– 6.
 20. Reyes H, Radrigan ME, Gonzalez MC, Latorre R, Ribalta J, Segovia 
N, et al. Steatorrhea in patients with intrahepatic cholestasis of preg -
nancy. Gastroenterology. 1987;93(3):584– 90.
 21. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Antenatal Care. 
NICE guideline [NG201]. London: NICE; 2021.
 22. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Diabetes in preg -
nancy: management from preconception to the postnatal period. 
NG3. London: NICE; 2020.
 23. Marschall HU, Wikstrom Shemer E, Ludvigsson JF, Stephansson 
O. Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and associated hepa -
tobiliary disease: a population- based cohort study. Hepatology. 
2013;58(4):1385– 91.
 24. Gurusamy KS, Davidson BR. Gallstones. BMJ. 2014;348:g2669.
 25. Wikstrom Shemer EA, Stephansson O, Thuresson M, Thorsell 
M, Ludvigsson JF, Marschall HU. Intrahepatic cholestasis 
of pregnancy and cancer, immune- mediated and cardiovas -
cular diseases: a population- based cohort study. J Hepatol. 
2015;63(2):456– 61.
 26. Public Health England. Hepatitis C: interventions for patient case- 
finding and linkage to care. 2018 [cited 2020 Jan 13]. Available from: 
https://assets.publi shing.servi ce.gov.uk/gover nment/ uploa ds/syste 
m/uploa ds/attac hment_data/file/82933 1/Hepat itis_C_inter venti 
ons_for_patie nt_case- findi ng_and_linka ge_to_care.pdf
 27. Vasavan T, Deepak S, Jayawardane IA, Lucchini M, Martin C, Geenes 
V, et al. Fetal cardiac dysfunction in intrahepatic cholestasis of preg -
nancy is associated with elevated serum bile acid concentrations. J 
Hepatol. 2021;74(5):1087– 96.
 28. Sepulveda WH, Gonzalez C, Cruz MA, Rudolph MI. Vasoconstrictive 
effect of bile acids on isolated human placental chorionic veins. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1991;42(3):211– 5.
 29. Geenes V, Chappell LC, Seed PT, Steer PJ, Knight M, Williamson 
C. Association of severe intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy with 
adverse pregnancy outcomes: a prospective population- based case– 
control study. Hepatology. 2014;59(4):1482– 91.
 30. Cheong- See F, Schuit E, Arroyo- Manzano D, Khalil A, Barrett J, 
Joseph KS, et al. Prospective risk of stillbirth and neonatal complica -
tions in twin pregnancies: systematic review and meta- analysis. BMJ. 
2016;354:i4353.
 31. Liu X, Landon MB, Chen Y, Cheng W. Perinatal outcomes with intra -
hepatic cholestasis of pregnancy in twin pregnancies. J Matern Fetal 
Neonatal Med. 2016;29(13):2176– 81. 32. Henderson CE, Shah RR, Gottimukkala S, Ferreira KK, Hamaoui A, 
Mercado R. Primum non nocere: how active management became 
modus operandi for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 2014;211(3):189– 96.
 33. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Intrapartum care 
for healthy women and babies. Clinical guideline [CG190]. London: 
NICE; 2014.
 34. Iliodromiti S, Mackay DF, Smith GC, Pell JP, Nelson SM. Apgar score 
and the risk of cause- specific infant mortality: a population- based co -
hort study. Lancet. 2014;384(9956):1749– 55.
 35. Lai S, Flatley C, Kumar S. Perinatal risk factors for low and moderate 
five- minute Apgar scores at term. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
2017;210:251– 6.
 36. Kawakita T, Parikh LI, Ramsey PS, Huang CC, Zeymo A, Fernandez 
M, et al. Predictors of adverse neonatal outcomes in intrahepatic 
cholestasis of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2015;213(4):570.
e1– 8.
 37. Grymowicz M, Czajkowski K, Smolarczyk R. Pregnancy course in 
patients with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy treated with 
very low doses of ursodeoxycholic acid. Scand J Gastroenterol. 
2016;51(1):78– 85.
 38. Baliutaviciene D, Zubruviene N, Zalinkevicius R. Pregnancy out -
come in cases of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol 
Obstet. 2011;112(3):250– 1.
 39. Chappell LC, Bell JL, Smith A, Linsell L, Juszczak E, Dixon PH, et al. 
Ursodeoxycholic acid versus placebo in women with intrahepatic 
cholestasis of pregnancy (PITCHES): a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2019;394(10201):849– 60.
 40. Chappell LC, Gurung V, Seed PT, Chambers J, Williamson C, 
Thornton JG, et al. Ursodeoxycholic acid versus placebo, and early 
term delivery versus expectant management, in women with intra -
hepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: semifactorial randomised clinical 
trial. BMJ. 2012;344:e3799.
 41. Ovadia C, Sajous J, Seed PT, Patel K, Williamson NJ, Attilakos G, 
et al. Ursodeoxycholic acid in intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: 
a systematic review and individual participant data meta- analysis. 
Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021;6(7):547– 58.
 42. Norman JE, Marlow N, Messow CM, Shennan A, Bennett PR, 
Thornton S, et al. Vaginal progesterone prophylaxis for preterm birth 
(the OPPTIMUM study): a multicentre, randomised, double- blind 
trial. Lancet. 2016;387(10033):2106– 16.
 43. Liu J, Murray AM, Mankus EB, Ireland KE, Acosta OM, Ramsey PS. 
Adjuvant use of rifampin for refractory intrahepatic cholestasis of 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2018;132(3):678– 81.
 44. Geenes V, Chambers J, Khurana R, Shemer EW, Sia W, Mandair D, 
et al. Rifampicin in the treatment of severe intrahepatic cholestasis of 
pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2015;189:59– 63.
 45. Hague WM, Callaway L, Chambers J, Chappell L, Coat S, de Haan- 
Jebbink J, et al. A multi- centre, open label, randomised, parallel- 
group, superiority trial to compare the efficacy of URsodeoxycholic 
acid with RIFampicin in the management of women with severe early 
onset Intrahepatic Cholestasis of pregnancy: the TURRIFIC ran -
domised trial. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2021;21(1):51.
 46. Wikstrom Shemer E, Marschall HU, Ludvigsson JF, Stephansson O. 
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and associated adverse preg -
nancy and fetal outcomes: a 12- year population- based cohort study. 
BJOG. 2013;120(6):717– 23.
 47. Kohari KS, Carroll R, Capogna S, Ditchik A, Fox NS, Ferrara LA. 
Outcome after implementation of a modern management strategy for 
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 
2017;30(11):1342– 6.
 48. Puljic A, Kim E, Page J, Esakoff T, Shaffer B, LaCoursiere DY, et al. 
The risk of infant and fetal death by each additional week of expectant 
management in intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy by gestational 
age. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2015;212(5):667.e1– 5.
 49. Lo JO, Shaffer BL, Allen AJ, Little SE, Cheng YW, Caughey AB. 
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and timing of delivery. J Matern 
Fetal Neonatal Med. 2015;28(18):2254– 8.
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e110 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
 50. Webster JR, Chappell L, Cheng F, Breeze AC, Lucas N, Plaat F, et al. 
Operative delivery rates following induction of labour for obstetric 
cholestasis. Obstet Med. 2011;4(2):66– 9.
 51. Furrer R, Winter K, Schaffer L, Zimmermann R, Burkhardt T, 
Haslinger C. Postpartum blood loss in women treated for intrahe -
patic cholestasis of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;128(5):1048– 52.
 52. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Postnatal Care. 
NICE guideline [NG194]. London: NICE; 2021.
 53. Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare. UK medical eligibil-
ity criteria for contraceptive use. London: FSRH; 2016.
 54. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Menopause: di -
agnosis and management. NICE guideline [NG23]. London: NICE; 
2015.
 55. Shaw D, Frohlich J, Wittmann BA, Willms M. A prospective study 
of 18 patients with cholestasis of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1982;142(6 Pt 1):621– 5.
 56. Savander M, Ropponen A, Avela K, Weerasekera N, Cormand B, 
Hirvioja ML, et al. Genetic evidence of heterogeneity in intrahepatic 
cholestasis of pregnancy. Gut. 2003;52(7):1025– 9.SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information can be found 
online in the Supporting Information section at the 
end of this article. How to cite this article: Girling J, 
Knight CL, Chappell L; on behalf of the Royal College 
of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Intrahepatic 
cholestasis of pregnancy. BJOG. 2022;129(13):e95– e114. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1471-0528.17206
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e111
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
APPENDIX 1
Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed state-
ments which assist clinicians and patients in making deci-
sions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’ . 
Each guideline is systematically developed using a standard-
ised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found 
in Clinical Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG 
Green- top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green - top- devel opment). These recom-
mendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of 
management or treatment. They must be evaluated with refer -
ence to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique 
to the institution and variations in local populations. It is hoped 
that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these 
guidelines into routine practice. Attention is drawn to areas of 
clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the 
scheme below and the recommendations formulated in a 
similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
Classification of evidence levels
1++ High- quality meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a very low 
risk of bias
1+ Well- conducted meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a low risk 
of bias
1– Meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of bias
2++ High- quality systematic reviews of case– control or cohort studies or high- quality
case– control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a
high probability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well- conducted case– control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance
and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case– control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a
significant risk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non- analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series
4 Expert opinion
Grades of Recommendation
Grade of Recommendation: A At least one meta- analysis, systematic reviews or RCT rated as 1++, and directly applicable to the target 
population; or a systematic review of RCTs or a body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, 
directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results
Grade of Recommendation: B A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population, and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
Grade of Recommendation: C A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating 
overall consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
Grade of Recommendation: D Evidence level 3 or 4; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good Practice Points
Grade of Recommendation: ✓ Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e112 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
APPENDIX 2
Flowchart for the care of pregnant women with itching
Pregnant woman with itching
Skin abnorma l Skin normal / 
scratch marks only
Bile acid concentrations
≥40 micromol/lBile acid concentrations
19–39 micromol/lBile acid concentrations 
<19 micromol/lNOT IC P
Consider other diagnoses 
according to clinical contex t
GESTATIONAL PRURITUS
Retest if ongoing itch; bile acids 
may increase and the woman 
develop ICP.
No effect on stillbirth. 
No impact on preterm birth.
No impact on birth timing .MILD ICP 
Retest as clinically indicated if 
ongoing itch; bile acids may increase 
and the woman develop moderate / 
severe ICP .
No effect on stillbirth .
16% preterm birth rate .
Consider birth by 40 weeks .ICP (moderate / severe) most 
likely diagnosi s
Review as clinically indicated, 
with repeat bile acid 
concentrations to assess 
trajectory
Bile acid concentrations
40–99 micromol/lBile acid concentrations
≥100 micromol/l
MODERATE ICP 
Stillbirth risk similar to general 
population until 38–39 weeks.
19% preterm birth rate .
Consider birth by 38–39 weeks.SEVERE IC P
Stillbirth risk higher than 
general population at 35-36 
weeks .
30% preterm birth rate.
Consider birth by 35-36 weeks.
Figures above relate to singleton pregnancy with no other risk factors .
Comorbidities (particularly pre-eclampsia and diabetes) or other obstetric risk factors (such as multifetal pregnancy), 
are associated with increased risk of stillbirth and should be taken into consideration when planning management .
Additional liver investigations may be considered in women with atypical features (e.g. early onset, marked 
transaminitis, jaundice, fever, or in whom postpartum resolution does not occur). These investigations may include liver 
ultrasound, viral hepatitis screen, liver autoimmune tests, and/or coagulation screen.Check bile acids and 
liver function tests
Structured history and examination: consider other causes / diagnoses.
Additional liver investigations not routinely indicated; 
consider if atypical features .
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | e113
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY 
APPENDIX 3
Summary of care for pregnant women with itching and normal skin
Otherwise uncomplicated low risk singleton pregnancya
Itching with normal skin/excoriations
Peak total BA concentration, micromol/L
<19 micromol/L 19– 39 micromol/L 40– 99 micromol/L ≥100 micromol/L
Initial diagnosis Pruritus gravidarum Mild ICP Moderate Severe ICP
Structured history and examination, no additional or alternative causes identified
If itch persists, frequency 
of BA1– 2 weekly 1– 2 weekly 1– 2 weekly Only if will impact care 
plans
Risk of stillbirth compared 
with general obstetric 
population [0.18– 0.75]Unchanged Unchanged 0.13% Unchanged until 39 weeks, 
0.28%Raised, 3.44%
Timing of mode of birth No impact Consider planned birth by 
40 weeksConsider planned birth at 
38– 39 weeksConsider planned birth at 
35– 36 weeks
Preterm birth rate, 
spontaneous and 
iatrogenicUnchanged 16% 19% 30%
Role for routine use of 
UDCANo No No impact on stillbirth No impact on stillbirth
Additional liver 
investigationsbNot indicated routinely. Consider for women with atypical features (e.g. early onset, marked tranaminitis, jaundice, 
fever, or in whom postpartum resolution does not occur)
a For pregnancies with other obstetric or medical conditions, these should be taken into consideration when deciding management options.
b Such as liver ultrasound, viral hepatitis screen, liver autoimmune tests. ICP, intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy; UDCA, ursodeoxyxholic acid.
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
e114 | 
GREEN-TOP GUIDELINE NO. 43
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educa -
tional aid to good clinical practice. They present 
recognised methods and techniques of clinical 
practice, based on published evidence, for consid -
eration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and 
other relevant health professionals. The ultimate 
judgement regarding a particular clinical proce -
dure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor 
or other attendant in the light of clinical data pre -
sented by the patient and the diagnostic and treat -
ment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike pro -
tocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they 
are not intended to be prescriptive directions de -
fining a single course of management. Departure 
from the local prescriptive protocols or guidelines 
should be fully documented in the patient's case 
notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.This guideline was produced on behalf of the 
Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists by: 
Miss J Girling FRCOG, London; Dr CL Knight 
MRCOG, London; Professor L Chappell FRCOG, 
London.
and peer reviewed by: Dr EA Bonney MRCOG, 
Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds; Dr 
J Allison MRCOG, NHS Fife, Kirkcaldy; Dr G 
Sayed FRCOG, Hamad Medical Corporation, 
Qatar; Dr D Fraser FRCOG, Norfolk and Norwich 
Universitiy Hospitals NHS Trust, Norwich; C 
Ovadia MRCOG, King's College London, London; 
C Williamson FRCS FMedSci, King's College 
London, London; A Ikomi, Mid and South Essex 
NHS Trust, Billericay; Dr T Everett MRCOG, 
Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds; ICP 
Support; The Royal College of Midwives; UK 
National Screening Committee; British Maternal 
and Fetal Medicine Society.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr B Magowan 
FRCOG, Melrose and Dr MA Ledingham FRCOG, 
Glasgow.
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: 
Dr B Magowan FRCOG, Melrose and Dr MA 
Ledingham FRCOG, Glasgow.
The final version is the responsibility of the 
Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.The guideline will be considered for update 3 years after 
publication, with an intermediate assessment of the need to 
update 2 years after publication.This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College 
of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by: 
Miss J Girling FRCOG, London; Dr CL Knight MRCOG, 
London; Professor L Chappell FRCOG, London.
and peer reviewed by: Dr EA Bonney MRCOG, Leeds 
Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds; Dr J Allison 
MRCOG, NHS Fife, Kirkcaldy; Dr G Sayed FRCOG, Hamad 
Medical Corporation, Qatar; Dr D Fraser FRCOG, Norfolk 
and Norwich Universitiy Hospitals NHS Trust, Norwich; 
C Ovadia MRCOG, King's College London, London; C 
Williamson FRCS FMedSci, King's College London, London; 
A Ikomi, Mid and South Essex NHS Trust, Billericay; Dr T 
Everett MRCOG, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Leeds; ICP Support; The Royal College of Midwives; UK 
National Screening Committee; British Maternal and Fetal 
Medicine Society.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr B Magowan FRCOG, 
Melrose and Dr MA Ledingham FRCOG, Glasgow.
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr B Magowan 
FRCOG, Melrose and Dr MA Ledingham FRCOG, Glasgow.
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines 
Committee of the RCOG.The guideline will be considered 
for update 3 years after publication, with an intermediate as -
sessment of the need to update 2 years after publication.
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical 
practice. They present recognised methods and techniques 
of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consid -
eration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other rele -
vant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding 
a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be 
made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical 
data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treat -
ment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or 
guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to 
be prescriptive directions defining a single course of man -
agement. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols or 
guidelines should be fully documented in the patient's case 
notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
 14710528, 2022, 13, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17206 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [23/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License