# Extracted from: BJOG - 2024 - DeÂ Silva - Outpatient Hysteroscopy.pdf
# Guideline ID: bjog-2024-de-silva-outpatient-hysteroscopy
# Content length: 152141 characters
# Processing date: 1740444794.3629835

BJOG . 2024;00:1–25. | 1
 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bjoRCOG GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE
Outpatient Hysteroscopy
(Green-top Guideline no. 59)
Prathiba M. De Silva | Paul P. Smith | Natalie A. M. Cooper | T. Justin Clark | 
on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsDOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.17907 
© 2024 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.Key recommendations
• All gynaecology departments should provide a dedicated outpatient hysteroscopy 
service to aid care of women and people with abnormal uterine bleeding, repro -
ductive problems, and insertion/retrieval of intrauterine devices. [Grade A]
• Written information should be provided to the woman prior to their appointment. 
This should include details about the procedure, the benefits and risks, advice re -
garding pre- operative analgesia, as well as alternative options for care and contact 
details for the hysteroscopy unit. [Good Practice Point]
• Women should be made aware of other settings and modes of anaesthesia for hys -
teroscopy (e.g. under general or regional anaesthesia or intravenous sedation). 
[GPP]
• The woman should be advised that if they find the procedure too painful or dis -
tressing at any point, they must alert the clinical team who will stop the procedure 
immediately. The clinical team should alert the hysteroscopist if the woman ap -
pears to be in too much pain or is experiencing a vasovagal episode and therefore 
unable to voice the concerns so that the procedure can be stopped. [GPP]
• Women should be advised to take standard doses of oral non- steroidal anti- 
inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) one hour before their scheduled appointment.
• Vaginoscopy should be the standard technique for outpatient hysteroscopy unless 
the use of a vaginal speculum is required (e.g. for administering local cervical an -
aesthesia or dilating the cervix). [Grade A]
• When performing operative hysteroscopy, the smallest diameter hysteroscope 
should be used, with consideration given to the use of hysteroscopes with expand -
able outer working channels because they are associated with less pain. [Grade B]
• Mechanical hysteroscopic tissue removal systems should be preferred over minia -
ture bipolar electrodes to remove endometrial polyps. [Grade A]
• Local anaesthesia should not be routinely administered prior to outpatient hys -
teroscopy where a vaginoscopic approach is used. It should be considered where 
use of a vaginal speculum is planned e.g. for cervical dilatation if anticipated, due 
to either cervical stenosis and/or the utilisation of larger- diameter hysteroscopes 
(≥5mm outer diameter). [Grade A]
• Saline should be instilled at the lowest possible pressure to achieve a satisfactory 
view. [Grade A]
• Conscious sedation should not be routinely used in outpatient hysteroscopic pro -
cedures. [Grade B]Correspondence
Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, 10–18 Union Street, London 
SE1 1SZ.
Email: clinicaleffectiveness@rcog.org.uk
This is the second edition of this guideline. 
The first edition of the guideline was published 
under the Best Practice in Outpatient 
Hysteroscopy title in 2011. 
2 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
1 | PURPOSE AND SCOPE
The aim of this guideline is to provide clinicians with up 
to date, evidence- based information regarding outpatient 
hysteroscopy, with particular reference to minimising pain 
and optimising the experience of the woman or person. 
The scope has been widened since the first edition to cover 
operative outpatient hysteroscopy, prevention of infection, 
training, and documentation. This guideline should be read 
in conjunction with the RCOG Good Practice Paper No. 16 
Pain Relief and Informed Decision Making for Outpatient 
Hysteroscopy .1
It is important to acknowledge that it is not only women 
for whom it is necessary to access women's health and re -
productive services in order to maintain their gynaecolog -
ical health and reproductive wellbeing. Gynaecological and 
obstetric services and delivery of care must therefore be ap -
propriate, inclusive and sensitive to the needs of those in -
dividuals whose gender identity does not align with the sex 
recorded at birth.
2 | INTRODUCTION AND 
BACKGROUND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Outpatient hysteroscopy is an established diagnostic and 
therapeutic procedure,2- 4 widely used across the UK.5- 7 
The procedure involves the use of miniaturised endoscopic 
equipment to directly visualise the uterine cavity, without 
the need for intravenous sedation or regional/general an -
aesthesia necessitating the use of formal theatre facilities.8 
However, women or people should be made aware of other 
settings and modes of anaesthesia for hysteroscopy (e.g. 
procedure under general or regional anaesthesia, intrave -
nous sedation) as an alternative to outpatient hysteroscopy. 
Outpatient hysteroscopy is indicated primarily in the assess -
ment of women or people with abnormal uterine bleeding2- 4 
but is also employed in the diagnostic work up of reproduc -
tive problems. Advances in endoscopic technology and an -
cillary instrumentation have facilitated the development of 
operative hysteroscopic procedures in an outpatient setting 
with or without the use of local anaesthesia. Common pro -
cedures include endometrial polypectomy,7,9,10 removal of 
submucous fibroids,11 endometrial ablation,12- 15 removal of 
chronic retained products of conception16 and retrieval of 
lost intrauterine devices.17
Outpatient hysteroscopy, whether diagnostic2,18 or opera -
tive7,9–17 is successful, safe and well tolerated by most women. 
However, as with any procedure requiring instrumentation 
of the uterus, outpatient hysteroscopy can be associated 
with significant pain,19,20 anxiety and embarrassment.21,22 This not only impacts upon the satisfaction of women with 
their experience, but also limits the feasibility and possibly 
the safety, accuracy and effectiveness of the procedure. In 
order to minimise pain and discomfort, variations in hys -
teroscopic equipment, adaptations in technique and use of 
pharmacological agents have been advocated. This guideline 
assesses these components along with issues relating to opti -
mal service provision.
3 | IDENTIFICATION AND 
ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE
Four databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, Cochrane) 
were systematically searched from inception to March 2023. 
No restrictions were placed on the searches in an attempt 
to reduce selection bias. The databases were searched using 
relevant MeSH terms and keywords. The main keywords 
used were ‘hysteroscopy’, outpatient’, ‘office’ and ‘ambula -
tory’ which were combined with the following words de -
pending upon the area of hysteroscopy being examined; 
‘analgesia’, ‘analgesic’, ‘local anesthetic’, ‘local anesthesia’, 
‘local anaesthetic’, ‘local anaesthesia’, ‘local infiltration’, 
‘tetracaine’, ‘procaine’, ‘prilocaine’, ‘lidocaine’, ‘ethyl chlo -
ride’, ‘emla cream’, ‘cocaine’, ‘bupivacaine’, ‘benzocaine’, 
‘sedation’, ‘sedative’, ‘hypnotic’, ‘tranquilizing agents’, ‘cer -
vical ripening’, ‘prostaglandin’, ‘estrogen’, ‘oestrogen’, ‘pro -
gestin’, ‘laminaria’, ‘mifepristone’, ‘dilapan’, ‘progesterone’, 
‘gestagen’, ‘cervical dilatation’, ‘cervical ripening’, ‘cervical 
preparation’, ‘cervix dilatation and effacement’, ‘no touch’, 
‘vaginoscopy’, ‘vaginoscopic’, ‘sodium chloride’, ‘carbon 
dioxide’, ‘glycine’, ‘mannitol’, ‘sorbitol’, ‘saline’, ‘dextrans’, 
‘glucose’, ‘distension media’, ‘distension medium’, ‘hystero -
scope’, ‘endometrial ablation’, ‘flexible’, ‘rigid’, ‘diameter’, 
‘size’, ‘angle’, ‘infection’, ‘sepsis’, ‘endometritis’, ‘antibiotic’, 
and ‘pyometra’. The results of the searches were systemati -
cally reviewed to include randomised controlled trials or 
systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials only, in 
order to capture the highest level of evidence for the basis of 
this guideline. The definitions of the types of evidence used 
in this guideline originate from the Scottish Intercollegiate 
Guideline Network (SIGN) methodology and developed in 
accordance with the standard methodology for producing 
RCOG Green- top Guidelines.23
Where possible, recommendations are based on, and ex -
plicitly linked to, the evidence that supports them. Areas 
lacking evidence are highlighted and annotated as ‘good 
practice points’ (GPP), which were agreed upon by consensus 
at the British Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy (BSGE) 
Ambulatory Care Network (ACN) Meeting, held virtually 
on Friday 18th June 2021.24
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 3
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
4 | SERVICE PROVISION
4.1 | What are the requirements for running 
an effective outpatient hysteroscopy service?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
All gynaecology 
departments should 
provide a dedicated 
outpatient hysteroscopy 
service to aid care of 
women or people with 
abnormal uterine 
bleeding, reproductive 
problems, and insertion/
retrieval of intrauterine 
devices.1+ A One randomised 
controlled trial (RCT)25 
showed that outpatient 
hysteroscopy provides 
quicker mobilisation and 
recovery, less time off 
work, less lost income and 
lower travel costs when 
compared to hysteroscopy 
performed under general 
anaesthesia, while 
maintaining equivalently 
high levels of satisfaction 
for the woman.
Outpatient hysteroscopy 
should be conducted 
outside of the formal 
operating theatre setting 
in an appropriately 
sized, equipped and 
staffed treatment room 
with adjoining, private 
changing facilities and 
toilet. This may be a 
dedicated hysteroscopy 
suite or a multipurpose 
facility.4 GPP An operating theatre 
environment is likely to 
provoke anxiety in the 
woman and negate the 
advantages associated 
with the outpatient 
setting.
There should be a 
minimum of two support 
staff consisting of at least 
one registered nurse and 
one healthcare assistant.4 GPP Staff should provide 
reassurance, explanation 
and support; one of the 
support staff should be 
dedicated to act as an 
advocate for the woman.1
An outpatient hysteroscopy service offers a safe, conve -
nient and cost- effective means of diagnosing and treating 
abnormal uterine bleeding, as well as aiding the manage -
ment of reproductive problems and insertion/retrieval of 
intrauterine devices.26 A randomised controlled trial re -
ported rapid mobilisation post- operatively (0 minutes [0–5] 
versus 105 minutes [80–120], P <0.001) and quicker recovery 
to pre- operative levels (2 days [range 1–2.7] versus 3 days, 
P<0.05) favouring diagnostic outpatient hysteroscopy com -
pared with traditional day- case hysteroscopy under gen -
eral anaesthesia.24 The same study demonstrated high and 
equivalent levels of satisfaction with outpatient hysteroscopy 
when compared to hysteroscopy under general anaesthesia. 
Women undergoing outpatient hysteroscopy also required 
significantly less time off work (0.8 days versus 3.3 days, 
P<0.001), lost less income and incurred lower travel costs.27 
[Evidence level 1+]
Outpatient hysteroscopy should be performed in an ap -
propriately sized and fully equipped treatment room. This 
may be a dedicated hysteroscopy suite or a multipurpose 
facility. Outpatient hysteroscopy can be associated with 
substantial anxiety21 and so the treatment room should be 
private and patient friendly, with a separate, and ideally adjoining, changing area with a toilet. Adequate resusci -
tation facilities must be available, as should a comfortable 
recovery area with refreshment making facilities. Access to 
on site or off- site decontamination facilities of an appropri -
ate standard is necessary. Outpatient hysteroscopy should 
not be performed in a formal, operating theatre setting be -
cause this environment is likely to provoke anxiety in the 
woman and negate the economic advantages associated with 
the outpatient setting. Music28,29 and the use of virtual re -
ality headsets30 have been shown to reduce the pain and/or 
anxiety associated with outpatient hysteroscopy. However, if 
these are to be used then units must ensure that communi -
cation with healthcare staff is not affected and be aware that 
such adjuncts may not be suitable for all women or people. 
[Evidence level 4]
Appropriate staffing levels are required and these will vary 
according to local circumstances (patient populations, num -
bers seen per clinic) and the type of service offered (concom -
itant pelvic ultrasound, pure diagnostic service or diagnostic 
and therapeutic service). In general, there will be a comple -
ment of ideally three, but a minimum of two, support staff, 
consisting of at least one registered nurse and one healthcare 
assistant. One of the staff members should act as an advocate 
for the women during the procedure to provide reassurance, 
explanation and support. Communication with the woman 
in this way may help alleviate anxiety. If the woman wishes 
for a partner or friend to be present during their appoint -
ment, this wish should be accommodated, unless infection 
control precautions prevent this.1 [Evidence level 4]
4.2 | What information should be provided 
prior to outpatient hysteroscopy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Written information 
should be provided 
to the woman prior 
to their appointment. 
This should include 
details about the 
procedure, the 
benefits and risks, 
advice regarding pre- 
operative analgesia 
as well as alternative 
options for care and 
contact details for the 
hysteroscopy unit.4 GPP Pre- procedural 
information is essential 
to allow women 
and people to make 
informed decisions 
regarding their care, 
which can be clarified 
and discussed further 
at the time of their 
appointment.1
Women and people 
should be made aware 
of other settings and 
modes of anaesthesia 
for hysteroscopy (e.g. 
under general or 
regional anaesthesia or 
intravenous sedation).4 GPP
Adequate, clear and simple, written information should 
be provided to the woman with the appointment letter, in 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
the preferred language for the woman where possible. This 
information should include the recommendation to take 
oral pain relief (see section  5) one hour before their sched -
uled appointment. It should also provide details about 
what the procedure entails, benefits and risks (including 
pain), and alternative options for care (e.g. alternatives 
to undergoing an outpatient hysteroscopic procedure) 
and pain- relief (e.g. inhaled analgesia, local anaesthesia 
etc.). Where simultaneous treatments are offered (‘see and 
treat’ services), it is important that this fact is reflected in 
the patient information to facilitate informed choice. In 
addition, the provided information should make women 
aware that there are alternative types of pain management 
(e.g. intravenous sedation, regional or general anaesthe -
sia) that they can choose if they have concerns about un -
dergoing hysteroscopy in the outpatient setting or if the 
procedure needs to be abandoned at the woman's request. 
Women and people should be aware that these alternative 
options can be discussed at their clinic appointment and 
that their hysteroscopy can be rescheduled to accommo -
date their preferred model of care and pain management 
as necessary.8
It is important to recognise that hysteroscopy can cause 
more pain and trauma for some women, but predicting such 
adverse experiences can be difficult. However, women should 
be made aware that an outpatient procedure may be more 
painful and traumatic for them if they have experienced:
• Faintness during their menstrual period because of pain
• Severe pain or anxiety during previous vaginal examina -
tions, including undergoing cervical smears
• Traumatic events especially sexual violence.
Women should also be provided with up to date local 
contact details, should they have any questions or concerns 
before their procedure.
If a woman attending her appointment is unaware that 
she has been referred for an OPH, then she should be given 
the opportunity to reschedule the hysteroscopy after being 
given written and verbal information, once she has had time 
to consider her options. Similarly, any woman who is un -
sure whether she wants to proceed with an OPH should be 
allowed more time to make a decision and offered a further 
appointment.
Units are advised to access the joint Royal College of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) and British 
Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy (BSGE) standards for 
further guidance,1 however, the information may vary ac -
cording to local circumstances and the type of service of -
fered. Women should be directed to, or provided with, the 
joint Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
(RCOG) and British Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy 
(BSGE) patient information on outpatient hysteroscopy, in 
the absence of adequate, contemporary local patient infor -
mation based on the RCOG patient information or to sup -
plement the local resources.314.3 | How should consent be obtained prior 
to outpatient hysteroscopy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Verbal and / or written 
informed consent 
should be given by the 
woman during their 
appointment, prior 
to hysteroscopy being 
performed.4 GPP This is considered 
good clinical 
practice.1
The woman should be 
advised that if they 
find the procedure too 
painful or distressing 
at any point, they 
must alert the clinical 
team who will stop the 
procedure immediate ly. 
The clinical team 
should alert the 
hysteroscopist if the 
woman appears to 
be in too much pain 
or is experiencing a 
vasovagal episode and 
is therefore unable to 
voice the concerns so 
that the procedure can 
be stopped.4 GPP This is considered 
good clinical 
practice.1
The clinical team should be mindful of the fact that ar -
rival of the woman or person at the clinic does not imply 
consent has been given for the procedure. The hysterosco -
pist is the responsible clinician and must be certain that the 
woman has had sufficient information and enough time for 
consideration to give informed verbal and written consent 
on the day of their procedure. Units should consider provid -
ing women with a pre- prepared written or electronic consent 
form for them to review before attending their appointment. 
Their appointment should be rescheduled if the women feels 
that they need more time to consider their decision, espe -
cially if they have not received or read the pre- procedural 
patient information prior to attending.1
The hysteroscopist must inform the woman that they are 
likely to experience period- like cramping and lower abdom -
inal pain during and/or after the procedure. However, the 
woman or person should be advised that if they find the pro -
cedure too painful or distressing at any point, then they must 
alert the clinical team who will stop the procedure immedi -
ately. The clinical team should alert the hysteroscopist if the 
woman appears to be in too much pain or is experiencing a 
vasovagal episode and therefore is unable to voice their con -
cerns so that the procedure can be stopped. The team should 
then make subsequent arrangements for the hysteroscopy 
to be rescheduled and to involve an alternative type of pain 
management (e.g. intravenous sedation, regional and gen -
eral anaesthesia) or consider alternative options for ongoing 
management in agreement with the woman.1
The RCOG and BSGE, in conjunction with NHS England 
and NHS Improvement “Getting it Right First Time 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 5
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
(GIRFT)” programme, have recently developed relevant 
standardised consent documents for outpatient hysteros -
copy, operative hysteroscopy and endometrial ablation.32- 34 
This should include the indication for the procedure, what 
it involves, any additional procedures that may be necessary, 
possible adverse effects, and the benefits and risks when 
compared to other alternative options for care, which should 
encompass other settings and modes of anaesthesia for hys -
teroscopy. [Evidence level 4]
4.4 | Should a pre- procedural safety checklist 
be performed prior to outpatient hysteroscopy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Completion of a 
safety checklist 
should be 
considered prior 
to outpatient 
hysteroscopy.4 GPP This can help ensure that 
essential information 
such as patient identity 
checks and allergy status 
is not missed.25
Pregnancy should 
be excluded in all 
women who are 
premenopausal 
and sexually active.4 GPP A urinary pregnancy 
test should either be 
undertaken routinely in 
women or people who 
are premenopausal and 
sexually active, or based 
upon the timing of their 
last menstrual period and 
history of unprotected 
sexual intercourse.1
Units should consider using a checklist (e.g. a specifically 
adapted World Health Organisation [WHO] surgical safety 
checklist35 or a locally developed outpatient procedure safety 
standard checklist) to make sure essential elements such as 
patient identity checks, allergy status and exclusion of preg -
nancy are recorded where appropriate.1 If the woman or per -
son declines to provide a pregnancy test and states that they 
are definitely not pregnant, their wishes should be respected 
should they want to proceed with hysteroscopy. While in -
volving women in a checklist can be empowering, for others, 
it may make the outpatient setting feel more like an operat -
ing theatre and induce anxiety. Units should therefore con -
sider how and when they complete the safety checklist prior 
to the outpatient hysteroscopy. In self- contained, enclosed 
clinical areas with adjoining procedure rooms and chang -
ing areas, safety checks can be completed with the woman 
during the pre- procedural consultation. If safety checks are 
undertaken in the procedure room, women should not be 
unnecessarily exposed during the process.
A urinary pregnancy test should either be undertaken 
routinely in women who are premenopausal and sexually ac -
tive, or based upon the timing of their last menstrual period 
and history of unprotected sexual intercourse.1 If unable to 
exclude a pregnancy, based upon recent unprotected sexual 
intercourse and the fact that it may be too early for a urinary 
pregnancy test to provide a reliable result, then the woman or person should be offered the chance for their appointment 
to be deferred. However, if the woman prefers to proceed 
with hysteroscopy, then this should be respected.
A checklist which captures the following information is 
suitable for use in outpatient hysteroscopy:
• Date
• Confirmation of identification (3 identifiers; e.g. name, 
date of birth, address)
• Discussion of alternative pain management and settings 
in which these will be offered (e.g. intravenous sedation, 
regional/general anaesthesia in a day- case theatre setting)
• Consent performed (verbal and / or written)
• Allergy status
• Exclusion of pregnancy (with urinary pregnancy test if 
applicable)
• Details of whether and what pre- procedural analgesia has 
been taken (including timing and dose). [Evidence level 4]
4.5 | How should care after outpatient 
hysteroscopy be provided?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Clinical findings, 
further care and likely 
timescales of results, 
where appropriate, 
should be discussed 
with the woman once 
they are changed and 
comfortable. A written 
summary of this 
information should be 
provided to the woman 
and their general 
practitioner (GP).4 GPP This is considered good 
clinical practice.1
Women should be 
provided with both 
verbal and written 
information as to when 
and how to contact 
their local unit.4 GPP This allows for the 
woman to be reviewed 
in the case of severe 
pain, heavy bleeding 
and/or signs and 
symptoms of genital 
tract sepsis.1
Units should have a 
dedicated recovery 
area with comfortable 
chairs/recliners 
and curtained off 
areas with bed(s)/
trolley(s). Access 
should be available 
to extended recovery 
when pain cannot be 
easily controlled, or 
complications have 
arisen during the 
procedure.4 GPP This allows for the 
woman's condition, 
comfort and pain 
control to be assessed 
and monitored, and 
analgesia be provided 
when necessary.1
Following the procedure, the woman or person should 
be given time to change back into their clothes for a post- 
procedure consultation, which should ideally take place 
away from the procedure area. The hysteroscopist should 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
6 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
explain the clinical findings and explain when and how his -
tological/cytological/microbiological results will be commu -
nicated, if appropriate. If further care is required, it should 
be discussed in light of the clinical findings, and the woman 
should be informed when and how this will take place. This 
information should be summarised and written copies given 
to both the woman and their general practitioner (GP).1 
[Evidence level 4]
The woman should be given post- procedural informa -
tion, ideally both verbally and written.1 This should include 
contact numbers (e.g. a direct line to the clinic and an out of 
hours contact number) should the woman have any problems 
or concerns over the next two weeks. In particular, women 
should be told to make contact if they experience abdominal 
pain not controlled with simple analgesia, bleeding heavier 
than a period, or symptoms/signs of sepsis (fever, rigors and/
or malodourous vaginal discharge). [Evidence level 4]
Women or people may prefer to leave after their post- 
procedure consultation without staying for a period of ob -
servation. However, recuperation and refreshments should 
be offered to all women in a dedicated recovery area with 
comfortable chairs/recliners and privacy (e.g. curtained off 
areas with bed(s)/trolley(s)). The woman's condition, com -
fort and pain control should be assessed, monitored and 
analgesia be provided when necessary. Access should be 
available to a longer duration recovery area when pain can -
not be easily managed or complications have arisen during 
the procedure.1 [Evidence level 4]
4.6 | How should training and standards 
in outpatient hysteroscopy be provided and 
assessed?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
A hysteroscopic 
training programme 
should include 
knowledge and 
understanding of both 
basic and advanced 
skills relevant 
to hysteroscopic 
procedures alongside 
aspects of clinical 
governance in 
hysteroscopy.4 GPP Hysteroscopists 
should be proficient 
in outpatient 
procedures and also 
have a thorough 
understanding of pre- 
operative planning, case 
selection and service 
development.
Simulation should 
be considered an 
important adjunct to 
hysteroscopy training.2++ B This allows 
hysteroscopists in- 
training to learn basic 
manoeuvres without 
impacting adversely on 
the woman's experience.
The RCOG offers a Special Interest Training Module in 
“Therapeutic Hysteroscopy” which requires competence in 
hysteroscopy.36 The European Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy (ESGE) has developed a diploma programme 
for laparoscopic and hysteroscopic skills training, known 
as the Gynaecological Endoscopic Surgical Education and 
Assessment Minimally Invasive Gynaecological Surgery 
(GESEA MIGS) Diploma, of which there are two hysteros -
copy modules of different levels of difficulty (Hysteroscopic 
Skills Training and Testing method [HYSTT® 1 and 2]).37 
These curricula not only cover hysteroscopic procedures but 
also pre- operative planning, case selection and service de -
velopment. [Evidence level 4]
Achievement of competency in outpatient hysteroscopy 
requires having the opportunity to undertake training in 
the clinical setting on women while they are awake. It is 
important to consider, however, that this may lead to a pro -
longed procedure time and in turn impact upon the woman 
or person's experience. Training packages have tried to ad -
dress this by using various models and simulators in order 
to improve psychomotor skills and performance. As illus -
trated by a systematic review on training and assessment 
of hysteroscopic skills, vegetables (e.g. potatoes, pears, but -
ternut squash etc.), animal organs (e.g. porcine hearts, pig 
bladders, cattle uteri, etc.) and synthetic models (e.g. HYSTT 
box trainer [European Academy of Gynecological Surgery, 
Leuven, Belgium]) have been used to simulate intrauterine 
pathology, allowing for the development of a variety of dif -
ferent hysteroscopic skills (e.g. fibroid resection, septoplasty, 
etc.).38 Virtual reality simulators (e.g. HystSimTM [VirtaMed 
AG, Zurich, Switzerland]) have a variety of pathologies and 
cases that the user can access, allowing for a standardised 
environment where data can be collected to allow an objec -
tive assessment of the trainee's performance.
Clinicians undertaking outpatient hysteroscopy clinics 
should have sufficient workload in the job plan to main -
tain competencies and enhance their skills. Clinicians are 
expected to review their clinical outcomes and participate 
in audits for quality assurance purposes (refer to Auditable 
Topics ).
5 | Analgesia
5.1 | What analgesia should be recommended 
prior to outpatient hysteroscopy and how should 
it be given in order to reduce the pain felt by 
women during and after their procedure?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Women or people 
should be advised to 
take standard doses of 
oral non- steroidal anti- 
inflammatory agents 
(NSAIDs) one hour 
before their scheduled 
appointment.1++ A Meta- analysis39 showed 
that NSAIDs are the 
only medication that 
have been shown to 
reduce pain both during 
and after hysteroscopy 
without an increase in 
side- effects.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 7
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Where NSAIDs are 
contraindicated (e.g. 
in certain asthmatics, 
women or people with 
renal impairment 
or gastric ulceration 
etc.) or declined, the 
use of transcutaneous 
electrical nerve 
stimulation (TENS), 
could be considered. 
Oral opioid or 
antispasmodic agents 
can be used for women 
with contraindications 
to NSAIDs, provided 
they are made aware 
of the increased risk of 
adverse effects.1++ A Meta- analysis39 showed 
that TENS reduced pain 
without an increase in 
side- effects. As these 
devices are not widely 
available, opioids and 
antispasmodics can be 
used instead, so long as 
women are made aware 
of the increased risk of 
drowsiness with opioids 
and vasovagal episodes 
with antispasmodics.
Women or people 
should be offered 
inhaled nitrous oxide 
(at an equimolar 
gas mixture of 50% 
nitrous oxide and 50% 
oxygen). Penthrox® 
should be considered 
for the reduction 
of pain associated 
with outpatient 
hysteroscopy.1+ B One RCT40 
demonstrated a 
reduction in intra- 
procedural pain with 
the use of inhaled 
nitrous oxide, although 
some women felt 
dizziness. One small 
RCT66 has comparing 
Penthrox® with 
placebo did not find a 
significant reduction 
in pain with the use 
of Penthrox® during 
diagnostic hysteroscopy 
but found a significant 
reduction in pain where 
subsequent operative 
procedures were 
undertaken, such as the 
excision of polyps or 
fibroids, the insertion 
of intrauterine devices 
or when an endometrial 
biopsy was taken.
A systematic review and meta- analysis39 identified 
twenty- two randomised controlled trials (RCTs)41- 62 exam -
ining the use of analgesics against a control prior to outpa -
tient hysteroscopy for the reduction of pain.
Meta- analysis showed a statistically significant re -
duction in intra- procedural (standardized mean differ -
ence [SMD] −0.72; 95% confidence interval [CI] −1.27 to 
−0.16)50,52,55,57,58,59,62 and post- procedural (SMD −0.55; 95% 
CI −0.97 to −0.13)50,52,55,57,59,62 pain when giving an NSAID 
compared to a control. Subgroup analysis showed that the oral 
route52,55,57,59,62 was associated with the greatest reduction in 
pain both during (SMD −0.87; 95% CI −1.59 to −0.15) and after 
(SMD −0.56; 95% CI −1.02 to −0.10) hysteroscopy. The NSAID 
was given one hour prior to the procedure55,57,59,62 in all but 
one52 study. There was no significant difference in side- effects 
(namely in the form of vasovagal reactions [e.g. nausea, vomit -
ing, sweating, dizziness, vertigo, bradycardia, hypotension]) in 
women randomised to NSAIDs or their controls (Peto OR 1.01; 
95% CI 0.52–1.98).46,47,49,52,57,59,62 [Evidence level 1++]There was a statistically significant reduction in intra- 
procedural (SMD −0.99; 95% CI −1.67 to −0.31)54,61 and 
post- procedural (SMD −0.54; 95% CI −0.95 to −0.12)61 pain 
when comparing TENS to a control. Reported side- effects 
were vasovagal episodes, but there was no significant differ -
ence between women receiving TENS or a suitable control 
(Peto OR 0.86; 95% CI 0.46–1.61). [Evidence level 1++]
A statistically significant reduction in intra- procedural 
(SMD −0.50; 95% CI −0.97 to −0.03)43,51,53,59 and post- 
procedural (SMD −0.73; 95% CI −1.07 to −0.39)43,59 pain was 
demonstrated when giving an opioid (given 40–60 minutes 
prior to commencing hysteroscopy) compared to a control. 
Women randomised to opioids were also significantly more 
likely to suffer from side- effects when compared to their 
controls (Peto OR 7.30; 95% CI 3.96–13.47),43,45,53,59 with 
drowsiness being commonly cited. [Evidence level 1++]
Meta- analysis showed a statistically significant reduc -
tion in intra- procedural (SMD −1.48; 95% CI −1.82 to −1.13) 
and post- procedural (SMD −1.02; 95% CI −1.34 to −0.69) 
pain55,62 when giving an antispasmodic one hour prior to 
hysteroscopy, compared to a control. The risk of side- effects, 
however, primarily in the form of vasovagal episodes, was 
significantly greater (Peto OR 11.34; 95% CI 3.96—13.47).62
Three trials40,63,64 have been published since the afore -
mentioned systematic review39 was performed. The first 
trial64 randomised postmenopausal women undergoing di -
agnostic hysteroscopy to tramadol or placebo, and was in 
keeping with the conclusions of the aforementioned system -
atic review. The second trial63 randomised women undergo -
ing diagnostic hysteroscopy and directed biopsy or operative 
hysteroscopy to either oral diclofenac, oral diclofenac and 
hyoscine, or placebo. Their findings contrasted slightly with 
the systematic review because a significant reduction in 
intra- procedural pain with oral diclofenac was restricted to 
women with a prior history of chronic pelvic pain ( P=0.04). 
The third trial40 evaluated the use of inhaled nitrous oxide (at 
an equimolar gas mixture of 50% nitrous oxide and 50% ox -
ygen, also known as Entonox®) compared to inhaled air and 
to a paracervical block using 1% lidocaine. Approximately 
one third of the 314 participants had a diagnostic hysteros -
copy and directed biopsy with the remainder undergoing 
operative hysteroscopy. A significant reduction in pain re -
corded 5–10 minutes after the procedure was demonstrated 
in women randomised to nitrous oxide compared to inhaled 
air alone ( P=0.001). No significant difference in adverse 
events ( P=0.26) was found between these groups (attributed 
to pain, anxiety and vasovagal symptoms), although it was 
noted that 5% of women reported dizziness with nitrous 
oxide. [Evidence level 1+]
There has been recent interest in using another inhala -
tional agent called Penthrox® (methoxyflurane) as an easily 
administered, short acting, pain control solution for ambu -
latory procedures like hysteroscopy. Penthrox® is anaesthetic 
agent which is self- administered through a custom- built 
handheld inhaler and is currently used for the relief of 
moderate to severe trauma- associated pain in emergency 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
8 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
settings.65,66 One small RCT has compared Penthrox® with 
placebo for the reduction of pain in outpatient hysteros -
copy. This RCT did not find a significant reduction in pain 
with the use of Penthrox® during diagnostic hysteroscopy 
(34.2 ±28.0 [n = 45] versus 43.2 ±29.8 [n = 44]; P = 0.05) on 
a 100mm visual analogue scale (VAS), but found a signifi -
cant reduction in pain (20.4 ±25.2 [n = 35] versus 34.6 ±30.1 
[n = 32]; P = 0.03) where subsequent operative procedures 
were undertaken such as the excision of polyps or fibroids, 
the insertion of intrauterine devices or when an endometrial 
biopsy was taken. The pain scores 15 minutes after hysteros -
copy were not significantly different in patients randomised 
to Penthrox® or placebo ( P > 0.05).67
6 | CERVICAL PREPARATION
6.1 | Should cervical preparation be used in 
order to facilitate outpatient hysteroscopy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Cervical preparation 
should not be used 
routinely.1++ A Meta- analysis68 
showed that vaginal 
prostaglandins reduced 
pain, although they 
are associated with 
genital tract bleeding, 
abdominal pain 
and gastrointestinal 
side- effects. The 
risk of failure and 
complications such as 
cervical trauma and 
uterine perforation was 
not reduced.
If vaginal 
prostaglandins are 
to be administered, 
they should be given 
12 hours before 
hysteroscopy. However, 
clinicians should 
consider the feasibility 
of administration, 
side- effect profile and 
alternative options 
(including the use of 
local anaesthesia and 
cervical dilatation).1++ A Two RCTs69,70 showed 
that giving vaginal 
prostaglandins 12 hours 
before hysteroscopy 
provided better pain 
relief than when given 3 
hours before.
Cervical preparation 
with vaginal 
prostaglandins can be 
considered in selected 
cases (e.g. where 
cervical stenosis is 
anticipated or there 
is need to dilate the 
cervix beyond 6mm to 
accommodate uterine 
instrumentation).4 GPP There is no robust 
evidence to identify 
specific groups of 
women or people who 
may benefit most from 
cervical preparation.
Uterine trauma (lacerations to the cervix or uterine perfo -
ration) is recognised with blind and endoscopic instrumen -
tation of the uterus,2,71,72,73,74 with an estimated incidence of perforation of 0.002–1.7%. The incidence of uterine trauma 
is low for diagnostic outpatient hysteroscopy performed 
with small diameter endoscopes (≤3.5mm outer sheath di -
ameter) under direct vision, however, cervical preparation 
has been historically used to dilate the cervix to facilitate 
easier hysteroscopic entry and reduce the risk of uterine 
trauma.2 Factors associated with uterine trauma include the 
need for blind dilatation beyond 6mm for intrauterine in -
strumentation (e.g. for the use of larger- diameter operative 
hysteroscopes), cervical stenosis (e.g. due to atrophy, cervi -
cal surgery, previous caesarean section, nulliparity), a tor -
tuous cervical canal (e.g. in association with fibroids) and a 
deviated uterine cavity (e.g. acute flexion, pelvic adhesions, 
fibroids).1,18
A systematic review and meta- analysis68 investigating the 
impact of cervical preparation on pain during hysteroscopy, 
identified twenty- four46,49,69,75–95 RCTs. Administration of a 
cervical preparation (between 3–24 hours prior), when com -
pared against a placebo, significantly reduced intra- procedural 
pain (SMD –0.67, 95% CI –1.05 to –0.29).76,77,79,81,84,87–90,92,93 
Subgroup analysis according to the agent given found that 
misoprostol (SMD –0.64; 95% CI –0.97 to –0.31),76,81,84,87–89,92,93 
and dinoprostone (SMD –2.24; 95% CI –2.75 to –1.74)90 sig-
nificantly reduced intra- procedural pain, however, mifepri -
stone (SMD  –0.13; 95% CI –0.65 to 0.38),77 and carboprost 
(SMD 0.09; 95% CI–0.02 to 0.20)79 did not. Subgroup analysis 
based on route of administration of misoprostol showed pain 
was only reduced during hysteroscopy when given vaginally 
(SMD –0.68, 95% CI –1.04 to –0.32),76,81,84,87,89 rather than 
orally (SMD –0.52, 95% CI –1.54 to 0.51).92,93 Subgroup analy -
sis based on menopausal status found that misoprostol reduced 
intra- procedural pain in premenopausal women (SMD –0.86, 
95% CI –1.18 to –0.54),76,81,84,87,92,93 but not postmenopausal 
women (SMD 0.10, 95% CI –0.30 to 0.51).88,93 Only two stud -
ies76,80 randomised women to different doses of cervical prosta -
glandins, where 400 micrograms of vaginal misoprostol did not 
show any significant reduction in pain when compared to 200 
micrograms ( P=0.32). Only one study69 randomised women 
to receive a cervical preparation at different times and found 
that pain was only significantly reduced when 400 micrograms 
vaginal misoprostol was given 12 hours, rather than 3 hours 
before hysteroscopy ( P<0.001). Since this systematic review68 
was published, a further randomised controlled trial has sup -
ported these findings, with 3 milligram vaginal dinoprostone 
only showing a significant reduction in intra- procedural pain 
when given 12 hours ( P<0.001), rather than 3 hours ( P=0.1) be -
fore outpatient hysteroscopy.70
Prostaglandins are associated with gastrointestinal 
side- effects and are contraindicated in severe uncontrolled 
asthma, chronic adrenal failure, acute porphyria and renal 
or hepatic impairment.96 In the systematic review68 de-
scribed above, meta- analysis of adverse events in women 
randomised to either a cervical preparation or placebo prior 
to outpatient hysteroscopy found a significant increase in 
their incidence when a cervical preparation was given (OR 
2.94, 95% CI 1.58–5.47).46,49,76,78,79,81,84,86–94 These included 
genital tract bleeding, abdominal pain/cramping, nausea, 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 9
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
vomiting, diarrhoea, pyrexia/fever and vasovagal episodes. 
The incidence of complications were too small and balanced 
between groups for meta- analysis, and were only reported 
in studies randomising women to either misoprostol or 
placebo/nil .46,49,76,78,81,84,86–89,91–94 These included cervi -
cal trauma (n = 7), false passage (n = 4), severe pain (n = 4), 
uterine perforation (n = 1), infection (n = 1) and genital tract 
bleeding requiring emergency department admission (n = 1) 
in women randomised to misoprostol (n=18/711; 2.5%) and 
cervical trauma (n = 4), false passage (n = 5), uterine perfora -
tion (n = 3) and severe pain (n = 1) in women randomised to 
placebo/nil (total 13/694; 1.9%).
One of the main reasons for failure to successfully per -
form an outpatient hysteroscopy is the inability to access 
the uterine cavity due to cervical stenosis, and this is most 
commonly encountered in a postmenopausal population.1 
The previously mentioned systematic review,68 showed that 
administration of cervical preparation was associated with 
significantly greater cervical dilatation prior to hysteroscopy 
(gauged by the size of Hegar dilator the cervical canal could 
accommodate), when compared with placebo (SMD 0.81, 
95% CI 0.08–1.53).76,77,79 In addition, meta- analysis of ease 
of hysterosopic entry, as scored by the operator on either a 
5- point Likert scale or 10cm Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), 
showed that giving a cervical preparation was associated 
with significantly easier hysteroscopic entry when compared 
to placebo (SMD 0.89, 95% CI 0.32–1.46).76,81,84,87,89,90 The 
incidence of failed hysteroscopies due to cervical steno -
sis, however, was too small for meta- analysis, with 29/2001 
(1.4%) women randomised to a cervical preparation and 
32/1183 (2.7%) women randomised to placebo/nil.
No comparative studies were identified for other methods of 
cervical dilatation prior to outpatient hysteroscopy (e.g. local / 
systemic administration of oestrogens or osmotic agents).
7 | TYPE OF HYSTEROSCOPE
7.1 | What size and angle of hysteroscope 
should be used in the outpatient setting?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Hysteroscopes of 3.5 mm 
or less in outer diameter 
should be used for 
diagnostic outpatient 
hysteroscopy.1+ A Meta- analysis97 
showed that miniature 
hysteroscopes confer less 
pain to women during 
hysteroscopy.
When performing 
operative hysteroscopy, 
the smallest diameter 
hysteroscope should be 
used, with consideration 
given to the use of 
hysteroscopes with 
expandable outer 
working channels 
because they are 
associated with less pain.1+ B One RCT98 showed that 
a hysteroscope with a 
smaller initial diameter 
but larger resultant 
diameter confers 
less pain than a rigid 
hysteroscope.RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
When performing 
operative hysteroscopy 
using mechanical 
hysteroscopic tissue 
removal systems, the 
smallest diameter 
system available that 
is appropriate for the 
procedure should be 
used.4 GPP This is considered best 
practice.
Choice of hysteroscope 
lens angle should be left 
to the discretion of the 
clinician.4 GPP There is insufficient 
evidence to recommend 
0° or fore- oblique 
optical lenses for routine 
outpatient hysteroscopy.
A systematic review and meta- analysis97 identified 
seven RCTs99- 105 examining how the diameter of the outer 
sheath of the hysteroscope affected pain during outpatient 
hysteroscopy. Women randomised to mini- hysteroscopes 
(outer diameter 3–3.5mm) experienced significantly less 
pain during hysteroscopy when compared to women ran -
domised to conventional hysteroscopes (outer diameter 
≥5mm) (SMD –3.64; 95% CI –5.16 to –2.12). Data pertain -
ing to image quality, failure rate, procedural timing and 
adverse events were not meta- analysed. Image quality was 
either not reported,100,101 showed no significant difference 
between scope sizes,99,102,103 or found significantly better 
visualisation with the use of a smaller- diameter hystero -
scope.104 In one study,105 was significantly less conclusive 
with the use of a miniature hysteroscope but this was due to 
the leakage of carbon dioxide distension media, rather than 
due to the device used. Two studies104,105 reported a signifi -
cant increase in success when using a smaller- diameter hys -
teroscope, whereas the other three studies99- 101 reporting 
failure showed no significant difference between groups. 
In the three studies commenting on procedural duration, 
a significantly shorter time was required with the use of a 
miniaturised hysteroscope in two,99,101 with no significant 
difference found between scope sizes in the other.100 The 
incidence of vasovagal reactions was significantly lower 
when using a smaller- diameter hysteroscope in one study,99 
with the rest100- 104 showing no significant difference be -
tween the two groups.
A systematic review106 identifying the operative devices 
used in outpatient hysteroscopy to determine which technol -
ogies confer the least pain, found one randomised controlled 
trial98 comparing hysteroscope diameters for operative hys -
teroscopy in the outpatient setting. Women randomised to 
the use of a semi- rigid hysteroscopic system (AlphascopeTM 
[Gynecare, division of Ethicon, NJ, USA]) with a collapsible 
sheath (3.5mm diameter) and 7Fr forceps (total diameter 
5.8mm) found polypectomy significantly less painful than 
when randomised to a lens based hysteroscope with 5Fr for -
ceps (total diameter 5mm) ( P < 0.05), despite the resulting 
hysteroscopic diameter being greater, with the incidence 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
10 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
of adverse events minimal and balanced between groups 
(P = 0.09). [Evidence level 1++]
There were no studies comparing the outer diameters of 
mechanical hysteroscopic tissue removal (mHTR) systems 
for the reduction of pain in operative hysteroscopy, however, 
these are generally between 5 and 6.25mm which are suitable 
for use in the outpatient setting.107 [Evidence level 3]
No studies were identified that compared 0° hystero -
scopes with off- set distal lenses (e.g. 12°, 30°). Off- set lenses 
offer a wider field of view and this property can be advan -
tageous in visualising the corneal recesses and tubal ostia 
within the uterine cavity with minimal external movement 
of the hysteroscope. Fore- oblique lenses facilitate visualisa -
tion of ancillary instrumentation and so are advantageous 
for operative hysteroscopy. However, 0° hysteroscopes are 
more intuitive, facilitating entry into the uterine cavity 
through the cervical canal which may reduce the need for 
cervical dilatation, as well as minimising discomfort and 
uterine trauma. [Evidence level 4]
7.2 | Should rigid or flexible hysteroscopes be 
used routinely in the outpatient setting?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Choice of whether 
a rigid or flexible 
hysteroscope is 
used should be left 
to the discretion of 
the hysteroscopist.1+ B Two RCTs108,109 have 
shown that flexible 
hysteroscopes are 
associated with less 
pain during diagnostic 
outpatient hysteroscopy. 
However, rigid 
hysteroscopes may 
provide better images, 
fewer failed procedures, 
quicker examination 
time and reduced cost.
Two, small randomised controlled trials compared the 
pain experienced during outpatient hysteroscopy with 
the use of a flexible hysteroscope versus a rigid hystero -
scope.108,109 Both found that the use of the flexible hys -
teroscope significantly reduced pain during the procedure 
(P = 0.0001 and P < 0.001, respectively). One of these studies 
reported no difference between the flexible and rigid groups 
in terms of procedure time and image view, with no failed 
hysteroscopies in either group.109 The other study found 
that rigid scopes gave significantly better image quality ( P 
< 0.001), significantly shortened the time taken to perform 
the procedure ( P = 0.003), were cheaper to purchase and eas -
ier to sterilise and maintain.108 In addition, while there were 
no failed hysteroscopies when rigid scopes were used, seven 
women randomised to flexible scopes had a failed procedure 
due to the inability to negotiate the cervical canal (n = 5) and 
an inadequate view (n = 2). Both these trials were published 
over twenty years ago and so their findings may not reflect 
the relative advances in technologies and techniques, such as 
vaginoscopy.1087.3 | What devices should be used for 
operative procedures in the outpatient setting?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Mechanical 
hysteroscopic tissue 
removal systems 
should be preferred 
over miniature bipolar 
electrodes to remove 
endometrial polyps.1+ A One RCT110 showed 
that mechanical 
hysteroscopic tissue 
removal systems are 
less painful, quicker, 
more successful and 
more acceptable to 
women for the removal 
of endometrial polyps 
when compared to 
using a miniature 
bipolar electrode.
The choice of device for 
outpatient endometrial 
ablation should be left 
to clinician discretion 
and familiarity.4 GPP There is an absence 
of comparative data 
examining newer 
generation (quicker 
and smaller- diameter) 
ablative devices.
Inactivated mechanical 
mini- scissors should 
be preferred over 
miniature bipolar 
electrodes to remove 
uterine septa.1+ B One RCT111 showed that 
inactivated mechanical 
mini- scissors is 
associated with less 
pain than the use of 
a miniature bipolar 
electrode.
A systematic review106 identifying the operative devices 
used in outpatient hysteroscopy to determine which technolo -
gies confer the least pain, found seven randomised controlled 
trials98,110,112–116 investigating technologies for endometrial 
polypectomy, two trials117,118 investigating endometrial abla -
tion devices, and one trial111 for uterine septoplasty.
Two tria ls110,113 compared the use of a bipolar electrode 
(using a 5Fr VersapointTM [Gynecare, division of Ethicon, 
NJ, USA] mini- electrode) for polypectomy, against a mHTR 
system (TruclearTM 5mm system [Medtronic, MN, USA]) 
that allows for simultaneous cutting and aspiration of polyp 
tissue. While the earlier study, which was larger and of 
higher quality, found a significant reduction in pain during 
polypectomy when using a mHTR system ( P < 0.001),110 
the later one did not ( P > 0.05).113 This difference in find -
ings may be explained by the fact that the earlier study110 
compared a 5mm diameter mHTR system (TruclearTM 5mm 
system [Medtronic, MN, USA]) with an expandable 3.5mm 
(Alphascope® [Gynecare, division of Ethicon, NJ, USA]) or 
rigid 5mm operative hysteroscope (Bettocchi® [Karl Storz, 
Tuttlingen, Germany]), whereas the later study113 com-
pared the same 5mm diameter mHTR system with a larger 
5.5mm diameter hysteroscope (Olympus GmbH, Hamburg, 
Germany). Both studies showed that morcellation was sig -
nificantly faster ( P < 0.001) and associated with a higher suc -
cess rate. While the incidence of adverse events was higher 
in women randomised to a bipolar electrode in both studies, 
the majority of these related to procedural failure, with no 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 11
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
serious complications (e.g. uterine perforation), reported 
in either group. When patient satisfaction was reported, 
there was a statistically significant preference for the use of 
the mHTR system ( P = 0.009).110 Another trial114 found no 
significant difference in pain experienced by women un -
dergoing polypectomy using a diode laser (980nm Ceralas® 
HPD laser [Biolitec AG, Vienna, Austria]) when compared 
to a bipolar electrode (5Fr VersapointTM [Gynecare, division 
of Ethicon, NJ, USA] mini- electrode) ( P > 0.05), however, it 
should be noted that laser fibres like these are not in wide -
spread use and comparisons with modern mechanical hys -
teroscopic tissue removal (mHTR) systems are lacking.
In the two trials117,118 comparing endometrial ablation 
devices, women were randomised to either bipolar radiofre -
quency impedance- controlled ablation (Novasure® [Hologic, 
MA, USA]), thermal balloon ablation (Thermachoice III® 
[Gynecare, division of Ethicon, NJ, USA] or Thermablate® 
[Idoman Teoranta, Toronto, Canada]). Pain scores were not 
significantly different with the use of either device type, 
however, these older devices have been replaced by smaller- 
diameter and more rapid ablative technologies (e.g. Novasure® 
ADVANCED [Hologic, MA, USA], LiNA LibrataTM [LiNA 
Medical, Glostrup, Denmark], MinitouchTM [MicroCube, 
Fremont, CA, USA] etc.). [Evidence level 4]
One small randomised controlled trial111 compared the 
use of inactivated 7Fr mini- scissors against a bipolar elec -
trode (using a 5Fr VersapointTM [Gynecare, division of 
Ethicon, NJ, USA] mini- electrode) through an expandable 
3.5mm (Alphascope® [Gynecare, division of Ethicon, NJ, 
USA]) operative hysteroscope for resection of sonograph -
ically diagnosed uterine septa <2cm, and found that me -
chanical resection was significantly less painful ( P = 0.013), 
with similar operative times ( P = 0.25) and no adverse 
events recorded with either technique. All women, regard -
less of which technique was used, had complete resection of 
their septum noted at hysterosalpingogram 3 months post- 
procedure. [Evidence level 1+]
8 | DISTENSION MEDIUM
8.1 | Which uterine distension medium 
should be used during outpatient hysteroscopy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Saline is 
recommended 
as the distension 
medium for 
outpatient 
hysteroscopy.1++ A Meta- analysis119 
showed that saline is 
associated with less 
post- procedural pain, 
better image quality, 
fewer side- effects, shorter 
procedural time, greater 
patient satisfaction and 
allows for operative 
hysteroscopy.
A systematic review and meta- analysis119 investigating the 
optimal distension media for outpatient hysteroscopy identified 18 RCTs.49,102,120–135 The only distension media types that were 
compared in this systematic review were saline and carbon 
dioxide.
Meta- analysis showed no significant difference in 
intra- procedural pain102,120–126 (SMD −0.12; 95% CI 
−0.36 to 0.13) or post- procedural pain (immediately 
after,122 1 minute after127 and 15 minutes102 after hysteros -
copy) (SMD 5.54; 95% CI −2.34 to 13.43) between saline 
and carbon dioxide, however, after excluding the lower 
quality study,127 a statistically significant reduction in 
post- procedural pain was demonstrated with the use of 
saline102,122 (SMD −0.65; 95% CI −1.14 to −0.16). There 
was a statistically significant reduction in hysteroscopies 
with an unsatisfactory view with saline (Peto OR, 0.38; 
95% CI 0.22−0.66).102,120,122,124,126 Women randomised to 
saline had significantly fewer side- effects compared to 
women randomised to carbon dioxide (Peto OR, 0.29; 95% 
CI 0.20−0.40).102,120–127 Vasovagal symptoms (e.g. nausea, 
vomiting, dizziness, and fainting) (n = 38/50, 76%) were 
the main side- effects attributed to saline, however, shoul -
der pain (n = 8/50, 16%) and bleeding (n = 4, 8%) were also 
cited. Similarly, vasovagal symptoms (n = 71/134, 53%) 
were the predominant side- effects noted with carbon di -
oxide, however, shoulder pain was much more prevalent 
(n = 49/134, 44%) and bleeding (n = 4/134, 3%) was also re -
ported. Complications either did not occur or were not re -
corded. A statistically significant reduction in procedural 
time was found when carbon dioxide was used (SMD 5.46; 
95% CI 0.96−9.96),120,121,122,125,127 however, when subgroup 
analysis was performed according to risk of bias, the high -
est quality studies122,125 showed a significant reduction 
in time taken when saline was used (SMD −0.40; 95% CI 
−0.74 to −0.05). Finally, a significant increase in patient 
satisfaction was noted when using saline compared to car -
bon dioxide (SMD 1.39; 95% CI 0.51−2.28).121,122
Saline allows for the efficient practice of “see and treat” 
services, where diagnosis is immediately followed by treat -
ment, in the same outpatient hysteroscopy appointment. 
Furthermore, it is isotonic, which minimises risks associ -
ated with fluid overload and conducts electricity to allow 
for the operation of miniature bipolar electrosurgical elec -
trodes.136 Finally, saline is the distension medium of choice 
when using hysteroscopic tissue retrieval systems, as the use 
of carbon dioxide with these devices has not been evaluated. 
[Evidence level 3]
8.2 | How should uterine distension media be 
delivered during outpatient hysteroscopy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Saline should be 
instilled at the 
lowest possible 
pressure to achieve 
a satisfactory view.1++ A Meta- analysis119 showed 
that higher uterine 
distension pressures 
cause more pain.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
12 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Warming saline 
to approximate 
body temperature 
for outpatient 
hysteroscopy can 
be considered.1- B Meta- analysis119 did not 
show a reduction in pain 
with warmed saline, 
however, one RCT133 
showed improved patient 
satisfaction.
Fluid instillation methods and the effect on pain, accept -
ability and feasibility have not been compared for outpatient 
hysteroscopy, however, current approaches include:25,107
• Use of automated fluid management systems, e.g. setting 
initial intrauterine pressures at 40–50 mmHg and increas -
ing to the minimum needed to obtain a satisfactory view.
• Manually distilling fluid via a syringe and titrating 
distention.
• Titrating inflow using the tap on the inflow channel (and/
or outflow channel if a continuous flow hysteroscope).
• Using continuous flow via a gravity feed or external com -
pression, although care needs to be taken to ensure initial 
pressure is kept low and that it is maintained to ensure the 
view is adequate.
A systematic review and meta- analysis119 identified four 
randomised control trials128- 131 randomising women to re -
ceive saline distension media at different filling pressures, 
of which three studies128- 130 compared more than one pres -
sure threshold. Women randomised to undergo hysteros -
copy at pressures of ≤40 mmHg had intra- procedural pain 
scores that were significantly reduced when compared to 
women undergoing hysteroscopy at pressures above this 
threshold (SMD, −0.67; 95% CI −1.09 to −0.26). When com -
paring women receiving filling pressures of ≤50mmHg ver -
sus >50mmHg, ≤60mmHg versus >60mmHg, ≤70mmHg 
versus >70mmHg and ≤80mmHg versus >80mmHg, no sig -
nificant difference in pain scores could be found. With re -
gards to post- procedural pain, any reduction in distension 
media pressure resulted in a statistically significant reduc -
tion in pain. Despite lower filling pressures being associated 
with less pain, it also resulted in lower likelihood of a satis -
factory view. At pressures of 30–40mmHg, the proportion 
of satisfactory hysteroscopies was between 81.25–88.75%, 
whereas at pressures of 50–100mmHg, the proportion in -
creased to a range between 94.87–98.75%.128- 130 There was 
insufficient data available to comment upon the impact of 
filling pressure on procedural time and side- effects. No se -
rious complications were reported in the studies investigat -
ing distension media filling pressure. Data relating to the 
impact of distension media filling pressure on pain asso -
ciated with outpatient hysteroscopy should be interpreted 
cautiously because unless using modern fluid management 
systems (which themselves are not completely reliable due 
to dynamic fluid losses through the fallopian tubes, cer -
vix, intravascularly etc.), then intrauterine pressures are 
not being accurately measured. Finally, one must consider that the flow rate of distension media through the hystero -
scope and subsequent uterine pressure will depend on the 
hysteroscope diameter, fluid reservoir height and dynamic 
losses.
Four randomised controlled trials132- 135 allowed for the 
meta- analysis of pain scores of women randomised to either 
saline at room temperature or warmed saline in the previ -
ously mentioned systematic review,119 of which three132- 134 
reported intra- procedural pain and all four reported post- 
procedural pain (recorded immediately after,135 and at 1,132 
5134 and 15133 minutes following the end of hysteroscopy). 
No significant difference in pain was observed either during 
(SMD 0.59; 95% CI −0.14 to 1.33) or after (SMD 0.22; 95% CI 
−0.35 to 0.79) hysteroscopy. Additionally, no significant dif -
ference was found regarding procedural time (SMD −0.17; 
95% CI −0.47 to 0.13). Adverse events or failure either did 
not occur or were not reported. Three of the trials, how -
ever, did comment on patient satisfaction,132- 134 with only 
one study133 finding a significant difference, where women 
randomised to warmed saline reported higher satisfaction 
rates ( P = 0.05). Since the publication of the aforementioned 
systematic review,119 a quasi- randomised control trial inves -
tigating the impact of warmed saline against room tempera -
ture found that warming was associated with a significant 
reduction in intra- procedural ( P = 0.02) and post- procedural 
(P = 0.003) pain at diagnostic hysteroscopy, although the 
clinical significance of the observed reduction in pain is 
unclear.137 Again, no adverse events were recorded in either 
group.
9 | LOCAL ANAESTHESIA AND 
CERVICAL DILATATION
9.1 | Should routine dilatation of the cervical 
canal be performed prior to insertion of the 
hysteroscope in the outpatient setting?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Routine cervical 
dilatation should 
be avoided prior 
to outpatient 
hysteroscopy.2+ C This practice is 
associated with pain, 
vasovagal reactions and 
uterine trauma, and 
is unnecessary where 
miniature hysteroscopes 
(with an outer diameter 
≤3.5mm) are used.
Blind dilatation of the cervix in order to instrument 
the uterine cavity is commonly performed under general 
anaesthesia and is associated with cervical and uterine 
trauma.2,71–74 However, in the outpatient setting, dilatation 
of the cervix causes pain and discomfort and generally re -
quires the use of local anaesthesia.1 No RCTs examining the 
routine or selective use of blind cervical dilatation prior to 
outpatient hysteroscopy were identified.68
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 13
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
9.2 | Should local anaesthesia be 
administered prior to outpatient hysteroscopy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Local anaesthesia 
should not be 
routinely administered 
prior to outpatient 
hysteroscopy where a 
vaginoscopic approach 
is used. It should be 
considered where use 
of a vaginal speculum 
is planned e.g. where 
cervical dilatation is 
anticipated, due to 
either cervical stenosis 
and/or the utilisation 
of larger- diameter 
hysteroscopes (≥5mm 
outer diameter).1++ A While meta- analysis138 
showed that local 
anaesthesia reduces 
pain during and after 
outpatient hysteroscopy, 
the clinical benefit 
regarding its analgesic 
benefit is uncertain 
when compared to the 
use of vaginoscopy. The 
same meta- analysis 
does not show that 
local anaesthesia 
reduces the risk of 
vasovagal episodes nor 
the chances of a failed 
procedure.
A systematic review and meta- analysis138 identified 37 
RCTs42,47,51,55,58,82,105,124,139–167 examining pain in women 
undergoing outpatient hysteroscopy randomised to re -
ceive either a local anaesthetic or a control. Meta- analysis 
showed that administering local anaesthesia significantly 
reduced pain during outpatient hysteroscopy (SMD –0.57, 
95% CI –0.79 to –0.34) when compared against placebo or 
nil.51,105,124,139–145,147,149,152,156–160,163–165 Local anaesthesia also 
reduced pain after outpatient hysteroscopy (SMD –0.30, 95% 
CI –0.54 to –0.06), when aggregated from pain scores recorded 
at 5,143 10,139 15,144,145,152 30141,149,156,157,159,160 and 60158 min -
utes following hysteroscopy. Local anaesthesia did not, how -
ever, reduce the incidence of vasovagal episodes (OR 0.73, 95% 
CI 0.50–1.09),47,105,139,140,144,145,148,152,153,156,158–160,162,163,165,167 
nor reduce the rate of failure (OR 0.72, 95 % CI 0.47–
1.11),105,140,141,143–149,152,153,156,158–160,162–165 when compared 
against placebo or nil. The incidence of complications was too 
small to determine an association to either local anaesthesia or 
its control.
The clinical significance for the demonstrated reduction 
in average pain scores remains unclear, especially when con -
sidering that few studies commented on the impact of the 
reduction in pain on satisfaction and acceptability of admin -
istration of local anaesthesia when compared to their con -
trol. In studies where a placebo was administered, instead of 
a local anaesthetic, a lower than expected difference in mean 
pain was likely observed because instillation of placebo into 
the cervix/uterus still causes pain. A systematic review168 in-
vestigating the impact of the vaginoscopic approach on pain 
in outpatient hysteroscopy identified one RCT randomising 
women to either hysteroscopy with intracervical mepivacaine 
or to hysteroscopy using the vaginoscopic approach.169 This 
found a significant reduction in pain both during (3.8±2.7 versus 5.34±3.23) and after (3.02±2.50 versus 4.57±3.30) di -
agnostic hysteroscopy when the vaginoscopic approach was 
used, despite using a hysteroscope with a 3.7mm diameter. 
The adoption of vaginoscopy has been facilitated by the de -
velopment of miniature hysteroscopes (≤3.5mm outer diam -
eter), and so as this has been found to confer less pain and 
side- effects, this supports the use of local anaesthesia only 
when cervical dilation is anticipated.168
9.3 | Which local anaesthesia should be 
administered and how should it be given prior to 
outpatient hysteroscopy?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
The choice of local 
anaesthetic agent 
for outpatient 
hysteroscopy 
should be left to 
the discretion of 
the hysteroscopist.1++ A While meta- analysis138 
showed that mepivacaine 
and bupivacaine were the 
only agents associated 
with both a reduction 
in pain during and after 
outpatient hysteroscopy 
and mepivacaine was 
the only agent to reduce 
vasovagal episodes, there 
are no direct head- to- head 
comparisons between 
anaesthetic agents to 
make robust conclusions 
as the existing 
comparisons are against 
either nil or placebo.
The choice 
of route(s) of 
administration of 
local anaesthesia 
for outpatient 
hysteroscopy 
should be left to 
the discretion of 
the hysteroscopist, 
however, 
intrauterine 
fundal anaesthesia 
should be 
considered for the 
reduction of pain 
during outpatient 
endometrial 
ablation.1++ A Meta- analysis138 
showed that all routes of 
administration of local 
anaesthesia prior to 
outpatient hysteroscopy 
reduce pain during 
the procedure. One 
RCT158 demonstrated 
a significant reduction 
in pain during 
endometrial ablation 
when intrauterine fundal 
anaesthesia was given.
Short- acting local 
anaesthetics (e.g. 
mepivacaine, 
lidocaine and 
prilocaine) require 
at least 2 minutes 
and longer acting 
agents (e.g. 
bupivacaine) 
require at least 5 
minutes to allow 
for onset of effect.1++ A Meta- analysis138 
showed that the interval 
between administration 
of local anaesthesia 
and commencement 
of the procedure will 
depend upon the 
pharmacokinetics of the 
local anaesthetic and how 
it is administered.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
14 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
In the previously mentioned systematic review and 
meta- analysis,138 subgroup analyses were performed in 
order to identify the specific local anaesthetic agents 
that were effective in reducing pain during and after out -
patient hysteroscopy, when compared to nil or placebo. 
Bupivacaine, a long- acting local anaesthetic, produced the 
greatest reduction in intraprocedural pain (SMD –4.27, 
95% CI –5.06 to –3.49).139 There was a significant reduction 
in pain during hysteroscopy with the use of short acting 
local anaesthetics (lidocaine [SMD –0.34, 95% CI –0.52 to 
–0.16];124,141,143,147,149,152,156,159,160,163,165 mepivacaine [SMD 
–0.60, 95% CI –1.03 to –0.17]51,105,144,145,164 and prilocaine 
[SMD –0.40, 95% CI –0.68 to –0.12]).157 Mepivacaine (SMD 
–0.66; 95% CI –1.19 to –0.14)144,145 and bupivacaine (SMD 
–1.55; 95% CI –2.05 to –1.06)139 were the only local anaes -
thetics to significantly reduce pain after hysteroscopy. While 
meta- analysis of vasovagal episodes did not show any benefit 
when local anaesthesia was given, subgroup analysis accord -
ing to the type of local anaesthetic given found a significant 
reduction in vasovagal episodes, only when mepivacaine was 
given (OR 0.33, 95% CI 0.19–0.60).105,144,145,162,167
The same systematic review and meta- analysis138 also per -
formed subgroup analyses to identify which specific routes 
of local anaesthesia administration led to a reduction in pain 
during and after outpatient hysteroscopy. Topical (application 
of local anaesthesia directly onto the ectocervix), transcer -
vical (instillation of local anaesthesia through the cervix via 
either a cannula or within the distension medium), intracer -
vical (injection of local anaesthesia directly into the ectocer -
vix) and paracervical (injection of local anaesthesia into the 
cervicovaginal junction) routes were investigated when given 
in an outpatient setting. All routes of administration were 
associated with a significant reduction in pain during out -
patient hysteroscopy when compared against placebo or nil; 
this encompassed the topical (SMD –0.36, 95% CI –0.66 to 
–0.06),140,156,163,165 transcervical (SMD –0.33, 95% CI –0.64 
to –0.02),124,144,147,152,156,160 intracervical (SMD –0.38, 95% CI 
–0.57 to –0.19)51,141,149,157 and paracervical (SMD –1.09, 95% CI 
–0.90 to –0.31)105,139,143,145,159,164 routes. In contrast, no specific 
route of administration of local anaesthesia led to a significant 
reduction in pain following hysteroscopy. When subgroup 
analysis was performed to determine the optimal route of 
administration for the reduction of vasovagal episodes, a sig -
nificant reduction was observed only when given through the 
transcervical route (OR 0.39, 95 % CI 0.18–0.83).47,144,156,160,167 
A randomised controlled trial found that giving intrauterine 
fundal anaesthesia, using a combination of mepivacaine and 
bupivacaine, during outpatient hysteroscopy three minutes 
prior to outpatient endometrial ablation, showed a statistically 
significant reduction in intra- procedural (SMD –0.49, 95 % 
CI –0.90 to –0.07) but not post- procedural (SMD 0.00, 95% CI 
–0.40 to 0.41) pain, when compared against placebo.158 The 
incidence of vasovagal episodes was balanced between groups 
(OR 2.44, 95% CI 0.53–11.32).
Unless given within the distension media,124 local an -
aesthesia in the aforementioned systematic review and 
meta- analysis138 was given two minutes (lidocaine),147,152 five minutes (lidocaine,141,143,156,159,160,163,164 mepiva -
caine,51,105,144,164 bupivacaine139) or ten minutes (EMLATM,140 
mepivacaine145) before outpatient hysteroscopy. No RCTs 
randomised women to receive the same local anaesthetic 
route or agent at different times prior to outpatient hys -
teroscopy. In the absence of data to support a specific local 
anaesthetic regime, standard local protocols regarding the 
type, maximum dosage and route of administration of local 
anaesthesia should be implemented to ensure adequacy of 
anaesthesia and help both recognise and prevent rare, but 
potentially serious side- effects resulting from systemic vas -
cular absorption.170
10 | CONSCIOUS SEDATION
10.1 | Should conscious sedation be used 
to reduce pain associated with outpatient 
hysteroscopic procedures?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Conscious sedation 
should not be routinely 
used in outpatient 
hysteroscopic 
procedures.1– B Meta- analysis171 
showed no benefit of 
intravenous conscious 
sedation and led to 
more side- effects. 
There were no data 
regarding adverse 
events available to 
make recommendations 
for the use of inhaled 
conscious sedation.
If conscious sedation is 
to be employed, women 
and people must be 
appropriately selected 
beforehand and 
hysteroscopy must be 
performed in a suitable 
environment, where 
there is a separate staff 
member who has the 
skills and equipment 
necessary to monitor 
vital observations and 
recognise and care for 
women and people who 
are over- sedated.4 GPP Life threatening 
complications can 
result from the use of 
conscious sedation and 
so it is imperative that 
guidance produced by 
the Academy of Medical 
Royal Colleges in the 
safe use of conscious 
sedation is followed.172
Sedation induces a depression in consciousness, which 
ranges from minimal sedation and anxiolysis, through to 
moderate or ‘conscious’ sedation, deep sedation, and finally 
ending with general anaesthesia. While responsiveness is al -
ways suppressed, as the level of sedation becomes deeper, so 
does the potential ability of the woman to maintain their air -
way, ventilation and cardiovascular function.173 Conscious 
sedation is therefore defined as a “drug- induced depression 
of consciousness during which women respond purposefully 
to verbal commands, either alone or accompanied by light 
tactile stimulation” (i.e. not a painful stimulus) where “no 
interventions are required to maintain a patent airway when 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 15
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
spontaneous ventilation is adequate” and “cardiovascular 
function is usually maintained”.174
A systematic review and meta- analysis171 investigating 
the role of conscious sedation against suitable controls for the 
control of pain for outpatient hysteroscopy, included seven 
RCTs.44,55,56,60,151,175,176 Intravenous conscious sedation, 
when compared with local anaesthesia, reduced pain during 
(SMD –0.26, 95% CI –0.51 to –0.01), but not after (SMD 
–0.18, 95% CI –0.43 to 0.07) outpatient hysteroscopy.55,151 
No significant difference in side- effects were noted when the 
studies were pooled (OR 15.58, 95% CI 0.08–2891.91).55,151 
Intravenous conscious sedation, when compared to an oral 
analgesic and antispasmodic, was associated with increased 
pain, both during (SMD 1.03, 95% CI 0.56–1.49) and after 
(SMD 0.49, 95% CI 0.04–0.93) hysteroscopy and was associ -
ated with significantly more side- effects (OR 134.33, 95% CI 
16.14–1118.17).55 Side- effects in women randomised to con -
scious sedation were either vasovagal symptoms occurring 
at the time of or shortly after hysteroscopy, or dizziness that 
persisted longer than one hour following the end of hysteros -
copy. Intravenous sedation, when compared with an oral 
analgesic alone, did not show any significant difference in 
intra- procedural pain (SMD –0.16, 95% CI –0.59 to 0.26).56 
[Evidence level 1++]
Inhaled conscious sedation (in the form of 70% N2O/30% 
O3), when compared to oral analgesia and anxiolysis, showed 
the greatest reduction in pain during hysteroscopy (SMD 
–1.04, 95% CI –1.57 to –0.52), however side- effects were not 
recorded, and so its use cannot be supported outside of a re -
search context.60 [Evidence level 1++]
Because sedative drugs depress the central nervous sys -
tem and have the potential to impair respiration, circulation 
or both, close monitoring of the woman or person must be 
undertaken by a designated staff member, separate to the 
hysteroscopist, to ensure maintenance of vital observations 
(heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, pulse oxime -
try, with electrocardiography and capnography performed 
where appropriate) peri- and post- procedurally, in accor -
dance with guidance produced by the Academy of Medical 
Royal Colleges.172 This individual must be able to identify 
a woman who becomes over- sedated and ensure the appro -
priate response is taken such as requiring the administra -
tion of a reversal agent, airway maintenance, and, rarely, full 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Patient selection is of para -
mount importance, in order to minimise the risks associated 
with conscious sedation, where obese, elderly and/or comor -
bid women may either not be suitable or require different 
sedating regimes. Many centres do not have the equipment, 
clinic space and staff necessary to deliver conscious seda -
tion safely in the outpatient setting, which require facilities 
to convert to a general anaesthetic in the event of cardio- 
respiratory compromise. In those that do, it is performed in 
an endoscopy suite, and does not confer the benefits of being 
in an “office setting”; women still need to arrive at the start 
of the session to be seen by an anaesthetist, be fasted prior 
to their procedure, and cannot be discharged until the ef -
fects of the conscious sedative wear away, often necessitating a hospital bed. In keeping with this, the European Society 
for Gynaecological Endoscopy (ESGE), the American 
Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopy (AAGL) and the 
Global Congress of Hysteroscopy (GCH) recently produced 
a standardised nomenclature to enable consistency in re -
porting of hysteroscopic procedures, where the facility to 
administer parenteral medications with a sedative effect, 
or regional/general anaesthesia is considered an operating 
room, as opposed to an outpatient setting.8 [Evidence level 4]
11 | VAGI NO S C OPY
11.1 | Does a vaginoscopic approach to 
outpatient hysteroscopy reduce pain and 
increase the feasibility of the procedure?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Vaginoscopy should be 
the standard technique 
for outpatient 
hysteroscopy unless 
the use of a vaginal 
speculum is required 
(e.g. when dilating the 
cervix or obtaining 
a blind endometrial 
biopsy).1++ A Meta- analysis168 showed 
that vaginoscopy 
is significantly less 
painful, quicker and 
associated with fewer 
vasovagal episodes 
when compared to 
the use of a vaginal 
speculum.
Vaginoscopy should 
still be considered 
after using a 
vaginal speculum 
to administer local 
anaesthesia to the 
cervix and/or cervical 
dilatation in order 
to reduce the pain 
associated with genital 
tract instrumentation 
and increase 
manoeuvrability of the 
hysteroscope.4 GPP This is in order to 
reduce the pain 
associated with genital 
tract instrumentation 
and increase 
manoeuvrability of the 
hysteroscope.
Vaginoscopy or the ‘no touch’ approach to hysteroscopy re -
fers to a technique where the hysteroscope is introduced into the 
vagina, through the cervical canal and into the uterine cavity 
without the need for a vaginal speculum or cervical instrumen -
tation. By performing hysteroscopy without a vaginal specu -
lum, which causes lower genital tract pain, manoeuvrability of 
the hysteroscope within the uterine cavity is improved because 
there is no vaginal speculum restricting movement. This is 
particularly advantageous in women and people who cannot 
lie supine due to medical comorbidities (e.g. heart failure, re -
spiratory disease etc.), are obese, who have acutely flexed uteri 
and in those who have restricted hip movement. Women who 
are nulliparous, suffer from vaginismus, are virgo intact and/or 
suffer from genital tract atrophy may also benefit from vaginos -
copy, where distension of the vagina is minimised. A systematic 
review and meta- analysis168 identified seven RCTs comparing 
vaginoscopic versus traditional outpatient hysteroscopy, which 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
16 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
employed the use of a vaginal speculum as a minimum.169,177–182 
The vaginoscopic approach was significantly less painful 
during (SMD –0.27, 95% CI –0.48 to –0.06)169,177,180,182 and 
15 minutes after hysteroscopy (SMD –0.55, 95 % CI –0.91 to 
–0.18).169 Vaginoscopy was also significantly quicker (SMD 
–0.25, 95 % CI –0.43 to –0.08)169,177,178–180,182 and associated 
with significantly fewer vasovagal episodes (OR 0.35, 95 % CI 
0.15–0.82).169,177,182 Complications were only found in one of 
the six trials;182 this reported no significant difference in the 
incidence of post- operative infection between the two meth -
ods; infection was reported in 27/798 women (3.4%) who had 
vaginoscopy, compared with 31/799 women (3.9%) who un -
derwent the traditional approach ( P = 0.60). All other compli -
cations that were reported occurred in women randomised to 
the use of a vaginal speculum and included cervical trauma 
(n = 2), admission for analgesia (n = 2) and postprocedural hae -
morrhage (n = 1). Neither the vaginoscopic technique nor the 
traditional approach reduced failure rates (OR 0.98, 95 % CI 
0.69–1.38).169,177–182
In women who require a vaginal speculum for administra -
tion of local anaesthesia, many clinicians remove the speculum 
before performing hysteroscopy to invoke the aforementioned 
benefits of the vaginoscopic approach.47,82,140,157
12 | PREVENTION OF INFECTION
12.1 | Should routine antibiotic prophylaxis 
be employed in outpatient hysteroscopic 
procedures to reduce the incidence of 
procedural- related infection?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
Routine antibiotic 
prophylaxis is not 
recommended for 
outpatient hysteroscopic 
procedures.1++ A One RCT183 found no 
benefit in administering 
antimicrobial 
prophylaxis for the 
reduction of post- 
procedural infection. 
Clinicians should 
also bear in mind that 
there is no evidence 
to support the use of 
prophylactic antibiotics 
when performing an 
endometrial ablation.
Outpatient hysteroscopy 
should be delayed and 
genital tract swabs taken 
and / or antibiotics 
administered if pelvic 
infection is suspected 
and confirmed 
microbiological infection 
should be treated with 
antibiotics. If a pyometra 
is diagnosed at the time of 
outpatient hysteroscopy, 
antibiotics should be 
administered immediately 
to minimise the risk of 
systemic infection.3 D This recommendation 
was made based on a 
survey of practice.184Only one RCT examined the incidence of post- procedural 
infection in women undergoing outpatient hysteroscopy 
randomised to receive either antibiotic prophylaxis (in the 
form of 1g cefazolin intramuscularly) or placebo (10ml sa -
line intramuscularly).183 No trials have investigated the role 
of prophylactic antibiotics for the reduction of post- operative 
infection following endometrial ablation. All procedures 
were therapeutic; including hysteroscopic polypectomy, sep -
toplasty, myomectomy and intrauterine adhesiolysis. Post- 
procedural infection was diagnosed if two or more of the 
following criteria were met in the 5 days post- hysteroscopy: 
“(i) fever (body temperature greater than 38°C or 100.4°F at 
repeated measurements over a period of at least 48 hours); 
(ii) lower abdominal pain; (iii) uterine, adnexal, or cervical 
motion tenderness; (iv) purulent leucorrhoea; (v) vaginal 
discharge or itchiness; and (vi) dysuria”. In the 1046 women 
who underwent hysteroscopy, only 12 (1.15%) were found to 
meet the criteria of post- procedural infection, where 5/523 
women (1.0%) were initially allocated cefazolin and 7/523 
women (1.3%) were allocated placebo ( P > 0.05). Antibiotics 
were prescribed in all cases, leading to complete resolution of 
infection in all cases, with no women developing upper gen -
ital tract/pelvic infection, as confirmed by clinical and sono -
graphic examination. No trials have investigated the role of 
prophylactic antibiotics for the reduction of post- operative 
infection following endometrial ablation. [Evidence level 1++]
Despite the low incidence of pelvic infection following hys -
teroscopy185 and the absence of evidence for reduction of post- 
operative infection with the routine use of antibiotics, women 
with symptoms and signs of genital tract infection, including a 
pyometra, should have their procedure deferred, genital tract 
swabs taken and/or empirical antibiotics administered. In post- 
menopausal women, a non- sterile pyometra should be sus -
pected when intrauterine fluid is seen on pelvic scanning and/
or there is a mucoid vaginal discharge. If a pyometra is diag -
nosed during an outpatient hysteroscopy there is a risk of rapid 
dissemination of pelvic and systemic infection and so antibiot -
ics should be administered as soon as possible, with the initial 
dose ideally administered intravenously to optimise the onset 
of action followed by a full oral course.184 [Evidence level 3]
13 | DOCUMENTATION
13.1 | How should procedural technique and 
findings at hysteroscopy be recorded?
RecommendationEvidence 
quality StrengthRationale for the 
recommendation
A standardised 
proforma is 
recommended 
for the 
documentation 
of hysteroscopic 
technique and 
findings.4 GPP This is considered 
best practice.25
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 17
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
The majority of units use either a written or digital/com -
puterised standardised proforma to record procedural tech -
nique and findings. [Evidence level 4]
Items that should be recorded pertaining to technique 
include:
• Operator / surgeon
• Hysteroscope/operative device used, including instru -
ment diameter as a minimum
• Approach (vaginoscopy or speculum)
• Distension medium used
• Local anaesthesia (agent, volume, route)
• Cervical instrumentation (tenaculum, cervical dilatation)
• Biopsy performed (and if so, method used e.g. directed/
blind and device used i.e. Pipelle or other device)
• Operative procedure performed, if applicable (e.g. polyp -
ectomy, myomectomy, septoplasty, coil removal, removal 
of retained pregnancy tissue etc.)
• Use of oral or inhalational medications with an analgesic 
or sedative effect (e.g. Entonox®, Penthrox®)
• Procedural success (yes/no) and reasons for abandonment 
(e.g. intolerable pain, poor visualisation etc.), if applicable
• Complications (e.g. vasovagal reaction, uterine perfora -
tion, heavy bleeding etc.) [Evidence level 4]
Items that should be recorded regarding findings include:
• Impression and description of vulva, vagina, cervix and 
endometrium (functional or pathological)
• Visualisation of both ostia
• Details of any congenital (hypoplastic ‘T’ or ‘Y’ shaped 
uterus, septum, other structural anomalies) or ac -
quired uterine pathology (adhesions, cervical niches, 
fibroids FIGO Type 0–3, polyps, retained products of 
conception)
• The uterocervical length should be recorded when a global 
biopsy is taken or an intrauterine device fitted. [Evidence 
level 4]
Pictures and/or diagrams may also be helpful in re -
cording findings at hysteroscopy. Where possible, digital 
images of the uterine cavity and/or cervix (e.g. panoramic 
view of the cavity, magnified views of the tubal ostia/cor -
nual regions, fundus, uterine walls, cervical canal etc.) 
should be captured, especially where there is any intra -
uterine pathology (e.g. global endometrial appearances 
such as vascularity, thickening, irregularity, necrosis; 
focal endometrial lesions such as polyps, fibroids, ad -
hesions, congenital uterine anomalies, embedded coils 
etc.).25 [Evidence level 4]
14 | RECOMMENDATIONS 
FOR RESEARCH
• Effect of cervical preparation with prostaglandins on pain 
relief and feasibility in outpatient hysteroscopy.• Safety, acceptability and feasibility of hysteroscopy ac -
cording to angle of distal optical lens.
• Effectiveness of the vaginoscopic approach to outpatient 
hysteroscopy in relieving pain compared with traditional 
approaches with local anaesthesia.
• Relative effectiveness of different types, routes, doses and 
timings of local anaesthesia on pain and incidence of va -
sovagal reactions.
• Effectiveness of warming fluid distension media on pain 
relief and satisfaction.
• Effectiveness of methoxyflurane (Penthrox®) on pain re -
lief and satisfaction.
• Assessment of specific operative hysteroscopic technol -
ogies including endometrial ablative devices, regarding 
pain, acceptability, feasibility and effectiveness.
• Evaluation of technical, analgesic, anaesthetic and sed -
ative interventions for specific operative outpatient hys -
teroscopic procedures.
• Qualitative research exploring patient experience and 
preferences.
• Qualitative research exploring patient recovery and re -
turn to daily activity following outpatient hysteroscopy.
15 | AUDITABLE TOPICS
Units should consider collecting data for quality assurance 
purposes. The lower estimate of the confidence intervals 
have been used to define the minimum audit standard or 
where data are lacking or considered inappropriate, expert 
opinion has been relied upon (BSGE Ambulatory Care 
Network).23 However, the data sources have been provided 
to allow units / practitioners to set and aim for higher stand -
ards as appropriate where units / practitioners should strive 
for continual improvement.
Criteria Procedure(s) Standard Source(s)
WOMAN- CENTRED
Provision of 
pre- appointment 
written 
information on 
OPH≥ 95% 88.7% (95% CI 
87.8%–89.5%)22 
however expert 
opinion23 
felt that the 
standard should 
be higher
Mean peak 
intra- procedural 
pain score (on an 
11- point Visual 
Analogue Scale)Diagnostic 
hysteroscopy +/- 
global endometrial 
biopsy≤ 5.2 ≤5.2 (95% CI 
5.12–5.29)22
Insertion/retrieval 
of intrauterine 
device (IUD)≤ 5.2 ≤5.16 (95% CI 
4.91–5.41)22
Hysteroscopic 
polypectomy≤ 5.1 ≤5.1 (95% CI 
4.91–5.29)22
Hysteroscopic 
myomectomy≤ 6.4 ≤6.37 (95% CI 
5.37–7.36)22
Endometrial 
ablation≤ 6.5 ≤6.48 (95% CI 
5.8–7.16)22
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
18 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
Criteria Procedure(s) Standard Source(s)
Procedure 
acceptability (yes/
no)Diagnostic 
hysteroscopy≥ 97% ≥97.8% (95% CI 
97.0–98.5%)182
Hysteroscopic 
polypectomy≥ 95% 97.8% (95% CI 
94.9%–99.3%)186; 
99.2% (95% CI 
95.4%–99.9%)110
Endometrial 
ablation≥ 77% 93.6% (95% CI 
78.6–99.2%)117; 
77%–94%187
Mean overall level 
of careAll hysteroscopies 
& endometrial 
ablation9.7/10 ≥9.73 (95% CI 
9.70–9.75)22
PROCEDURAL
Compliance with 
safety checklistsAll hysteroscopies 
& endometrial 
ablation≥ 99% Expert 
opinion23
Documentation 
completion ratesoAll hysteroscopies 
& endometrial 
ablation≥ 99% Expert 
opinion23
Vasovagal reaction Diagnostic 
hysteroscopy≤ 2% 1.1% (95% CI 
0.7%–1.9%)182
Hysteroscopic 
polypectomy 
& endometrial 
ablation*< 12% 5.8% (95% CI 
2.4%–11.6%)110
Uterine / cervical 
traumaAll hysteroscopies 
& endometrial 
ablation*≤ 0.5% ≤0.1% (95% CI 
0.02–0.50%)182; 
0%186
Infection All hysteroscopies#≤ 5% ≤3.6% (95% CI 
2.80–4.70%)182
Endometrial 
ablation≤ 16% 4.8% (95% CI 
0.6%–16.1%)117
Hospital admission All hysteroscopies 
& endometrial 
ablation+< 5% ≤2.0% (90% CI 
0.3%– 4.8%)188
Hospital 
readmissionAll hysteroscopies 
& endometrial 
ablation+≤3 .5% ≤1.5%; (90% CI 
0.1%–3.5%)188
Nb. There are no reliable data for operative outpatient 
myomectomy or removal of retained products of conception
* No data available for outpatient endometrial ablation
# No data available for outpatient hysteroscopic polypec -
tomy or outpatient endometrial ablation
+ No data available for outpatient hysteroscopic polypec -
tomy or outpatient endometrial ablation
o documentation should cover the points listed in sec -
tion  13.1 of the GTG
16 | USEFUL LINKS
The following British Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy 
(BSGE) quality assurance tools for outpatient hysteroscopy 
are recommended:
• BSGE outpatient hysteroscopy patient satisfaction sur -
vey, allowing for local data to compared with national 
standards.22 A template of the survey be accessed from: https:// www. bsge. org. uk/ wp- conte nt/ uploa ds/ 2019/ 09/ 
Outpa tient - hyste rosco py- patie nt- surve y- FINAL - 010919. 
pdf
• BSGE Surgical Information Collection System (BSGE 
SICS) to collect data on demographic, technologies, feasi -
bility and complications of outpatient hysteroscopic pro -
cedures (diagnostic outpatient hysteroscopy, polypectomy, 
myomectomy, septoplasty, removal retained products of 
conception, tubal cannulation / sterilisation, endometrial 
ablation). This can be accessed from: https:// www. bsges 
ics. com/ 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the contributions of Dr A Mahmud 
PhD MRCOG PGDip (MedEd), Dr H Stevenson MRCOG 
MSc MEd, Dr A Carnegy BMedSc (Hons) MBChB, Dr L 
Wilson BSc, MBChB (Hons), Dr CS Graham BSc (Hons) 
FRCA and Ms L Davies.
FUNDING INFORMATION
All those involved in the development of the Green- top 
Guidelines, including the Guidelines Committee, Guidelines 
Committee co- chairs, guideline developers, peer reviewers 
and other reviewers, are unpaid volunteers and receive no 
direct funding for their work in producing the guideline. 
The exception to this are the RCOG staff involved who are 
salaried employees of the College and Guidelines Committee 
members who receive reimbursement for expenses for at- 
tending Guidelines Committee meetings. Please see more 
information on travel expense rules on the RCOG website.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
PMD has received part funding for a PhD stipend 
from Tommys and the Birmingham Women's Hospital 
Ambulatory Gynaecology Fund and travel and accommoda -
tion funding for attending a meeting from Hologic (Smith & 
Nephew). PPS has received an honorarium for speaking from 
Medtronic (Smith & Nephew). NAMC has received an hono -
rarium for attending an advisory meeting from Hologic. 
TJC has received research grants, honoraria for speaking 
and running courses, and honoraria for attending advisory 
board meetings from Hologic (Cytyc) and Medtronic (Smith 
& Nephew); he is also a former president of the British 
Society for Gynaecology and Endoscopy (BSGE).
REFERENCES
 1. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. RCOG Good 
Practice Paper No. 16: Pain relief and informed decision- making 
for outpatient hysteroscopy and procedures. London: RCOG; 2022. 
Available from: https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ caree rs- and- train ing/ 
train ing/ curri culum/ og- curri culum - 2024/ backg round/ 
 2. Clark TJ, Voit D, Gupta JK, Hyde C, Song F, Khan KS. Accuracy 
of hysteroscopy in the diagnosis of endometrial cancer and hy -
perplasia: a systematic quantitative review. JAMA. 2002 Oct 
2;288(13):1610–21.
 3. Farquhar C, Ekeroma A, Furness S, Arroll B. A systematic review 
of transvaginal ultrasonography, sonohysterography and hysteros -
copy for the investigation of abnormal uterine bleeding in premeno -
pausal women. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2003 Jun;82(6):493–504.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 19
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
 4. van Dongen H, de Kroon CD, Jacobi CE, Trimbos JB, Jansen FW. 
Diagnostic hysteroscopy in abnormal uterine bleeding: a system -
atic review and meta- analysis. BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2007 
Jun;114(6):664–75.
 5. Hospital outpatient activity: treatment specialty, 2007- 08. The 
Health and Social Care Information Centre; 2009. (Hospital Episode 
Statistics). Report No.: 5.
 6. Hospital Outpatient Activity: Main procedure and interventions, 
2007- 08. The Health and Social Care Information Centre; 2009. 
(Hospital Episode Statistics). Report No.: 47.
 7. Clark TJ, Khan KS, Gupta JK. Current practice for the treatment 
of benign intrauterine polyps: a national questionnaire survey of 
consultant gynaecologists in UK. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
2002 Jun 10;103(1):65–7.
 8. Carugno J, Grimbizis G, Franchini M, Alonso L, Bradley L, Campo 
R, et  al. International Consensus Statement for Recommended 
Terminology Describing Hysteroscopic Procedures. J Minim 
Invasive Gynecol. 2021 Oct 12;S1553- 4650(21)01214-0.
 9. Litta P, Cosmi E, Saccardi C, Esposito C, Rui R, Ambrosini G. 
Outpatient operative polypectomy using a 5 mm- hysteroscope 
without anaesthesia and/or analgesia: advantages and limits. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2008 Aug;139(2):210–4.
 10. Marsh FA, Rogerson LJ, Duffy SRG. A randomised controlled trial 
comparing outpatient versus daycase endometrial polypectomy. 
BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2006 Aug;113(8):896–901.
 11. Clark TJ, Mahajan D, Sunder P, Gupta JK. Hysteroscopic treatment 
of symptomatic submucous fibroids using a bipolar intrauterine 
system: a feasibility study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2002 
Jan 10;100(2):237–42.
 12. Prasad P, Powell MC. Prospective observational study of 
Thermablate Endometrial Ablation System as an outpatient proce -
dure. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2008 Aug;15(4):476–9.
 13. Andersson S, Mints M. Thermal balloon ablation for the treat -
ment of menorrhagia in an outpatient setting. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand. 2007;86(4):480–3.
 14. Jack SA, Cooper KG, Seymour J, Graham W, Fitzmaurice A, Perez 
J. A randomised controlled trial of microwave endometrial ablation 
without endometrial preparation in the outpatient setting: patient 
acceptability, treatment outcome and costs. BJOG Int J Obstet 
Gynaecol. 2005 Aug;112(8):1109–16.
 15. Clark TJ, Gupta JK. Outpatient thermal balloon ablation of the en -
dometrium. Fertil Steril. 2004 Nov;82(5):1395–401.
 16. Hamerlynck TWO, Blikkendaal MD, Schoot BC, Hanstede MMF, 
Jansen FW. An alternative approach for removal of placental rem-
nants: hysteroscopic morcellation. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2013 
Dec;20(6):796–802.
 17. Vitale SG, Di Spiezio SA, Riemma G, De Franciscis P, Alonso 
Pacheco L, Carugno J. In- office hysteroscopic removal of re -
tained or fragmented intrauterine device without anesthesia: a 
cross- sectional analysis of an international survey. Updat Surg. 
2022;74(3):1079–85. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s13304- 022- 01246- 0
 18. Nagele F, O'Connor H, Davies A, Badawy A, Mohamed H, Magos 
A. 2500 Outpatient diagnostic hysteroscopies. Obstet Gynecol. 1996 
Jul;88(1):87–92.
 19. Jivraj S, Dass M, Panikkar J, Brown V. Outpatient hysteroscopy: 
an observational study of patient acceptability. Med Kaunas Lith. 
2004;40(12):1207–10.
 20. Morgan M, Dodds W, Wolfe C, Raju S. Women's views and experi -
ences of outpatient hysteroscopy: implications for a patient- centered 
service. Nurs Health Sci. 2004 Dec;6(4):315–20.
 21. Gupta JK, Clark TJ, More S, Pattison H. Patient anxiety and experi -
ences associated with an outpatient “one- stop” “see and treat” hys -
teroscopy clinic. Surg Endosc. 2004 Jul;18(7):1099–104.
 22. Mahmud A, Smith P, Clark TJ. Benchmarking services in outpatient 
hysteroscopy (OPH): A quality improvement project. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2021 Apr;259:211–21.
 23. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologist. Developing a 
Green- top Guideline: guidance for developers. London: RCOG; 2020. 24. British Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy. Ambulatory Care 
Network Meeting 2021 [Internet]. British Society for Gynaecological 
Endoscopy; 2021 [cited 2022 Feb 10]. Available from: https:// www. 
bsge. org. uk/ news/ 21444 - 2/ 
 25. Kremer C, Duffy S, Moroney M. Patient satisfaction with outpatient 
hysteroscopy versus day case hysteroscopy: randomised controlled 
trial. BMJ. 2000 Jan 29;320(7230):279–82.
 26. Clark TJ, Gupta JK. Handbook of outpatient hysteroscopy: a com -
plete guide to diagnosis and therapy. London: New York: Hodder 
Arnold; Distributed in the United States of America by Oxford 
University Press; 2005. p. 289.
 27. Marsh F, Kremer C, Duffy S. Delivering an effective outpatient ser -
vice in gynaecology. A randomised controlled trial analysing the 
cost of outpatient versus daycase hysteroscopy. BJOG Int J Obstet 
Gynaecol. 2004 Mar;111(3):243–8.
 28. Angioli R, De Cicco Nardone C, Plotti F, Cafà EV, Dugo N, Damiani 
P, et al. Use of Music to Reduce Anxiety during Office Hysteroscopy: 
Prospective Randomized Trial. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2014 
May;21(3):454–9.
 29. Law HY, Ng DYT, Chung CD. Use of music in reducing pain during 
outpatient hysteroscopy: Prospective randomized trial. J Obstet 
Gynaecol Res. 2021 Mar;47(3):904–12.
 30. Deo N, Khan K, Mak J, Allotey J, Gonzalez Carreras F, Fusari G, 
et  al. Virtual reality for acute pain in outpatient hysteroscopy: a 
randomised controlled trial. BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2021 
Jan;128(1):87–95.
 31. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists BS for GE. 
RCOG/BSGE Outpatient Hysteroscopy Patient Information Leaflet. 
RCOG; 2018. Available from: https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ for- the- pub-
lic/ brows e- our- patie nt- infor mation/ outpa tient - hyste rosco py/ 
 32. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists BS for GE. 
RCOG/BSGE Outpatient Hysteroscopy Consent Form [Internet]. 
RCOG; 2022. Available from: https:// www. bsge. org. uk/ wp- conte 
nt/ uploa ds/ 2022/ 03/ 03022 022- Opera tive- Hyste rosco py- Conse nt- 
Form- DRAFT_ v3_ clean. pdf
 33. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists BS for GE. 
RCOG/BSGE Operative Hysteroscopy Consent Form [Internet]. 
RCOG; 2022. Available from: https:// www. bsge. org. uk/ wp- conte 
nt/ uploa ds/ 2022/ 03/ 03022 022- Opera tive- Hyste rosco py- Conse nt- 
Form- DRAFT_ v3_ clean. pdf
 34. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists BS for GE. 
RCOG/BSGE Endometrial Ablation Consent Form [Internet]. 
London: RCOG; 2022. Available from: TBA
 35. WHO Patient Safety, World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines 
for Safe Surgery. Safe Surg Saves Lives. 2009;(WHO/IER/
PSP/2008.08-1E):124.
 36. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. RCOG 
Advanced Training in Obstetrics & Gynaecology [Internet]. 
London: RCOG; 2019 [cited 2021 Feb 14]. Available from: https:// 
www. rcog. org. uk/ caree rs- and- train ing/ train ing/ curri culum/ og- 
curri culum - 2024/ backg round/ 
 37. European Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy. GESEA MIGS 
Diploma [Internet]. ESGE; 2022 [cited 2022 Feb 14]. Available from: 
https:// gesea. eu/ pathw ays/ migs# level - 1
 38. Savran MM, Sørensen SMD, Konge L, Tolsgaard MG, Bjerrum F. 
Training and Assessment of Hysteroscopic Skills: A Systematic 
Review. J Surg Educ. 2016 Oct;73(5):906–18.
 39. De Silva PM, Mahmud A, Smith PP, Clark TJ. Analgesia for Office 
Hysteroscopy: A Systematic Review and Meta- analysis. J Minim 
Invasive Gynecol. 2020 Jul;27(5):1034–47.
 40. Solano Calvo J, Valle Rubido C, Rodríguez- Miguel A, Abajo F, 
Delgado Espeja J, González Hinojosa J, et  al. Nitrous oxide ver -
sus lidocaine versus no analgesic for in- office hysteroscopy: a 
randomised clinical trial. BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2021 
Jul;128(8):1364–72.
 41. Nagele F, Lockwood G, Magos AL. Randomised placebo controlled 
trial of mefenamic acid for premedication at outpatient hysteros -
copy: a pilot study. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1997 Jul;104(7):842–4.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
20 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
 42. Mercorio F, De Simone R, Landi P, Sarchianaki A, Tessitore G, 
Nappi C. Oral dexketoprofen for pain treatment during diag -
nostic hysteroscopy in postmenopausal women. Maturitas. 2002 
Dec;43(4):277–81.
 43. Floris S, Piras B, Orrù M, Silvetti E, Tusconi A, Melis F, et al. Efficacy 
of intravenous tramadol treatment for reducing pain during office 
diagnostic hysteroscopy. Fertil Steril. 2007 Jan;87(1):147–51.
 44. Schneider EN, Riley R, Espey E, Mishra SI, Singh RH. Nitrous 
oxide for pain management during in- office hysteroscopic ster -
ilization: a randomized controlled trial. Contraception. 2017 
Mar;95(3):239–44.
 45. Hassan A, Haggag H. Role of oral tramadol 50 mg in reducing pain 
associated with outpatient hysteroscopy: A randomised double- 
blind placebo- controlled trial. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2016 
Feb;56(1):102–6.
 46. Hassa H, Aydin Y, Oge T, Cicek K. Effectiveness of Vaginal 
Misoprostol and Rectal Nonsteroidal Anti- Inflammatory Drug in 
Vaginoscopic Diagnostic Outpatient Hysteroscopy in Primarily 
Infertile Women: Double- Blind, Randomized, Controlled Trial. J 
Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2013 Nov;20(6):880–5.
 47. Senturk MB, Guraslan H, Babaoğlu B, Yaşar L, Polat M. The Effect 
of Intrauterine Lidocaine and Rectal Indomethacin on Pain during 
Office Vaginoscopic Hysteroscopy: Randomized Double- Blind 
Controlled Study. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2015 Nov 20;81(3):280–4.
 48. Kadiroğulları P, Seçkin KD, Yücel B, Çetin BA, Barut SA, Yıldırım 
G. Analgesic Efficiency of Tramadol Administered Prior to 
Hysteroscopy Procedure. Gynecol Obstet Reprod Med. 2016 Dec 
28;22(3):152–5.
 49. Issat T, Beta J, Nowicka MA, Maciejewski T, Jakimiuk AJ. A 
Randomized, Single Blind, Placebo- Controlled Trial for the Pain 
Reduction During the Outpatient Hysteroscopy After Ketoprofen 
or Intravaginal Misoprostol. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2014 
Sep;21(5):921–7.
 50. Caligiani L, Pera L, Scuderi A, Ferrarello S. Analgesia for 
out- patients’ hysteroscopy in postmenopausal bleeding. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Ital. 1994;45(2 Suppl):251–6.
 51. Bellati U, Bonaventura A, Costanza A, Zulli S, Gentile C. Tramadol 
hydrochloride versus mepivacaine hydrochloride: comparison 
between two analgesic procedures in hysteroscopy. G Ital Ostet E 
Ginecol. 1998;20:469–72.
 52. Tam WH, Yuen PM. Use of diclofenac as an analgesic in outpatient 
hysteroscopy: a randomized, double- blind, placebo- controlled 
study. Fertil Steril. 2001 Nov;76(5):1070–2.
 53. Lin YH, Hwang JL, Huang LW, Chen HJ. Use of sublingual bu -
prenorphine for pain relief in office hysteroscopy. J Minim Invasive 
Gynecol. 2005 Aug;12(4):347–50.
 54. De Angelis C. Suppression of pelvic pain during hysteroscopy with 
a transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation device. Fertil Steril. 
2003 Jun;79(6):1422–7.
 55. Sharma J, Aruna J, Kumar P, Roy K, Malhotra N, Kumar S. 
Comparison of efficacy of oral drotaverine plus mefenamic acid 
with paracervical block and with intravenous sedation for pain re -
lief during hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy. Indian J Med Sci. 
2009;63(6):244.
 56. Thiel JA, Lukwinski A, Kamencic H, Lim H. Oral Analgesia vs 
Intravenous Conscious Sedation during Essure Micro- Insert 
Sterilization Procedure: Randomized, Double- Blind, Controlled 
Trial. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2011 Jan;18(1):108–11.
 57. Teran- Alonso MJ, Santiago JD, Usandizaga R, Zapardiel I. 
Evaluation of pain in office hysteroscopy with prior analgesic 
medication: a prospective randomized study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol. 2014 Jul;178:123–7.
 58. Mohammadi SS, Abdi M, Movafegh A. Comparing Transcervical 
Intrauterine Lidocaine Instillation with Rectal Diclofenac for Pain 
Relief During Outpatient Hysteroscopy: A Randomized Controlled 
Trial. Oman Med J. 2015 May 15;30(3):157–61.
 59. Hassan A, Wahba A, Haggag H. Tramadol versus Celecoxib 
for reducing pain associated with outpatient hysteroscopy: a randomized double- blind placebo- controlled trial. Hum Reprod. 
2016 Jan;31(1):60–6.
 60. Asgari Z, Razavi M, Hosseini R, Nataj M, Rezaeinejad M, 
Sepidarkish M. Evaluation of Paracervical Block and IV Sedation 
for Pain Management during Hysteroscopic Polypectomy: A 
Randomized Clinical Trial. Pain Res Manag. 2017;2017:1–7.
 61. Lisón JF, Amer- Cuenca JJ, Piquer- Martí S, Benavent- Caballer V, 
Biviá- Roig G, Marín- Buck A. Transcutaneous Nerve Stimulation for 
Pain Relief During Office Hysteroscopy: A Randomized Controlled 
Trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2017 Feb;129(2):363–70.
 62. Abbas AM, Elzargha AM, Ahmed AGM, Mohamed II, Altraigey 
A, Abdelbadee AY. Oral Diclofenac Potassium Versus Hyoscine- 
N- Butyl Bromide in Reducing Pain Perception during Office 
Hysteroscopy: ARandomized Double- blind Placebo- controlled 
Trial. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2019 May;26(4):709–16.
 63. Souza CAB, Genro VK, Tarrasconi DV, Oppermann MLR, Cunha 
Filho JSL. Diclofenac versus a combination of hyoscine and di -
clofenac for outpatient hysteroscopy: A placebo controlled ran -
domized clinical trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2020 
Apr;247:1–5.
 64. Samy A, Nabil H, Abdelhakim AM, Mahy ME, Abdel- Latif AA, 
Metwally AA. Pain management during diagnostic office hysteros -
copy in postmenopausal women: a randomized study. Climacteric. 
2020 Jul 3;23(4):397–403.
 65. electronic medicines compendium. PENTHROX 99.9%, 3 ml inha -
lation vapour, liquid - Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) 
- (emc) [Internet]. [cited 2023 Jun 20]. Available from: https:// www. 
medic ines. org. uk/ emc/ produ ct/ 1939/ smpc# gref
 66. Smith MD, Rowan E, Spaight R, Siriwardena AN. Evaluation of the 
effectiveness and costs of inhaled methoxyflurane versus usual an -
algesia for prehospital injury and trauma: non- randomised clinical 
study. BMC Emerg Med. 2022 Jul 7;22(1):122.
 67. Twidale E, Neutens S, Streeton C, Mudzamiri T, Hunt L, Dudley N. 
Methoxyflurane Analgesia for Conscious Hysteroscopy: A Double- 
Blind Randomised Placebo- Controlled Trial (MACH Trial). J 
Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2023 Nov;30(11):S12.
 68. De Silva P, Wilson L, Carnegy A, Smith P, Clark T. Cervical dila -
tation and preparation prior to outpatient hysteroscopy: a system -
atic review and meta- analysis. BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2021 
Jun;128(7):1112–23.
 69. Fouda UM, Gad Allah SH, Elshaer HS. Optimal timing of miso -
prostol administration in nulliparous women undergoing office 
hysteroscopy: a randomized double- blind placebo- controlled study. 
Fertil Steril. 2016 Jul;106(1):196–201.
 70. Rund NMA, El Shenoufy H, Islam BA, El Husseiny T, Nassar SA, 
Mohsen RA, et  al. Determining the Optimal Time Interval be -
tween Vaginal Dinoprostone Administration and Diagnostic Office 
Hysteroscopy in Nulliparous Women: A Randomized, Double- 
blind Trial. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2022 Jan;29(1):85–93.
 71. Pasini A, Belloni C. [Intraoperative complications of 697 consecutive 
operative hysteroscopies]. Minerva Ginecol. 2001 Feb;53(1):13–20.
 72. Jansen FW, Vredevoogd CB, van Ulzen K, Hermans J, Trimbos JB, 
Trimbos- Kemper TC. Complications of hysteroscopy: a prospec-
tive, multicenter study. Obstet Gynecol. 2000 Aug;96(2):266–70.
 73. Berek JS, Stubblefield PG. Anatomic and clinical correlates of uter -
ine perforation. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1979 Sep 15;135(2):181–4.
 74. Radman HM, Korman W. Uterine perforation during dilatation 
and curettage. Obstet Gynecol. 1963 Feb;21:210–5.
 75. Abulnour AAER, Mohamed MEM, Khalaf WM. Dinoprostone 
versus Misoprostol for Cervical Ripening before Diagnostic 
Hysteroscopy in Nulliparous Women : A Randomized Controlled 
Trial. Egypt J Hosp Med. 2018 Apr;71(1):2287–93.
 76. Bastu E, Celik C, Nehir A, Dogan M, Yuksel B, Ergun B. Cervical 
Priming Before Diagnostic Operative Hysteroscopy in Infertile 
Women: A Randomized, Double- Blind, Controlled Comparison of 
2 Vaginal Misoprostol Doses. Int Surg. 2013 May 1;98(2):140–4.
 77. Ben- Chetrit A, Eldar- Geva T, Lindenberg T, Farhat M, Shimonovitz 
S, Zacut D, et  al. Mifepristone does not induce cervical 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 21
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
softening in non- pregnant women. Hum Reprod Oxf Engl. 2004 
Oct;19(10):2372–6.
 78. da Costa AR, Pinto- Neto AM, Amorim M, Paiva LHSC, Scavuzzi A, 
Schettini J. Use of misoprostol prior to hysteroscopy in postmeno -
pausal women: a randomized, placebo- controlled clinical trial. J 
Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2008 Feb;15(1):67–73.
 79. Duan H, Hao M, Wang SM, Meng YJ, Wang Y, Yuan R, et  al. 
[Clinical multicenter study of carboprost methylate suppository for 
cervical ripening prior to diagnostic hysteroscopy]. Zhonghua Fu 
Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2018 Sep 25;53(9):602–7.
 80. El- Khayat W, Dwidar L, Elsawah H, Idris O. A double- blind ran -
domized controlled trial of two different doses of misoprostol for 
cervical priming prior to office hysteroscopy. Middle East Fertil Soc 
J. 2015 Mar;20(1):1–5.
 81. El- Mazny A, Abou- Salem N. A double- blind randomized controlled 
trial of vaginal misoprostol for cervical priming before outpatient 
hysteroscopy. Fertil Steril. 2011 Oct;96(4):962–5.
 82. Esin S, Baser E, Okuyan E, Kucukozkan T. Comparison of 
Sublingual Misoprostol With Lidocaine Spray for Pain Relief in 
Office Hysteroscopy: A Randomized, Double- Blind, Placebo- 
Controlled Trial. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2013 Jul;20(4):499–504.
 83. Fouda UM, Elshaer HS, Elsetohy KA, Youssef MA. Misoprostol 
versus uterine straightening by bladder distension for pain relief 
in postmenopausal patients undergoing diagnostic office hysteros -
copy: a randomised controlled non- inferiority trial. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2016 Aug;203:326–30.
 84. Fouda UM, Elsetohy KA, Elshaer HS, Hammad BEM, Shaban 
MM, Youssef MA, et  al. Misoprostol Prior to Diagnostic Office 
Hysteroscopy in the Subgroup of Patients with No Risk Factors for 
Cervical Stenosis: A Randomized Double Blind Placebo- Controlled 
Trial. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2018;83(5):455–60.
 85. Hwang JY, Song SH. Optimal Dose of Vaginal Misoprostol for 
Cervical Ripening before Hysteroscopy: A Randomized Double- 
Blind Study. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2018 Sep;25(6):1031–4.
 86. Gokmen Karasu AF, Aydin S, Ates S, Takmaz T, Comba C. 
Administration of rectal cytotec versus rectal buscopan before hys -
teroscopy. Minim Invasive Ther Allied Technol MITAT Off J Soc 
Minim Invasive Ther. 2020 Jun 3;1–5.
 87. Nair VG, Roy KK, Rai R, Das A, Bharti J, Zangmo R. Effectiveness of 
Misoprostol in Office Hysteroscopy in Premenopausal Nulliparous 
Women: A Prospective Randomized Double- Blind Placebo- 
Controlled Trial. J Hum Reprod Sci. 2020 Jun;13(2):104–9.
 88. Nakano FY, Yela DA, Pinto JPL, Riegas T, Benetti- Pinto CL, Pedro 
AO, et al. Efficacy of misoprostol before diagnostic hysteroscopy in 
postmenopausal women: a randomized clinical trial. Menopause. 
2018 Jul;25(7):789–94.
 89. Nandhini B, Maurya DK, Keepanasseril A, Kubera NS. Effect of cer -
vical priming with misoprostol on cervical entry in women under -
going vaginoscopic hysteroscopy for evaluation of abnormal uterine 
bleeding: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2018 
Jul;298(1):133–7.
 90. Samy A, Abbas AM, Rashwan ASSA, Talaat B, Eissa AI, Metwally 
AA, et  al. Vaginal Dinoprostone in Reducing Pain Perception 
During Diagnostic Office Hysteroscopy in Postmenopausal 
Women: A Randomized, Double- Blind, Placebo- Controlled Trial. 
J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2020 May;27(4):847–53.
 91. Singh N, Ghosh B, Naha M, Mittal S. Vaginal misoprostol for cer -
vical priming prior to diagnostic hysteroscopy–efficacy, safety and 
patient satisfaction: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Gynecol 
Obstet. 2009 Jan;279(1):37–40.
 92. Sordia- Hernández LH, Rosales- Tristan E, Vazquez- Mendez J, 
Merino M, Iglesias JL, Garza- Leal JG, et al. Effectiveness of miso -
prostol for office hysteroscopy without anesthesia in infertile pa -
tients. Fertil Steril. 2011 Feb;95(2):759–61.
 93. Tasma M, Louwerse M, Hehenkamp W, Geomini P, Bongers M, 
Veersema S, et  al. Misoprostol for cervical priming prior to hys -
teroscopy in postmenopausal and premenopausal nulliparous women; a multicentre randomised placebo controlled trial. BJOG 
Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2018 Jan;125(1):81–9.
 94. Valente EP, de Amorim MMR, Costa AAR, de Miranda DV. Vaginal 
misoprostol prior to diagnostic hysteroscopy in patients of repro -
ductive age: a randomized clinical trial. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 
2008 Aug;15(4):452–8.
 95. Xu D, Zhang X, He J. A Prospective, Randomized Comparison of 
Intramuscular Phloroglucinol Versus Oral Misoprostol for Cervix 
Pretreatment Before Diagnostic Hysteroscopy. Int Surg. 2015 
Jul;100(7–8):1207–11.
 96. Martin J, editor. British National Formulary [Internet]. 57th ed. 
London: BMJ group and RPS publishing; 2009 Available from: 
http:// bnf. org/ bnf/ 
 97. Paulo AAS, Solheiro MHR, Paulo COS. Is pain better tolerated with 
mini- hysteroscopy than with conventional device? A systematic 
review and meta- analysis: Hysteroscopy scope size and pain. Arch 
Gynecol Obstet. 2015 Nov;292(5):987–94.
 98. Cicinelli E, Tinelli R, Loiudice L, Loiudice I, Quattromini P, 
Fusco A, et al. AlphaScope vs Lens- Based Hysteroscope for Office 
Polypectomy without Anesthesia: Randomized Controlled Study. J 
Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2011 Nov;18(6):796–9.
 99. Cicinelli E, Schönauer LM, Barba B, Tartagni M, Luisi D, Di 
Naro E. Tolerability and Cardiovascular Complications of 
Outpatient Diagnostic Minihysteroscopy Compared with 
Conventional Hysteroscopy. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 2003 
Aug;10(3):399–402.
 100. De Angelis C, Santoro G, Re ME, Nofroni I. Office hysteroscopy and 
compliance: mini- hysteroscopy versus traditional hysteroscopy in a 
randomized trial. Hum Reprod Oxf Engl. 2003 Nov;18(11):2441–5.
 101. Kassem GA, El- Brombly WH, El Huseiny AM. Outpatient mini -
hysteroscopy and conventional hysteroscopy: a comparative study. 
Middle East Fertility Soc J. 2005;10:231–7.
 102. Pluchino N, Ninni F, Angioni S, Artini P, Araujo VG, Massimetti G, 
et al. Office Vaginoscopic Hysteroscopy in Infertile Women: Effects 
of Gynecologist Experience, Instrument Size, and Distention 
Medium on Patient Discomfort. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2010 
May;17(3):344–50.
 103. Rullo S, Sorrenti G, Marziali M, Ermini B, Sesti F, Piccione E. Office 
hysteroscopy: comparison of 2.7- and 4- mm hysteroscopes for ac-
ceptability, feasibility and diagnostic accuracy. J Reprod Med. 2005 
Jan;50(1):45–8.
 104. Campo R, Molinas CR, Rombauts L, Mestdagh G, Lauwers M, 
Braekmans P, et al. Prospective multicentre randomized controlled 
trial to evaluate factors influencing the success rate of office diag -
nostic hysteroscopy. Hum Reprod Oxf Engl. 2005 Jan;20(1):258–63.
 105. Giorda G, Scarabelli C, Franceschi S, Campagnutta E. Feasibility 
and pain control in outpatient hysteroscopy in postmenopausal 
women: a randomized trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2000 
Jul;79(7):593–7.
 106. De Silva PM, Stevenson H, Smith PP, Clark TJ. Pain and oper -
ative technologies used in office hysteroscopy: a systematic re -
view of randomized controlled trials. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 
2021;28(10):1699–711.
 107. Connor M, Clark TJ, editors. Diagnostic and operative hysteros -
copy. Cambridge, United Kingdom; New York, NY: Cambridge 
University Press; 2020. p. 1.
 108. Unfried G, Wieser F, Albrecht A, Kaider A, Nagele F. Flexible versus 
rigid endoscopes for outpatient hysteroscopy: a prospective ran -
domized clinical trial. Hum Reprod Oxf Engl. 2001 Jan;16(1):168–71.
 109. Baxter AJ, Beck B, Phillips K. A randomized prospective trial of rigid 
and flexible hysteroscopy in an outpatient setting: RANDOMIZED 
PROSPECTIVE TRIAL OF RIGID AND FLEXIBLE 
HYSTEROSCOPY. Gynaecol Endosc. 2002 Dec;11(6):357–64.
 110. Smith PP, Middleton LJ, Connor M, Clark TJ. Hysteroscopic 
Morcellation Compared With Electrical Resection of Endometrial 
Polyps: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2014 
Apr;123(4):745–51.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
22 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
 111. Kamel MAM, El- Tawab SS, El- Ashkar OS, Hassan MIA. Mini- 
Scissor Versus Bipolar Twizzle in Ambulatory Hysteroscopic 
Metroplasty: A Prospective Randomized Study. J Gynecol Surg. 2014 
Jun;30(3):147–51.
 112. Muzii L, Bellati F, Pernice M, Manci N, Angioli R, Panici PB. 
Resectoscopic versus bipolar electrode excision of endometrial pol-
yps: a randomized study. Fertil Steril. 2007 Apr;87(4):909–17.
 113. Pampalona JR, Bastos MD, Moreno GM, Pust AB, Montesdeoca 
GE, Guerra Garcia A, et  al. A Comparison of Hysteroscopic 
Mechanical Tissue Removal With Bipolar Electrical Resection for 
the Management of Endometrial Polyps in an Ambulatory Care 
Setting: Preliminary Results. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2015 
Mar;22(3):439–45.
 114. Lara- Domínguez MD, Arjona- Berral JE, Dios- Palomares R, 
Castelo- Branco C. Outpatient hysteroscopic polypectomy: bipolar 
energy system (Versapoint®) versus diode laser – randomized clini -
cal trial. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 3;32(3):196–200.
 115. Sudano MC, Vitale SG, Rapisarda AMC, Carastro D, Tropea A, 
Zizza G. The REP- b (removal of endometrial pathologies- basket) 
in- office hysteroscopy. Updat Surg. 2016 Dec;68(4):407–12.
 116. Remondi C, Sesti F, Sorrenti G, Venezia G, Sorge R, Pietropolli A, 
et al. Hysteroscopic polypectomy: a comparison between 22 Fr and 
26 Fr resectoscopes under paracervical block anesthesia, a random -
ized controlled study. Minim Invasive Ther Allied Technol. 2018 
Nov 2;27(6):339–46.
 117. Clark TJ, Samuel N, Malick S, Middleton LJ, Daniels J, Gupta 
JK. Bipolar Radiofrequency Compared With Thermal Balloon 
Endometrial Ablation in the Office: A Randomized Controlled 
Trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2011 Jan;117(1):109–18.
 118. Penninx JPM, Herman MC, Kruitwagen RFPM, Ter Haar AJF, Mol 
BW, Bongers MY. Bipolar versus balloon endometrial ablation in 
the office: a randomized controlled trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol. 2016 Jan;196:52–6.
 119. De Silva PM, Stevenson H, Smith PP, Justin Clark T. A Systematic 
Review of the Effect of Type, Pressure, and Temperature of the 
Distension Medium on Pain During Office Hysteroscopy. J Minim 
Invasive Gynecol. 2021 Jun;28(6):1148-1159.e2.
 120. Nagele F, Bournas N, O'Connor H, Broadbent M, Richardson R, 
Magos A. Comparison of carbon dioxide and normal saline for 
uterine distension in outpatient hysteroscopy. Fertil Steril. 1996 
Feb;65(2):305–9.
 121. Litta P, Bonora M, Pozzan C, Merlin F, Sacco G, Fracas M, et  al. 
Carbon dioxide versus normal saline in outpatient hysteroscopy. 
Hum Reprod Oxf Engl. 2003 Nov;18(11):2446–9.
 122. Pellicano M, Guida M, Zullo F, Lavitola G, Cirillo D, Nappi C. 
Carbon dioxide versus normal saline as a uterine distension me -
dium for diagnostic vaginoscopic hysteroscopy in infertile patients: 
a prospective, randomized, multicenter study. Fertil Steril. 2003 
Feb;79(2):418–21.
 123. Paschopoulos M, Kaponis A, Makrydimas G, Zikopoulos K, 
Alamanos Y, O'Donovan P, et al. Selecting distending medium for 
out- patient hysteroscopy. Does it really matter? Hum Reprod. 2004 
Nov 1;19(11):2619–25.
 124. Shankar M, Davidson A, Taub N, Habiba M. Randomised compar -
ison of distension media for outpatient hysteroscopy. BJOG Int J 
Obstet Gynaecol. 2004 Jan;111(1):57–62.
 125. Raimondo G, Raimondo D, D'Aniello G, Russo C, Ronga A, 
Gabbanini M, et al. A randomized controlled study comparing car -
bon dioxide versus normal saline as distension media in diagnostic 
office hysteroscopy: is the distension with carbon dioxide a prob -
lem? Fertil Steril. 2010 Nov;94(6):2319–22.
 126. Mazzon I, Favilli A, Grasso M, Horvath S, Bini V, Di Renzo GC, et al. 
Pain in diagnostic hysteroscopy: a multivariate analysis after a ran -
domized, controlled trial. Fertil Steril. 2014 Nov;102(5):1398–403.
 127. Tagliaferri V, Ricciardi L, Ricciardi R, Pinto LR, Lanzone A, 
Scambia G, et al. Carbon dioxide in office diagnostic hysteroscopy: 
An open question. A multicenter randomized trial on 1982 proce -
dures. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2019 Apr;235:97–101. 128. Shahid A, Pathak M, Gulumser C, Parker S, Palmer E, Saridogan 
E. Optimum uterine filling pressure for outpatient diagnostic hys -
teroscopy: a double- blind, randomized controlled trial. Reprod 
Biomed Online. 2014 Jan;28(1):86–91.
 129. Haggag HM, Hassan AMA. The impact of altering filling pressures 
in diagnostic outpatient hysteroscopy on the procedure completion 
rates and associated pain: a randomised double- blind controlled 
trial. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2016 Feb;56(1):97–101.
 130. Haggag H, Hassan A, Wahba A, Joukhadar R. A randomized double- 
blind controlled trial of different filling pressures in operative out -
patient hysteroscopy. Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2017 Oct;139(1):55–60.
 131. Karaman E, Kolusarı A, Çetin O, Çim N, Alkış İ, Karaman Y, 
et  al. What should the optimal intrauterine pressure be during 
outpatient diagnostic hysteroscopy? A randomized comparative 
study: Optimal intrauterine pressure during hysteroscopy. J Obstet 
Gynaecol Res. 2017 May;43(5):902–8.
 132. Evangelista A, Oliveira MAP, Crispi CP, Lamblet MF, Raymundo 
TS, Santos LC. Diagnostic Hysteroscopy Using Liquid Distention 
Medium: Comparison of Pain with Warmed Saline Solution vs 
Room- Temperature Saline Solution. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 
2011 Jan;18(1):104–7.
 133. Tawfek ME, Hemeda HM, Ibrahim AI. Effectiveness of Warm 
Saline Distension Media on Relieving Pain in Outpatient Office 
Hysteroscopy: A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial. J Gynecol 
Reprod Med. 2019 Jan 30;3(1):1–7.
 134. Kapur S, Gruber A, Sekar H, Mafuta J, Lodhi W, Sivashanmugarajan 
V, et al. Does temperature of distending medium matter in outpa -
tient hysteroscopy? A double- blinded cohort control observational 
study of room temperature versus warmed saline. J Obstet Gynaecol 
Res. 2020 Mar;46(3):485–9.
 135. Salazar CA, Wong MC, Miller VE, Morris SN, Isaacson KB. The 
Effect of Warmed Hysteroscopic Fluid- Distention Medium on 
Postoperative Core Body Temperature: A Randomized Trial. J 
Gynecol Surg. 2019 Aug;35(4):239–45.
 136. Umranikar S, Clark TJ, Saridogan E, Miligkos D, Arambage K, Torbe 
E, et al. BSGE/ESGE guideline on management of fluid distension 
media in operative hysteroscopy. Gynecol Surg. 2016;13(4):289–303.
 137. Gulucu S, Cakmak B. Warm distension fluid reduces pain severity 
in office hysteroscopy: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Saudi 
Med. 2021 Jun;41(3):135–40.
 138. De Silva PM, Carnegy A, Smith PP, Clark TJ. Local anaesthesia for 
office hysteroscopy: A systematic review & meta- analysis. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2020 Sep;252:70–81.
 139. Al- Sunaidi M, Tulandi T. A randomized trial comparing local intra -
cervical and combined local and paracervical anesthesia in outpa -
tient hysteroscopy. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2007 Apr;14(2):153–5.
 140. Arnau B, Jovell E, Redón S, Canals M, Mir V, Jiménez E. Lidocaine- 
prilocaine (EMLA®) cream as analgesia in hysteroscopy practice: 
a prospective, randomized, non- blinded, controlled study. Acta 
Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2013 Aug;92(8):978–81.
 141. Broadbent JA, Hill NC, Molnár BG, Rolfe KJ, Magos AL. 
Randomized placebo controlled trial to assess the role of intracer -
vical lignocaine in outpatient hysteroscopy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 
1992 Sep;99(9):777–9.
 142. Chapa HO, Venegas G, VanDuyne CP, Suvunrungsi L, Antonetti 
AG, Sandate J. In- office thermachoice III ablation: a com -
parison of two anesthetic techniques. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 
2010;69(2):140–4.
 143. Chudnoff S, Einstein M, Levie M. Paracervical block efficacy in 
office hysteroscopic sterilization: a randomized controlled trial. 
Obstet Gynecol. 2010 Jan;115(1):26–34.
 144. Cicinelli E, Didonna T, Ambrosi G, Schönauer LM, Fiore G, 
Matteo MG. Topical anaesthesia for diagnostic hysteroscopy and 
endometrial biopsy in postmenopausal women: a randomised 
placebo- controlled double- blind study. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1997 
Mar;104(3):316–9.
 145. Cicinelli E, Didonna T, Schonauer LM, Stragapede S, Falco N, Pansini 
N. Paracervical anesthesia for hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy 
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 23
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
in postmenopausal women. A randomized, double- blind, placebo- 
controlled study. J Reprod Med. 1998 Dec;43(12):1014–8.
 146. Clark S, Vonau B, Macdonald R. Topical anaesthesia in outpatient 
hysteroscopy. Gynaecol Endosc. 1996;5:141–4.
 147. Costello MF, Horrowitz SD, Williamson M. A prospective random -
ized double- blind placebo- controlled study of local anaesthetic 
injected through the hysteroscope for outpatient hysteroscopy and 
endometrial biopsy. Gynaecol Endosc. 1998 Jun;7(3):121–6.
 148. Davies A, Richardson RE, O'Connor H, Baskett TF, Nagele F, Magos 
AL. Lignocaine aerosol spray in outpatient hysteroscopy: a ran -
domized double- blind placebo- controlled trial. Fertil Steril. 1997 
Jun;67(6):1019–23.
 149. Esteve M, Schindler S, Borges Machado S, Argollo Borges S, Ramos 
Santos C, Coutinho E. The efficacy of intracervical lidocaine in out -
patient hysteroscopy. Gynaecol Endosc. 2002 Feb;11(1):33–6.
 150. Finikiotis G, Tsocanos S. Outpatient Hysteroscopy: A Comparison 
of 2 Methods of Local Analgesia. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 1992 
Nov;32(4):373–4.
 151. Guida M. Outpatient operative hysteroscopy with bipolar elec-
trode: a prospective multicentre randomized study between local 
anaesthesia and conscious sedation. Hum Reprod. 2003 Apr 
1;18(4):840–3.
 152. Gupta N, Gupta B, Dadhwal V, Mittal S. Efficacy of intrauterine lig -
nocaine plus vaginal misoprostol for pain relief in premenopausal 
women undergoing endometrial aspiration and ambulatory hys -
teroscopy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2010 Aug;89(8):1066–70.
 153. Hong J, Kim J. Use of paracervical analgesia for outpatient hystero -
scopic surgery: A randomized, double- blind, placebo- controlled 
study. Ambul Surg. 2006 Jul;12(4):181–5.
 154. Isley MM, Jensen JT, Nichols MD, Lehman A, Bednarek P, Edelman 
A. Intrauterine lidocaine infusion for pain management during out -
patient transcervical tubal sterilization: a randomized controlled 
trial. Contraception. 2012 Mar;85(3):275–81.
 155. Kabli N, Tulandi T. A randomized trial of outpatient hysteros -
copy with and without intrauterine anesthesia. J Minim Invasive 
Gynecol. 2008 Jun;15(3):308–10.
 156. Karakuş R, Namazov A, Ayas S, Polat M, Arinkan SA, Angın 
AD, et  al. OFİS HİSTEROSKOPİDE ANALJEZİ AMAÇLI 
LOKAL ANESTEZİ YÖNTEMLERİNİN ETKİNLİĞİNİN 
KARŞILAŞTIRILMASI (Efficacy of Local Anesthesia for Office 
Hysteroscopy). Zeynep Kamil Tıp Bül. 2014 Aug 6;45(3):136.
 157. Kokanalı MK, Güzel Aİ, Özer İ, Topçu HO, Cavkaytar S, Doğanay M. 
Pain experienced during and after office hysteroscopy with and with-
out intracervical anesthesia. J Exp Ther Oncol. 2014;10(4):243–6.
 158. Kumar V, Tryposkiadis K, Gupta JK. Hysteroscopic local anesthetic 
intrauterine cornual block in office endometrial ablation: a ran -
domized controlled trial. Fertil Steril. 2016 Feb;105(2):474-480.e1.
 159. Lau WC, Lo WK, Tam WH, Yuen PM. Paracervical anaesthesia 
in outpatient hysteroscopy: a randomised double- blind placebo- 
controlled trial. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1999 Apr;106(4):356–9.
 160. Lau WC, Tam WH, Lo WK, Yuen PM. A randomised double- blind 
placebo- controlled trial of transcervical intrauterine local anaes -
thesia in outpatient hysteroscopy. BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2000 
May;107(5):610–3.
 161. Lukes AS, Roy KH, Presthus JB, Diamond MP, Berman JM, Konsker 
KA. Randomized comparative trial of cervical block protocols for 
pain management during hysteroscopic removal of polyps and my -
omas. Int J Women's Health. 2015;7:833–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2147/ 
IJWH. S50101 . Erratum in: Int J Womens Health. 2015;7:871.
 162. Makris N, Xygakis A, Dachlythras M, Prevedourakis C, Michalas 
S. Mepivacaine Local Cervical Anesthesia for Diagnostic 
Hysteroscopy: A Randomized Placebo- Controlled Study. J Gynecol 
Surg. 2001 Mar;17(1):7–11.
 163. Soriano D, Ajaj S, Chuong T, Deval B, Fauconnier A, Daraï E. 
Lidocaine spray and outpatient hysteroscopy: randomized placebo- 
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2000 Nov;96(5 Pt 1):661–4.
 164. Vercellini P, Colombo A, Mauro F, Oldani S, Bramante T, Crosignani 
PG. Paracervical anesthesia for outpatient hysteroscopy. Fertil 
Steril. 1994 Nov;62(5):1083–5. 165. Wong AY, Wong K, Tang LC. Stepwise pain score analysis of the 
effect of local lignocaine on outpatient hysteroscopy: a random-
ized, double- blind, placebo- controlled trial. Fertil Steril. 2000 
Jun;73(6):1234–7.
 166. Zullo F, Pellicano M, Stigliano CM, Di Carlo C, Fabrizio A, Nappi C. 
Topical anesthesia for office hysteroscopy. A prospective, randomized 
study comparing two modalities. J Reprod Med. 1999 Oct;44(10):865–9.
 167. Zupi E, Luciano AA, Marconi D, Valli E, Patrizi G, Romanini C. The 
use of topical anesthesia in diagnostic hysteroscopy and endome -
trial biopsy. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 1994 May;1(3):249–52.
 168. De Silva PM, Carnegy A, Smith PP, Clark TJ. Vaginoscopy for office 
hysteroscopy: A systematic review & meta- analysis. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2020 Sep;252:278–85.
 169. Sagiv R, Sadan O, Boaz M, Dishi M, Schechter E, Golan A. A new 
approach to office hysteroscopy compared with traditional hys -
teroscopy: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2006 
Aug;108(2):387–92.
 170. Christie LE, Picard J, Weinberg GL. Local anaesthetic systemic tox -
icity. BJA Educ. 2015 Jun;15(3):136–42.
 171. De Silva PM, Carnegy A, Graham C, Smith PP, Clark TJ. Conscious 
sedation for office hysteroscopy: A systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2021 Nov;266:89–98.
 172. Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. Safe Sedation Practice for 
Healthcare Procedures: Standards and Guidance. London: Academy 
of Medical Royal Colleges; 2013.
 173. American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of Depth of 
Sedation: Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/
Analgesia. Washington DC: American Society of Anesthesiologists; 
2019.
 174. Practice Guidelines for Moderate Procedural Sedation and Analgesia 
2018: A Report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Moderate Procedural Sedation and Analgesia, the American 
Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons, American College 
of Radiology, American Dental Association, American Society of 
Dentist Anesthesiologists, and Society of Interventional Radiology. 
Anesthesiology. 2018 Mar 1;128(3):437–79.
 175. Bingol Tanriverdi T, Koceroglu I, Devrim S, Gura Celik M. 
Comparison of sedation with dexmedetomidine vs propofol during 
hysteroscopic surgery: Single- centre randomized controlled trial. J 
Clin Pharm Ther. 2019 Apr;44(2):312–7.
 176. Goswami D, Nisa N, Sharma A, Dadhwal V, Baidya DK, Arora M. 
Low- Dose Ketamine for Outpatient Hysteroscopy: A Prospective, 
Randomised, Double- Blind Study. Turk J Anaesthesiol Reanim. 
2020 Apr;48(2):134–41.
 177. Garbin O, Kutnahorsky R, Göllner JL, Vayssiere C. Vaginoscopic 
versus conventional approaches to outpatient diagnostic hysteros -
copy: a two- centre randomized prospective study. Hum Reprod Oxf 
Engl. 2006 Nov;21(11):2996–3000.
 178. Guida M, Di Spiezio Sardo A, Acunzo G, Sparice S, Bramante S, 
Piccoli R, et  al. Vaginoscopic versus traditional office hysteros -
copy: a randomized controlled study. Hum Reprod Oxf Engl. 2006 
Dec;21(12):3253–7.
 179. Sharma M, Taylor A, di Spiezio Sardo A, Buck L, Mastrogamvrakis G, 
Kosmas I, et al. Outpatient hysteroscopy: traditional versus the “no- 
touch” technique. BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2005 Jul;112(7):963–7.
 180. Ngu SF, Cheung VYT, Pun TC. Randomized Study of Vaginoscopy 
and H Pipelle vs Traditional Hysteroscopy and Standard Pipelle. J 
Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2012 Mar;19(2):206–11.
 181. Chapa HO, Venegas G. Vaginoscopy compared to traditional hys -
teroscopy for hysteroscopic sterilization. A randomized trial. J 
Reprod Med. 2015 Feb;60(1–2):43–7.
 182. Smith P, Kolhe S, O'Connor S, Clark T. Vaginoscopy Against 
Standard Treatment: a randomised controlled trial. BJOG Int J 
Obstet Gynaecol. 2019 Jun;126(7):891–9.
 183. Nappi L, Sardo ADS, Spinelli M, Guida M, Mencaglia L, Greco 
P, et  al. A Multicenter, Double- Blind, Randomized, Placebo- 
Controlled Study to Assess Whether Antibiotic Administration 
Should Be Recommended During Office Operative Hysteroscopy. 
Reprod Sci. 2013 Jul;20(7):755–61.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
24 | 
GREEN- TOP GUIDELINE NO. 59
 184. Janjua A, Smith P, Dawoud K, Gray J, Clark J. Fatal systemic infec-
tion following an outpatient hysteroscopic diagnosis of a chronic 
pyometra: a case report and survey of practice. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol. 2015 Nov;194:250–1.
 185. Guo T, Zeng N, Yang J, Wu P, Liu P, Liu Z, et al. The clinical effects 
of antibiotic prophylaxis for hysteroscopic procedures: A meta- 
analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Aug;98(34):e16964.
 186. Clark TJ, Middleton LJ, Cooper NA, Diwakar L, Denny E, Smith 
P, et  al. A randomised controlled trial of Outpatient versus inpa -
tient Polyp Treatment (OPT) for abnormal uterine bleeding. Health 
Technol Assess Winch Engl. 2015 Jul;19(61):1–194.
 187. Reinders I, Geomini P, Timmermans A, de Lange M, Bongers M. 
Local anaesthesia during endometrial ablation: a systematic review. 
BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2017 Jan;124(2):190–9. 188. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists & London School 
of Hygeine & Tropical Medicine. Patterns of Benign Gynaecology 
Care in English NHS Hospital Trusts 2015- 2016 [Internet]. [cited 
2022 Aug 14]. Available from: http:// allca tsrgr ey. org. uk/ wp/ downl 
oad/ obste trics_2/ benig n- gynae - indic ators - repor t- 2015- 16. pdf
How to cite this article: De Silva PM, Smith PP, 
Cooper NAM, Clark TJ. Outpatient Hysteroscopy. 
BJOG. 2024;00:1–25. https://doi.org/10.1111/1471-
0528.17907
A PPE N DI X 1: Explanation of grades and evidence levels
Classification of evidence levels
1++ High- quality meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with 
a very low risk of bias
1+ Well- conducted meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials 
with a low risk of bias
1– Meta- analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of 
bias
2++ High- quality systematic reviews of case–control or cohort studies or high- quality
case–control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a
high probability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well- conducted case–control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance
and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a
significant risk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non- analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series
4 Expert opinion
Grades of Recommendation
AAt least one meta- analysis, systematic reviews or RCT rated as 1++, and directly applicable to the target population; 
or a systematic review of RCTs or a body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, directly applicable 
to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results
BA body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating 
overall consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
CA body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating 
overall consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
DEvidence level 3 or 4; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good Practice Points
GPP Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group. *
* on the occasion when the guideline development group find there is an important practical point that they wish to emphasise but for which there is not, nor is there likely 
to be any research evidence. This will typically be where some aspect of treatment is regarded as such sound clinical practice that nobody is likely to question it. These are 
marked in the guideline, and are indicated by ✓ . It must be emphasised that these are NOT an alternative to evidence- based recommendations, and should only be used where 
there is no alternative means of highlighting the issue.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 | 25
OUTPATIENT HYSTEROSCOPY
The guideline will be considered for update 3 years after 
publication, with an intermediate assessment of the need to 
update 2 years after publication.This guideline was produced on behalf of the 
British Society of Gynaecological Endoscopists 
and the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists by:
Dr PM De Silva PhD MRCOG PGCert(MedEd), 
Birmingham; Mr PP Smith PhD MRCOG, 
Birmingham; Dr NAM Cooper PhD MRCOG, 
London; Professor TJ Clark MD(Hons) FRCOG, 
Birmingham
The authors acknowledge the contributions of: 
Dr A Mahmud PhD MRCOG PGDip(MedEd), 
Dr H Stevenson MRCOG MSc MEd, Dr A 
Carnegy BMedSc(Hons) MBChB, Dr L Wilson 
BSc, MBChB (Hons), Dr CS Graham BSc(Hons) 
FRCA and Ms L Davies.
Peer reviewers: Ms L Shilcock Patient, Leicester; 
Royal College of Anaesthetist; Mrs J Bushell, Didcot; 
P Howe, Patient; Dr J Lord FRCOG, London; Ms G 
Connor, Patient; Dr J Harrington, Patient; FEmISA; 
Campaign Against Painful Hysteroscopy; Ms C 
Mardon, Patient; MG Munro FRCSC FACOG, 
Los Angeles; Ms G Johnson Patient, Newcastle 
Upon Tyne; A Wright, Newcastle; S Knights BSc, 
Colchester; Ms T Parsons Patient, Suffolk; Patient 
Safety Learning; Ms C Wood Patient, Colchester; 
Dr J K Gupta FRCOG, Birmingham; Dr M Shahin 
MRCOG, Stoke on Trent; Mr J Nicholls FRCOG, 
Oxford; Dr S Mabbutt MRCOG, Northampton.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr A Macleod 
FRCOG, Edinburgh;1 Dr M Madhra MRCOG, 
Edinburgh2; Dr G Ahmad FRCOG, Manchester;3 
Mr K Jayaprakasan FRCOG, Nottingham.4
The co- Chairs of the Guidelines Committee 
were: Dr MA Ledingham MRCOG, Glasgow;1 
Dr B Magowan FRCOG, Melrose;2 Ms N Potdar 
FRCOG, Leicester;3 Mr A McKelvey MRCOG, 
Norwich.3
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare 
any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising 
any conflicts of interest for this guideline is avail -
able from : https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ en/ guide lines - 
resea rch- servi ces/ guide lines/ gtg59 .
The final version is the responsibility of the 
Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educa -
tional aid to good clinical practice. They present 
recognised methods and techniques of clinical 
practice, based on published evidence, for consid -
eration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and 
other relevant health professionals. The ultimate 
judgement regarding a particular clinical proce -
dure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor 
or other attendant in the light of clinical data pre -
sented by the patient and the diagnostic and treat -
ment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike pro -
tocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they 
are not intended to be prescriptive directions de -
fining a single course of management. Departure 
from the local prescriptive protocols or guidelines 
should be fully documented in the patient's case 
notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
1until May 2020; 2until May 2022; 3from June 2020; 4from 
June 2022.
1until December 2020; 2until June 2020; 3from January 2021.
 14710528, 0, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.17907 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [22/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License