# Extracted from: BJOG - 2017 -  Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in Pregnancy.pdf
# Guideline ID: bjog-2017-management-of-inherited-bleeding-disorders-in-pregnancy
# Content length: 245896 characters
# Processing date: 1732953490.7823577

Management of Inherited Bleeding
Disorders in Pregnancy
Green-top Guideline No. 71 (joint with UKHCDO)
April 2017
Please cite this paper as: Pavord S, Rayment R, Madan B, Cumming T, Lester W, Chalmers E, Myers B, Maybury H, Tower C,
Kadir R on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in
Pregnancy. Green-top Guideline No. 71. BJOG 2017; 124:e193 –e263.
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.14592
Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in Pregnancy
This is the ﬁrst edition of a combined United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organisation (UKHCDO) and
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) guideline although a previous guideline was written bythe UKHCDO in 2006.
Executive summary of recommendations
Haemophilia
What is the deﬁnition?
Clinicians should be aware that haemophilia is an X-linked condition associated with reduction
or absence of clotting factor VIII (haemophilia A) or IX (haemophilia B), causing bleedingsymptoms.P
How should inheritance be assessed?
Up to 50% of neonatal males with severe haemophilia have no previous family history. In thesecases, there is a 90% chance that the mother is a carrier, with risk to the next male child.D
A family tree should be constructed to assess the likelihood of haemophilia carriership in at-riskfemale family members.P
Females at risk of carrying haemophilia, particularly severe haemophilia, should be tested forthe genetic mutation present in affected family members, if available.P
What are the different phenotypes and how is severity assessed?
Clinicians should be aware of the different phenotypes and severities of haemophilia, as thisinﬂuences risk and required management.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e194 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby?
Known or potential female carriers may have low factor VIII/IX levels. The levels should be
checked prior to an invasive procedure or in association with bleeding symptoms.D
Clinicians should be aware that carriers of haemophilia are at increased risk of bleeding withinvasive procedures, termination, spontaneous miscarriage and at the time of delivery.D
Male neonates with haemophilia are at increased risk of bleeding, including intracranialhaemorrhage (ICH) and extracranial haemorrhage (ECH).C
Male neonates with haemophilia are at risk of iatrogenic bleeding following delivery.P
What is the prepregnancy management?
The baseline factor level should be determined prior to onset of pregnancy.P
Before pregnancy, the general health of women who are carriers for haemophilia should beoptimised, including attention to weight and correction of any iron de ﬁciency.P
How should genetic counselling be provided?
Genetic counselling should be provided to women at risk, ideally before pregnancy, by
appropriately quali ﬁed and experienced clinical staff.P
Written informed consent should be obtained in advance of any genetic testing.P
What are the options for prenatal diagnosis (PND)?
Carriers of severe haemophilia should be offered preimplantation genetic diagnosis.P
Carriers of severe haemophilia with a male fetus con ﬁrmed to be affected by haemophilia
should be counselled to enable informed choices.D
All carriers of severe haemophilia should be offered fetal sex determination by free fetal DNAanalysis from 9 weeks of gestation.D
Pregnant carriers of severe haemophilia with a male fetus at risk of haemophilia should beoffered the option of PND with chorionic villus sampling at 11 –14 weeks of gestation.P
All carriers of haemophilia with male fetuses should be offered third trimester amniocentesis if
diagnostic investigations have not previously been performed to determine haemophilia statusto inform options for delivery.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e195 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
What is the antepartum management?
Antenatal care should be delivered in the context of a multidisciplinary team setting with
haematologists and obstetricians with expertise in this ﬁeld.P
Maternal factor VIII/IX should be checked at booking, before any antenatal procedure and in
the third trimester; factor VIII levels rise in pregnancy, but factor IX tends to remain stable.D
Aim for factor VIII/IX levels of at least 0.5 iu/ml to cover surgical or invasive procedures, or
spontaneous miscarriage. If treatment is required, factor levels of 1.0 iu/ml should be aimedfor and not allowed to fall below 0.5 iu/ml until haemostasis is secure.C
Tranexamic acid should be considered in combination with treatment for all those with levelsof less than 0.5 iu/ml or as sole therapy for those with levels above 0.5 iu/ml if clinicallyindicated. Following miscarriage, it should be continued until the bleeding settles.D
Desmopressin (DDAVP) can be used antenatally to raise factor VIII levels. Due to theantidiuretic effect, ﬂuids should be restricted to 1 litre for 24 hours after use or, if not possible,
electrolytes should be monitored.C
Recombinant factor VIII should be used if levels obtained with DDAVP are insuf ﬁcient or in a
known nonresponder.C
Recombinant factor IX is required to cover invasive or surgical procedures in women withfactor levels less than 0.5 iu/ml.P
When giving treatment to raise clotting factor levels, it is important to monitor the response totreatment by measuring the plasma clotting factor concentration before and after infusion, and4–6 hours following treatment to facilitate dosing.P
Following any invasive or surgical procedure, a plan for ongoing treatment is required to
maintain the coagulation factor in the normal range for a suitable duration, determined by thenature of the procedure.P
A clear plan for the intrapartum care of a carrier and the baby should be available in advanceof 37 weeks of gestation. The woman should be seen in the anaesthetic clinic and theneonatologists should be informed of the intended delivery of a baby with haemophilia.P
If antenatal diagnosis has not been performed in a male fetus, then he should be managed asif he is affected.P
External cephalic version should be avoided in affected or potentially affected male fetuses andfemale fetuses who are obligate or possible carriers of severe haemophilia B.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e196 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
What is the optimal mode and timing of delivery?
A decision regarding the timing and mode of delivery should be agreed jointly between the
woman and the multidisciplinary team.C
The option of a planned lower segment caesarean section should be discussed for the deliveryof affected male babies, especially those with severe haemophilia and/or if the fetal status isunknown. However, there needs to be a full assessment of the advantages and disadvantagesof this mode of delivery and consideration of obstetric factors, maternal bleeding risk, patientpreference and reproductive expectations. D
If elective caesarean section is intended, this should be at 39+0completed weeks with a clear
plan for the event of spontaneous labour occurring beforehand.D
For intended vaginal delivery, spontaneous labour is preferred, if no other obstetric concerns,to minimise the risk of intervention. Measures should be taken to ensure expertise andnecessary resources are available at all times. Planned induction of labour may be necessary incases where there are concerns about distance of travel to the specialist centre or if there areother obstetric concerns. D
The use of ventouse and midcavity forceps should be avoided for male babies at risk ofhaemophilia.B
Fetal blood sampling (FBS) and fetal scalp electrode (FSE) should be avoided in babies expectedto have severe or moderate haemophilia. In babies potentially affected with mild haemophilia,judicious use of FBS and FSE can be considered, in order to facilitate vaginal delivery and avoidmorbidity associated with caesarean section in labour. This decision should be made by a seniorobstetrician. Where FBS is used, sustained pressure under direct vision should be used toensure haemostasis. P
The plan for intrapartum management and the second stage of labour, involving a seniorobstetrician, should be documented.P
There is no evidence to recommend special measures for delivery in women carrying femalefetuses. A female fetus who is at risk of carrying severe haemophilia B may theoretically bemore at risk of ICH/ECH and this should be considered in the birth plan.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e197 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
How can analgesia and anaesthesia be managed safely?
Factor VIII/IX levels of more than 0.5 iu/ml are required for the insertion and removal of
epidural catheter and for spinal anaesthesia.D
Experienced clinicians should be involved in decisions about whether or not to perform acentral neuraxial anaesthetic technique, and the woman should be given all the informationshe needs to make an informed choice.P
The most suitable form of analgesia depends on the context of the delivery. All carriers shouldhave the opportunity to discuss analgesia with a senior anaesthetist prior to delivery. A clearplan for analgesia and anaesthesia should be available in the maternal records.D
Intramuscular injections should generally be avoided if factor Vlll/IX levels are less than 0.5 iu/ml.They may be used when a woman ’s factor VIII/IX is maintained in the normal range by clotting
factor support or DDAVP.P
What is the haemostatic management during labour?
If clotting factor levels are less than 0.5 iu/ml, DDAVP should be given to raise factor VIII, orfactor IX concentrate should be given to raise factor IX, aiming for 1.0 iu/ml.P
Tranexamic acid could be considered as sole therapy for women with low normal levels or inconjunction with DDAVP to increase factor VIII, or with substantive factor IX treatment.P
Treatment should be given as close to delivery as possible.P
What is the postpartum management?
To minimise the risk of postpartum haemorrhage (PPH), it is important to recommend/offeractive management of the third stage of labour.P
Levels of factor VIII/IX should be maintained above 0.5 iu/ml for at least 3 days following anuncomplicated vaginal delivery or 5 days following instrumental delivery or caesarean section.Management should be guided by results of factor assays.D
Tranexamic acid should be continued postpartum until lochia is minimal.B
Pharmacological thromboprophylaxis should generally be avoided where the factor level is0.6 iu/ml or less, but will need to be considered in women with thrombotic risk factors, withcareful balance of risks.P
Following discharge from hospital, the haemophilia centre should maintain contact with thewoman who should be advised to report any increase in postpartum blood loss.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e198 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
What is the neonatal management?
A plan for diagnostic testing of the neonate following delivery, including cord blood sampling,
should be included in the maternal pregnancy management plan.P
Coagulation results in neonates should be interpreted against age-adjusted reference ranges.D
Cord blood sampling and diagnostic testing is recommended for all male babies born tomothers who are carriers of haemophilia A/B although some mild cases may require retestingat 3–6 months of age.D
Cord blood sampling and diagnostic testing of female babies born to mothers who are carriers
of haemophilia is not recommended.D
Parents of neonates diagnosed with haemophilia should be informed of the diagnosis in atimely manner and arrangements should be made for neonatal follow-up at a haemophiliacentre.P
In a neonate with low factor levels, vitamin K should be administered by an oral regimen andfollowing neonate bloodspot screening, pressure should be sustained to avoid excess bleeding.P
Cranial ultrasound (US) should be considered prior to discharge in all neonates with severe ormoderate haemophilia.P
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be undertaken in neonates with symptoms orsigns suggestive of ICH even in the presence of a normal cranial US.D
In neonates with haemophilia, information on the symptoms and signs of ICH should beprovided at the time of discharge.P
Short-term primary prophylaxis should be considered in severe and moderate haemophilia ininfants considered to be at increased risk of bleeding due to trauma at delivery or prematurity.D
Clinical bleeding events in neonates with haemophilia should be managed in accordance withtreatment guidelines.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e199 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
von Willebrand disease (VWD)
What is the classiﬁcation and inheritance?
VWD is classi ﬁed according to whether the de ﬁciency of von Willebrand factor (VWF) is partial
quantitative (type 1), qualitative (type 2) or severe quantitative (type 3). The classi ﬁcation is
important for diagnosis, treatment and counselling of patients. However, it does not reliablypredict response to therapy and has a variable association with VWF gene mutations.B
Clinicians counselling these women should be aware that inheritance of VWD is autosomal andvariably dominant or recessive, depending on the VWD type.P
Genetic counselling about the risk of disease transmission, and its variable penetrance andexpression, should be provided for all women with VWD.P
What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby?
Clinicians should be aware that women with VWD have an increased risk of antepartum,primary and secondary PPH.B
All women should receive counselling about risks of increased bleeding, especially women withtype I VWD whose VWF level does not rise above 0.5 iu/ml by term, or type 2 or 3 VWD.B
What is the prepregnancy and antenatal management?
Prior to conception, the bleeding phenotype should be assessed, historical diagnosis reviewedand response to DDAVP established.D
Safe management requires a multidisciplinary approach.P
All women with VWD should have VWF antigen levels and activity, and factor VIII levelschecked at booking, in the third trimester and prior to any invasive procedures.P
Women with type 1 VWD who achieve normal VWF levels can be safely managed in standardobstetric units in collaboration with haemophilia centre staff.P
Women with types 2 and 3, or severe type 1 VWD should be referred for prenatal care anddelivery to a centre where there are specialists in high-risk obstetrics, as well as a haemophiliacentre. Facilities for laboratory monitoring of VWF and factor VIII levels are essential.D
Clinicians should aim for factor VIII and VWF ristocetin cofactor (VWF:RCo) activity levels of0.5 iu/ml or above to cover surgical procedures or spontaneous miscarriage.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e200 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Where invasive procedures are required, if VWF activity or factor VIII levels are less than
0.50 iu/ml, women should receive haemostatic support in the form of DDAVP, whereresponsive, or VWF-containing concentrates.P
Treatment should be with DDAVP in preference to blood-derived factor concentrates wherepossible. This is safe for use in pregnancy and at delivery, but should be avoided inpre-eclampsia.D
Fluid intake should be restricted to 1 litre for 24 hours following DDAVP administration toprevent maternal hyponatraemia. If additional ﬂuid is required, electrolytes should be
monitored.D
Clinicians should be aware that patients with type 2B VWD may develop thrombocytopeniafollowing DDAVP treatment.D
If VWF replacement therapy is required, a concentrate containing factor VIII and VWF,manufactured from a safe plasma source with adequate viral testing and inactivationprocedures should be used.P
Target peak VWF activity levels should be 1.0 iu/ml and levels maintained above 0.5 iu/ml untilhaemostasis is secured.P
For most antenatal procedures, a single preoperative treatment is suf ﬁcient, but in some cases,
a second dose may be required at 12 –24 hours, depending on the nature of the procedure and
the measured levels.P
What is the intrapartum management?
The timing of treatment should be as near to delivery as possible, and pre- and post-treatmentlevels of VWF activity and factor VIII levels should be measured and repeated after delivery, orif labour is prolonged.P
Tranexamic acid should be considered in combination with treatment for all those with VWFactivity less than 0.5 iu/ml, or as sole therapy for those with levels above 0.5 iu/ml if clinicallyindicated. This can be given orally or intravenously, and can be started prior to delivery.P
Platelet transfusions, as well as VWF factor replacement, may sometimes be required in type2B VWD.D
The mode of delivery should be guided by obstetric indications. Spontaneous labour andnormal vaginal delivery should be permitted if there are no other obstetric concerns, tominimise risk of intervention.P
For fetuses at risk of having type 2 or 3 VWD, FBS, external cephalic version, fetal scalpmonitoring, ventouse delivery and midcavity forceps should be avoided.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e201 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
How can analgesia and anaesthesia be safely managed?
For patients with type 1 VWD, where VWF activity has been normalised by pregnancy or
treatment, central neuraxial anaesthesia can be offered.P
For patients with type 2 disease, central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided unless VWF
activity is more than 0.5 iu/ml and the haemostatic defect has been corrected; this may be
difﬁcult to achieve in type 2 and central neuraxial anaesthesia should not be given in cases of
type 3.P
For patients with type 2N VWD, central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided unless
factor VIII level is more than 0.5 iu/ml.P
Prior to delivery, all women should be given the opportunity to discuss analgesia with a senior
obstetric anaesthetist.P
In patients where an epidural catheter has been placed, consideration should be given to theneed for repeat treatment prior to catheter removal, as the risk of bleeding is no less thanwith insertion.D
Intramuscular injections and postnatal nonsteroidal anti-in ﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are only
suitable in the short term when VWF activity and factor VIII are more than 0.5 iu/ml.P
What is the postpartum management?
It is important to ensure that VWF activity and factor VIII levels are maintained at more than0.5 iu/ml for at least 3 days following uncomplicated vaginal delivery and at least 5 daysfollowing instrumental delivery or after caesarean section. Management should be guided byresults of laboratory investigations. P
Women with VWD should be considered for tranexamic acid for the postpartum period. Astandard dose is 1 g three to four times a day for 7 –14 days. In some cases, prolonged
administration for 2 –3 weeks or more may be necessary.P
If thromboprophylaxis is indicated, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) may be given to
inpatients with adequate correction of VWF:RCo and factor VIII levels. When pharmacologicalthromboprophylaxis is contraindicated, mechanical methods should be employed.P
Women with VWD should be made aware of the risk of delayed bleeding and be encouragedto report excessive bleeding. For women with more severe cases, haemoglobin should bemonitored and regular contact with the patient maintained for several weeks. Patients withtype 3 VWD may require treatment with VWF concentrate for 2 –3 weeks or even longer
following delivery.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e202 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
What is the neonatal management?
A plan for the diagnostic testing of the neonate following delivery, including cord blood
sampling, should be included in the maternal pregnancy management plan.P
Cord blood samples for VWF activity should be taken for babies at risk of type 2 and 3 VWD.P
For neonates at risk of type 2 or 3 VWD, vitamin K should be given orally, unless VWF activityis shown to be normal.D
Neonates with type 3 VWD should be considered for routine cranial imaging prior to dischargeand for short-term prophylaxis, with factor concentrate, if there has been signi ﬁcant potential
trauma at delivery.D
Factor XI deﬁciency
What is the inheritance?
Factor XI de ﬁciency is an uncommon autosomal disorder which has both recessive and
dominant inheritance patterns.B
The incidence in the non-Jewish population is 1/1 000 000; it is common in Ashkenazi Jews
with heterozygosity in 8% and homozygosity in 0.2 –0.5%.A
Clinicians should be aware that there is intra- and inter-individual variation in bleeding phenotype.D
What are the different phenotypes?
Plasma levels of factor XI show poor correlation with bleeding symptoms.B
Spontaneous bleeding is rare, even with very low factor XI levels. However, these patients are
often at risk of bleeding following surgery or trauma.C
Heterozygotes have mild or moderate reduction in factor XI levels (more than 0.15 –0.20 iu/ml).
Most are asymptomatic, but patients with even mild reductions in factor XI (0.5 –0.7 iu/ml) may
have a bleeding tendency.C
What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby?
Factor XI does not usually increase during pregnancy; however, levels should be checked atbooking, in the third trimester and prior to invasive procedures.C
Women with factor XI de ﬁciency may suffer excessive bleeding after miscarriage or
termination, especially if they have a bleeding phenotype.C
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e203 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
There is increased risk of PPH in factor XI-de ﬁcient women, which is highest in those with a bleeding
phenotype and of blood group O, and least in non-O blood groups with a nonbleeding phenotype.C
Patients with factor XI de ﬁciency should be assessed for the presence of other potentially
compounding factors, such as low VWF levels and platelet dysfunction.C
No special precautions for the baby are required for delivery unless the neonate is at risk ofhomozygosity or compound heterozygosity.D
What are the therapeutic options?
Treatment options include tranexamic acid, factor XI concentrate and fresh frozen plasma (FFP),however, women with a nonbleeding phenotype or unknown status can often be managedexpectantly.C
Tranexamic acid should not be given simultaneously with prophylactic factor XI concentrate asthis is considered to increase thrombotic risk. For many women, it is likely that tranexamic acidalone will be suf ﬁcient to prevent PPH.D
If FFP is given to raise factor XI levels, solvent detergent (SD)-FFP should be used when available.D
Recombinant factor VIIa is not licensed for this condition and is generally not recommended,
except if there is an inhibitor to factor XI.D
What is the antenatal, intrapartum and postpartum management?
Factor XI or tranexamic acid is not usually required antenatally unless an invasive procedure isundertaken or if there is bleeding following miscarriage or surgical procedure.C
Delivery plans need to be individualised. Prophylactic factor XI replacement should beconsidered if homozygous/compound heterozygous, previous history of PPH or general bleedinghistory. Otherwise, management can be expectant, with tranexamic acid alone and factorreplacement reserved for excess bleeding. C
Can central neuraxial anaesthesia be given?
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should not be given to women with low factor XI levels with a known
bleeding phenotype, where the phenotype is not clear or when there is a severe reduction in level.
In those with a nonbleeding phenotype, discussion and counselling should be given regarding therisks and bene ﬁts of allowing neuraxial anaesthesia with or without factor replacement.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e204 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Rare bleeding disorders
What are they?
Clinicians should be aware that rare bleeding disorders include inherited de ﬁciencies of
ﬁbrinogen, factors II, V, VII, X, XI and XIII, combined factor V and factor VIII (factor V+VIII)
deﬁciencies, and congenital de ﬁciency of vitamin K-dependent factors.D
What is the inheritance of factors II, V, VII, X and XIII, and combined factor V +VIII deﬁciencies?
Genetic counselling should be provided, with the understanding that most rare inherited
bleeding disorders are autosomal recessive in inheritance and heterozygote carriers are usuallyasymptomatic. For affected women or asymptomatic heterozygous carriers, consanguinityshould be established to allow counselling, screening when possible and formulation of adelivery plan for a potentially affected baby.D
What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby, and what are the treatment options?
Clinicians should appreciate that coagulation factor levels can change during pregnancy.However, this is unlikely to in ﬂuence haemostasis in women with severe de ﬁciency.
Management should take into account both the factor level and whether there is a clinicalhistory of bleeding.C
Treatment plans may need to be modi ﬁed according to the nature of individual bleeds or
procedures, and to the background bleeding phenotype of each case. Factor replacement therapyis usually advised for delivery in women with severe coagulation factor de ﬁciency and/or
a bleeding history. Tranexamic acid at a dose of 15 –20 mg/kg or 1 g four times daily alone can be
used for minor bleeds and in combination with factor replacement.D
If the baby is at risk of severe de ﬁciency, the delivery plan should include avoidance of
ventouse, midcavity forceps, FBS and FSE.P
Central neuraxial anaesthesia, postpartum pharmacological thromboprophylaxis and NSAIDsshould usually be avoided in women with severe de ﬁciencies as it may be dif ﬁcult to guarantee
consistent normalisation of haemostasis even after treatment. They may be used afterindividual assessment if adequate replacement therapy is con ﬁrmed.P
Prothrombin (factor II) deﬁciency
If factor II activity is less than 0.2 iu/ml and there is signi ﬁcant bleeding, established labour or
prior to caesarean section, give prothrombin complex concentrate 20 –40 iu/kg to achieve factor II
activity 0.2 –0.4 iu/ml. Consider further prothrombin complex concentrate 10 –20 iu/kg at 48-hour
intervals to maintain factor II activity more than 0.2 iu/ml for at least 3 days. Women alreadyreceiving prophylactic prothrombin complex concentrate can continue it throughout pregnancy.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e205 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Factor V deﬁciency
For signi ﬁcant bleeding or delivery in women with factor V activity less than 0.2 iu/ml,
15–25 ml/kg FFP should be considered once in established labour or before caesarean section
to achieve factor V activity 0.2 –0.4 iu/ml with further FFP 10 ml/kg at 12-hour intervals to
maintain factor V activity more than 0.2 iu/ml for at least 3 days. Where possible, SD-FFP
should be used to reduce infective risk.D
For severe bleeding or caesarean section, consider additional platelet transfusion.D
Severe factor VII deﬁciency
For factor VII activity less than 0.2 iu/ml in the third trimester with prior history of bleeding,
consider recombinant factor VIIa 15 –30 micrograms/kg every 4 –6 hours for at least 3 or 5 days
following caesarean section. For all other women, recombinant factor VIIa 15 –30 micrograms/kg
is recommended only in response to abnormal bleeding. For mild bleeding, tranexamic acid(15–20 mg/kg or 1 g four times daily) can be used. For severe bleeding, recombinant factor VIIa
15–30 micrograms/kg can be given and repeated if required every 4 –6 hours, usually for a
minimum of three doses.D
Severe factor X deﬁciency
For delivery in women with factor X activity less than 0.3 iu/ml in the third trimester who havea history of bleeding and all those who require caesarean section, use prothrombin complexconcentrate 20 –40 iu/kg (or factor X concentrate if available) to achieve factor X activity more
than 0.4 iu/ml. Consider further prothrombin complex concentrate 10 –20 iu/kg once daily to
maintain factor X activity more than 0.3 iu/ml for at least 3 days. Antenatal prophylaxis maybe considered in women with a history of recurrent bleeding or adverse pregnancy outcomeusing prothrombin complex concentrate 20 –30 iu/kg two or three times a week to maintain
trough factor X more than 0.01 iu/ml.D
Severe factor XIII deﬁciency
During pregnancy, increased intensity prophylaxis is required using factor XIII plasmaconcentrate or recombinant factor XIII (if A-subunit de ﬁciency). Dosing frequency should be
increased from every 28 days to every 14 –21 days to maintain factor XIII more than 0.2 iu/ml.
For delivery, consider additional factor XIII concentrate 10 –40 iu/kg once in established labour
or before caesarean section, depending on the interval since last prophylaxis.D
Factor V +VIII deﬁciency
For delivery in women with combined factor V+VIII de ﬁciency, if factor V activity less than
0.2 iu/ml in the third trimester, consider SD-FFP 15 –25 ml/kg once in established labour or
before caesarean section to achieve factor V activity 0.2 –0.4 iu/ml. Consider further SD-FFP
10 ml/kg once every 12 hours to maintain factor V activity more than 0.2 iu/ml for at least3 days. Consider additional recombinant factor VIII if the factor VIII activity is less than 0.5 iu/mlin the third trimester.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e206 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Fibrinogen disorders
What is the nature and inheritance of aﬁbrinogenaemia, hypoﬁbrinogenaemia and dysﬁbrinogenaemia?
Clinicians should be aware that ﬁbrinogen disorders can be autosomal recessive
(aﬁbrinogenaemia) or autosomal dominant (with quantitative and/or qualitative defects) and
are associated with a variable clinical phenotype.D
What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby?
Clinicians should be aware that severe ﬁbrinogen de ﬁciency may be associated with bleeding,
but quantitative and qualitative de ﬁciency can also be associated with thrombosis and
pregnancy loss.D
What is the management of pregnancy and delivery?
If functional ﬁbrinogen less than 0.5 g/litre, consider prophylaxis throughout pregnancy with
ﬁbrinogen concentrate initially 50 –100 mg/kg twice per week, adjusted to maintain trough
ﬁbrinogen activity more than 1 g/litre. Higher doses of ﬁbrinogen concentrate are likely to be
required to maintain ﬁbrinogen activity as pregnancy progresses. Consider additional ﬁbrinogen
concentrate for established labour to ensure ﬁbrinogen activity more than 1.5 g/litre for at
least 3 days .Tranexamic acid can be used for minor bleeding.D
Because of the variable clinical phenotype associated with hypo ﬁbrinogenaemia and
dysﬁbrinogenaemia, a personal and/or family history is required for management decisions. If
there is no personal or family history of bleeding or thrombosis, expectant management isrecommended for pregnant women or the neonate.D
Fibrinogen replacement therapy is associated with a high risk of thrombosis and requires vigilance.Pregnant women with a thrombotic phenotype or other risk factors for venous thrombosis, andwith a low risk of bleeding, should be considered for thromboprophylaxis with LMWH.P
Central neuraxial anaesthesia, NSAIDs and intramuscular injections should generally be avoidedfor women with severe ﬁbrinogen de ﬁciency, or a personal or family history of bleeding, due to
the dif ﬁculty in assuring correction with factor concentrate. They may be used after individual
assessment if adequate replacement therapy is con ﬁrmed.P
The use of midcavity forceps, rotational forceps, ventouse, FBS and FSE should be avoided in a
baby at risk of ﬁbrinogen de ﬁciency associated with a bleeding phenotype.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e207 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Platelet function disorders
Clinicians should be aware that the spectrum of bleeding in patients with platelet function
disorders varies and may ﬁrst present in pregnancy.D
Women known to have a platelet dysfunction disorder should receive prepregnancy counselling
from a multidisciplinary specialist team with expertise in caring for patients with plateletfunction disorders.P
Bernard Soulier Syndrome (BSS)
What is the aetiology?
Clinicians should be aware that BSS is caused by genetic abnormality of an important platelet
adhesion receptor (glycoprotein [GP] Ib-IX-V receptor) and is often associated with a severebleeding phenotype.P
What is the inheritance?
BSS is an autosomal recessive disorder. In areas of high consanguinity, it may be prudent totest the father using platelet ﬂow cytometry for GP Ib surface density.P
What are the maternal risks?
BSS is associated with signi ﬁcant risk of primary and secondary PPH, and wound haematoma.
Management of delivery, therefore, requires careful planning with the multidisciplinary team.A
Peripartum haemostatic management should be guided by assessment of the individualphenotype.D
Patients with a bleeding history should be given a platelet transfusion prophylactically atdelivery or before caesarean section, in combination with tranexamic acid. Platelets should behuman leucocyte antigen (HLA)-matched where possible to reduce the risk of alloimmunisationand platelet refractoriness. D
Tranexamic acid should be given at the onset of labour and continued regularly through thepostpartum period until lochia is minimal.D
DDAVP has variable ef ﬁcacy and is unlikely to be useful as sole therapy in BSS.D
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided.P
Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia (GT)
What is the aetiology?
Clinicians should be aware that GT is a disorder of platelet function with autosomal recessive
inheritance and is often associated with severe bleeding tendency.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e208 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
What are the maternal risks?
GT is associated with signi ﬁcant risk of intrapartum and PPH, and a careful plan of
management is needed for women preparing for labour and delivery.B
HLA-matched platelet transfusions and/or recombinant factor VIIa should be givenprophylactically, at delivery, for patients with a history of bleeding. Repeat doses may berequired depending on the clinical picture.D
DDAVP has not been shown to be effective in GT and is unlikely to be helpful.P
Tranexamic acid should be given from the onset of established labour and continued regularlythrough the postpartum period until lochia is minimal.P
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided.P
What are the risks to the fetus?
Maternal alloimmunisation to paternally-derived fetal platelet antigens (GP IIb/IIIa) may causefetal thrombocytopenia and risk of ICH and other fetal bleeding.B
If fetal-maternal alloimmunisation does not occur, there is no need to restrict aids to delivery.P
What are the treatment options?
Women should be monitored for platelet-speci ﬁc alloantibodies at booking, and at 28 and
34 weeks of gestation.C
If fetal-maternal alloimmunisation occurs, management should involve a fetal medicine unitwith experience of these conditions, and treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin with orwithout steroids should be considered.D
Amniocentesis with platelet typing may be considered in cases of paternal heterozygosity.P
If the baby is at risk of homozygous GT or fetomaternal alloimmune thrombocytopenia,
restrictions to delivery should be applied, as for all babies at risk of ICH. This includes
avoidance of ventouse, midcavity forceps, FSE and fetal scalp sampling. Depending on risk, anelective caesarean section may be considered.B
Neonatal care of potential alloimmunisation requires a cord platelet count and withholdingintramuscular vitamin K until the result is known, or administering it orally. A platelet countbelow the normal range should be repeated at day 3 –5 when the platelet nadir is reached, due
to development of the neonatal spleen. Platelet transfusion should be given if the plateletcount is less than 30 310
9/litre.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e209 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Other congenital platelet function defects
What are the therapeutic options?
Women with mild platelet function disorders may require treatment to cover delivery.P
DDAVP and/or tranexamic acid can be used to cover delivery.D
Tranexamic acid should be continued postpartum until lochia is minimal.P
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should only be given if the risks are considered to be outweighed
by the bene ﬁts and the haemostatic defect has been corrected. A platelet transfusion may be
necessary beforehand and epidural catheter should not be left in situ.P
1. Purpose and scope
This guideline is intended for both specialist haematologists and obstetricians who have experience in managing pregnant
patients with bleeding disorders. In addition, it may be a useful ref erence text for obstetric anaesthetists and neonatologists.
Women who have inherited bleeding disorders may be at signiﬁcant risk of bleeding following miscarriage, abortion,
antenatal procedures and delivery. They require multidisciplinary specialised care tailored to the individual, withcross-specialty communication, including anaesthetists and neonatologists as necessary. Progress has been made inthe identiﬁcation of obstetric problems in these women and raising clinical awareness among their care providers.Particular aspects of their obstetric management include preconception counselling, prenatal diagnosis (PND),antenatal, intrapartum and postpartum care, and the immediate care for the neonate.
2. Introduction and background epidemiology
The conditions covered in this guideline are haemophilia A and B, von Willebrand disease (VWD), factor XIdeﬁciency, rare factor deﬁciencies, ﬁbrinogen disorders, Bernard Soulier Syndrome (BSS), Glanzmann’sthrombasthenia (GT) and other platelet function disorders.
These conditions vary considerably in the potential impact on mother and baby. Female carriers of haemophilia A
and B usually (although not always) have normal levels of factor VIII and IX, and the main concern is identiﬁcationand safe management of a male baby at risk of haemophilia. Women who have low levels of a clotting factor mayhave mild or severe bleeding phenotypes which may or may not improve in pregnancy; some clotting factors, such asfactor XI, do not rise during pregnancy, while others, such as ﬁbrinogen, increase signiﬁcantly. In addition, there isless clear-cut available evidence-based guidance for the rare deﬁciencies.
3. Identi ﬁcation and assessment of evidence
This guideline was developed using standard methodology for developing Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists (RCOG) Green-top Guidelines. The Cochrane Library (including the Cochrane Database of SystematicReviews, the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects [DARE] and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e210 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Trials [CENTRAL]), EMBASE, MEDLINE and Trip were searched for relevant papers. The search was inclusive of all
relevant articles published until March 2016. The databases were searched using the relevant Medical Subject Headings
(MeSH) terms, including all subheadings and synonyms, and this was combined with a keyword search. The searchincluded the following terms: (haemophilia *or hemophilia *or bleeding disorder or bleeding disorders) AND (pregnan *
or delivery or labor or labour or postpartum haemorrhage or postpartum hemorrhage). The search was limited tohumans and papers in the English language. Relevant guidelines were also searched for using the same criteria in theNational Guideline Clearinghouse and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) Evidence Search.
Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. Areas lacking evidence are highlighted and
annotated as ‘good practice points’. Different wordings are used (such as must, should, could, suggest, require); theseare intentional to encourage an individualised approach where appropriate. Further information about the assessmentof evidence and the grading of recommendations may be found in Appendix I.
4. Haemophilia
4.1 What is the deﬁnition?
Clinicians should be aware that haemophilia is an X-linked condition associated with reduction or
absence of clotting factor VIII (haemophilia A) or IX (haemophilia B), causing bleeding symptoms.P
Haemophilia is an X-linked bleeding disorder caused by a genetic mutation in either factor VIII (haemophilia A) or
factor IX (haemophilia B) which causes absent or reduced production of that coagulation factor.1–3The hallmark of
the condition is bleeding into joints and muscles.
4.2 How should inheritance be assessed?
Up to 50% of neonatal males with severe haemophilia have no previous family history. In these
cases, there is a 90% chance that the mother is a carrier, with risk to the next male child.D
A family tree should be constructed to assess the likelihood of haemophilia carriership in at-riskfemale family members.P
Females at risk of carrying haemophilia, particularly severe haemophilia, should be tested forthe genetic mutation present in affected family members, if available.P
Haemophilia A and haemophilia B are X-linked recessive conditions. A woman is an ‘obligate carrier’ for haemophilia
A or B if her father has haemophilia or if she has an affected son and an affected relative(s) in the maternal line. Awoman is likely to be a carrier if she has a single son with haemophilia or a single carrier daughter, but this is notalways the case, as haemophilia may be the result of a new mutation in her offspring. A woman is a possible carrierif she has a maternal relative with haemophilia. For haemophilia A, a factor VIII:von Willebrand factor (VWF) ratio ofless than 0.7 is suggestive of carriership but a ratio of more than 0.7 does not exclude it. Where possible, at-riskfemales should be tested for the genetic mutation responsible for the haemophilia in affected family members.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e211 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Each son of a carrier female has a 50% chance of inheriting haemophilia from his mother; similarly, each daughter has
a 50% chance of being a haemophilia carrier.3
Up to 50% of haemophilia cases have no previous family history, either owing to lack of male relatives orspontaneous mutation, which occurs in 40 –50% of cases of severe haemophilia. Spontaneous mutations
occur more commonly during spermatogenesis than oogenesis because of the high cell turnover and unpairedX chromosome. Therefore, new cases of severe haemophilia usually arise from mutation duringspermatogenesis in the maternal grandfather, conferring obligate carrier status on the mother. This theory iscorrect in 90% of cases and thus, the risk to the next male baby after a spontaneously affected sibling is 45%.
4Evidence
level 3
4.3 What are the different phenotypes and how is severity assessed?
Clinicians should be aware of the different phenotypes and severities of haemophilia, as this
inﬂuences risk and required management.P
Severity is categorised according to the plasma concentration of factor VIII or IX. Severe haemophilia is
deﬁned as a factor concentration of less than 0.01 iu/ml; moderate haemophilia, 0.01 –0.05 iu/ml; and mild
haemophilia, 0.06 –0.40 iu/ml. The bleeding phenotype can largely be predicted from the absolute
concentration of factor. This is important when considering the risk of intracranial haemorrhage (ICH) andother bleeding at the time of delivery of an affected male (Appendix II). Males with severe haemophiliaexperience spontaneous bleeding into muscles and joints, and require regular prophylaxis with clotting factorreplacement to help avoid arthropathy and neurovascular compromise.
5Those with moderate and mild
haemophilia may only bleed following trauma or invasive procedures, and require cover for these times. Thecausative mutation in the family inﬂuences severity of haemophilia and may also inﬂuence the bleedingphenotype in carriers.
6The most signiﬁcant complication of haemophilia is the development of antibodies
(inhibitors) to the clotting factor preparations used for treatment. This occurs in around 10 –40% of treated
patients and involves both genetic and nongenetic factors.7Inhibitors may cause signiﬁcant morbidity, require
intensive management and are potentially life threatening. Inhibitor development in female carriers isextremely rare.Evidence
level 3
4.4 What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby?
Known or potential female carriers may have low factor VIII/IX levels. The levels should be
checked prior to an invasive procedure or in association with bleeding symptoms.D
Clinicians should be aware that carriers of haemophilia are at increased risk of bleeding withinvasive procedures, termination, spontaneous miscarriage and at the time of delivery.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e212 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Male neonates with haemophilia are at increased risk of bleeding, including ICH and
extracranial haemorrhage (ECH).C
Male neonates with haemophilia are at risk of iatrogenic bleeding following delivery.P
Factor levels in female carriers are variable and unpredictable. Due to X-chromosome inactivation
(lyonisation) which occurs in early embryonic life, levels are approximately half that of noncarriers,
i.e. 0.5 iu/ml, although studies have shown that the median is in fact slightly higher at 0.6 iu/ml.6,8Families
in which many females are low level carriers are thought to have co-inherited the haemophilia gene anda genetically controlled susceptibility to skewed lyonisation.
9Other factors, such as ABO blood group,
may also inﬂuence factor levels.10Levels largely correlate with bleeding risk and should be measured as
early as possible in suspected carriers to inform risk during surgery or delivery. Bleeding risk can beincreased in carriers even if they have relatively normal factor levels of 0.4 –0.6 iu/ml (Appendix II).
6,8
Carriers of haemophilia A have an increased tendency to bleed with invasive procedures, even when
their levels are between 0.4 and 0.6 iu/ml.8The risk of spontaneous miscarriage is not increased in
haemophilia carriers, but if it occurs, bleeding is more likely to be heavy.11Although coagulation factors
may normalise during pregnancy, they do not usually reach the levels seen in the general pregnantpopulation and it may be for this reason, or an early fall in levels postnatally, that carriers of haemophiliahave an increased risk of postpartum haemorrhage (PPH).
11Evidence
level 3
Neonates are at risk of ICH and ECH as a consequence of the process of labour and delivery. In the
general population, the risk of ICH is considered to be 0.058%12–14and of ECH, 0.469%.15,16The risk in
babies affected with haemophilia is increased to 2.5% and 3.7%, respectively.17–25Thus, neonates with
haemophilia have an odds ratio of 44 (95% CI 34.7 –57.1) for ICH and 8 (95% CI 5.38 –12.60) for ECH
compared with the general population.26Evidence
level 2 +
Bleeding events in neonates with haemophilia differ from those in older children where muscle and joint
bleeds predominate. In addition to the risks of cranial bleeding at delivery, neonatal bleeds are typicallyiatrogenic, arising as a consequence of venepunctures, intramuscular vitamin K and surgicalinterventions.
27,28Evidence
level 3
4.5 What is the prepregnancy management?
The baseline factor level should be determined prior to onset of pregnancy.P
Before pregnancy, the general health of women who are carriers for haemophilia should be
optimised, including attention to weight and correction of any iron de ﬁciency.P
Factor VIII levels increase with age, as well as inﬂammatory conditions, and an up-to-date level is required to assess
risks in pregnancy. It is prudent to also check factor IX baseline rather than accepting a historical result.
The health of women who are carriers of haemophilia should be optimised before pregnancy, including
addressing any iron deﬁciency and obesity, both of which are associated with an increased bleeding risk.29Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e213 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.6 How should genetic counselling be provided?
Genetic counselling should be provided to women at risk, ideally before pregnancy, by
appropriately quali ﬁed and experienced clinical staff.P
Written informed consent should be obtained in advance of any genetic testing.P
The provision of appropriate counselling may require input from a multidisciplinary team of health professionals, for
example, haemophilia clinical specialists, obstetricians and genetic counsellors.
Patients should be in a position to be able to make their own informed decision having been provided with all the
appropriate information, and having been given the time and opportunity to have their questions answered.Information should be provided about inheritance, clinical aspects of haemophilia (such as bleeding, treatment andcomplications) and options available to family members who may wish to consider genetic diagnosis, including PND,and discussion about having a child with haemophilia. Ideally, counselling of haemophilia carriers should be carriedout before pregnancy.
It is the responsibility of the referring clinician to ensure that appropriate informed consent is obtained for genetic
diagnosis, including carrier and/or PND.
4.7 What are the options for prenatal diagnosis (PND)?
Carriers of severe haemophilia should be offered preimplantation genetic diagnosis.P
Carriers of severe haemophilia with a male fetus con ﬁrmed to be affected by haemophilia
should be counselled to enable informed choices.D
All carriers of severe haemophilia should be offered fetal sex determination by free fetal DNAanalysis from 9 weeks of gestation.D
Pregnant carriers of severe haemophilia with a male fetus at risk of haemophilia should beoffered the option of PND with chorionic villus sampling (CVS) at 11 –14 weeks of gestation.P
All carriers of haemophilia with male fetuses should be offered third trimester amniocentesis if
diagnostic investigations have not previously been performed to determine haemophilia statusto inform options for delivery.P
Options for PND in inherited bleeding disorders are summarised in Appendix III. These include noninvasive PND for
fetal sexing, genetic analysis for the familial mutation in fetuses at risk of being affected by means of CVS oramniocentesis, and preimplantation genetic diagnosis.
In England, NHS England
30will commission three cycles of preimplantation genetic diagnosis for couples at
risk of and wishing to avoid the birth of an affected child. Success rates of around 30% have been reported.31
Carriers of male fetuses conﬁrmed to be affected by severe haemophilia should be counselled to enableinformed choices.
32Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e214 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.8 What is the antepartum management?
Antenatal care should be delivered in the context of a multidisciplinary team setting with
haematologists and obstetricians with expertise in this ﬁeld.P
Maternal factor VIII/IX should be checked at booking, before any antenatal procedure and in
the third trimester; factor VIII levels rise in pregnancy, but factor IX tends to remain stable.D
Aim for factor VIII/IX levels of at least 0.5 iu/ml to cover surgical or invasive procedures, orspontaneous miscarriage. If treatment is required, factor levels of 1.0 iu/ml should be aimedfor and not allowed to fall below 0.5 iu/ml until haemostasis is secure.C
Tranexamic acid should be considered in combination with treatment for all those with levelsof less than 0.5 iu/ml or as sole therapy for those with levels above 0.5 iu/ml if clinicallyindicated. Following miscarriage, it should be continued until the bleeding settles.D
Desmopressin (DDAVP) can be used antenatally to raise factor VIII levels. Due to theantidiuretic effect, ﬂuids should be restricted to 1 litre for 24 hours after use or, if not possible,
electrolytes should be monitored.C
Recombinant factor VIII should be used if levels obtained with DDAVP are insuf ﬁcient or in a
known nonresponder.C
Recombinant factor IX is required to cover invasive or surgical procedures in women withfactor levels less than 0.5 iu/ml.P
When giving treatment to raise clotting factor levels, it is important to monitor the response totreatment by measuring the plasma clotting factor concentration before and after infusion, and4–6 hours following treatment to facilitate dosing.P
Following any invasive or surgical procedure, a plan for ongoing treatment is required to
maintain the coagulation factor in the normal range for a suitable duration, determined by thenature of the procedure.P
A clear plan for the intrapartum care of a carrier and the baby should be available in advanceof 37 weeks of gestation. The woman should be seen in the anaesthetic clinic and theneonatologists should be informed of the intended delivery of a baby with haemophilia.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e215 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If antenatal diagnosis has not been performed in a male fetus, then he should be managed as
if he is affected.P
External cephalic version should be avoided in affected or potentially affected male fetuses andfemale fetuses who are obligate or possible carriers of severe haemophilia B.P
Close liaison within the multidisciplinary team is required in order to ensure the safety of both mother
and baby at the time of delivery. Due to the risk of ICH in affected males at the time of delivery, theneonatal team should be informed of the expected date of delivery of a male with haemophilia and plansmade for neonatal care, including the availability of an appropriate factor concentrate.
27Evidence
level 3
Synthesis of factor VIII is increased in pregnancy with plasma levels rising from 6 weeks of gestation to
two to three times the baseline by term. Factor IX levels are relatively unaltered.11For carriers of
haemophilia A, the pregnancy-induced rise in factor VIII level reduces the risk of bleeding although theyremain vulnerable in early pregnancy and those with low baseline levels (for instance, less than 0.15 iu/ml)
may not achieve normal levels by delivery. Women with low factor IX levels remain at risk of bleeding
throughout pregnancy.Evidence
level 2 +
The normal range for factor VIII and IX outside of pregnancy is 0.5 –2.0 iu/ml. A level above 0.5 iu/ml is
likely to be sufﬁcient for haemostasis during invasive procedures, such as amniocentesis and CVS. Sincecarriers may bleed with invasive procedures with levels around 0.5 iu/ml, this should be the absoluteminimum tolerated for major procedures, such as lower segment caesarean section.
6If treatment is
required, factor levels of 1.0 iu/ml should be aimed for and not allowed to fall below 0.5 iu/ml.
Tranexamic acid is an antiﬁbrinolytic agent which is associated with reduced bleeding in menorrhagia,
surgery and trauma.33It is useful as sole therapy for women with low normal factor levels or may be
used in combination with other treatments in women at higher risk.Evidence
level 4
DDAVP is a synthetic analogue of vasopressin which can increase the levels of both factor VIII and VWF
three- to four-fold.34It has no effect on factor IX. The mechanism of action of DDAVP is poorly
understood,35,36although it exerts its action through V2 receptors on endothelial cells. The uterus
expresses V1 receptors, for which DDAVP has no afﬁnity and, therefore, its use in pregnancy is consideredsafe.
37–39DDAVP can be used to raise factor VIII levels for invasive procedures during pregnancy and at
the time of delivery.40DDAVP should be used at a dose of 0.3 micrograms/kg of prepregnancy weight as
an intravenous or subcutaneous injection. Repeated doses may be given 12 –24 hourly, but may lead to
tachyphylaxis (where the factor VIII response lessens with further doses). It is essential to monitor theresponse with factor VIII assays before and after treatment to ensure adequate levels.
35,41DDAVP has
antidiuretic properties which may result in hyponatraemia. Hyponatraemic ﬁts have occurred followingadministration of DDAVP.
36,37Therefore, ﬂuids should be restricted to 1 litre for 24 hours following
treatment and DDAVP should be avoided in women with pre-eclampsia. During intravenous infusion,
hypotension, headache and facial ﬂushing are common, but generally mild. Blood pressure should bemonitored before and after infusion. Women with factor VIII levels less than 0.5 iu/ml in the third trimestershould be considered for DDAVP in the ﬁrst instance. However, if contraindicated or if levels obtained withDDAVP are insufﬁcient, as a result of tachyphylaxis or in a known nonresponder, then recombinant factorVIII should be used.Evidence
level 2 +
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e216 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
As endogenous factor IX does not increase, carriers of haemophilia B with factor IX levels less than 0.5 iu/ml
require treatment with recombinant factor IX to maintain levels above 0.5 iu/ml for invasive procedures.
Response to treatment (recovery) and duration (half-life) varies among individuals and within individuals in different
circumstances. The clinical setting can inﬂuence the clotting factor half-life, for example, this can be shorter in theimmediate period following surgery or delivery.
In general, following a surgical procedure, treatment is directed at maintaining levels of coagulation factor above
0.5 iu/ml for 3 –5 days to allow for wound healing, but this should be individualised according to the clinical situation.
Consideration of mode of delivery should take into account risks of maternal and fetal morbidity, and
should be discussed with the mother by the multidisciplinary team in advance. A written plan for delivery
should be available in the maternal record. The plan should detail the requirements with regard to
central neuraxial anaesthesia and for clotting factor replacement at the time of delivery. She should bereviewed by an anaesthetist. For the baby, it should state the precautions required for vaginal deliveryand if there is need for assessment of clotting factor level from a cord sample at the time of delivery, aswell as any other recommendations regarding early neonatal management.
42
There is no evidence for the use of external cephalic version in pregnancies where the fetus has a bleedingdisorder. In a meta-analysis of 84 studies that included 12 955 women, the overall complication rate was 6%and the rate of serious complications was 0.24% (placenta abruption in 0.18% and stillbirth in 0.6%). Ten ofthe 11 abruptions resulted in emergency caesarean section.
43,44Although intracranial bleeding is not
reported as a signiﬁcant complication in these studies, external cephalic version has always been avoided inthe case of a known/suspected fetus with a bleeding disorder due to this theoretical risk.Evidence
level 4
4.9 What is the optimal mode and timing of delivery?
A decision regarding the timing and mode of delivery should be agreed jointly between the
woman and the multidisciplinary team.C
The option of a planned lower segment caesarean section should be discussed for the deliveryof affected male babies, especially those with severe haemophilia and/or if the fetal status isunknown. However, there needs to be a full assessment of the advantages and disadvantagesof this mode of delivery and consideration of obstetric factors, maternal bleeding risk, patientpreference and reproductive expectations. D
If elective caesarean section is intended, this should be at 39+0completed weeks with a clear
plan for the event of spontaneous labour occurring beforehand.D
For intended vaginal delivery, spontaneous labour is preferred, if no other obstetric concerns,to minimise the risk of intervention. Measures should be taken to ensure expertise andnecessary resources are available at all times. Planned induction of labour may be necessary incases where there are concerns about distance of travel to the specialist centre or if there areother obstetric concerns. D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e217 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The use of ventouse and midcavity forceps should be avoided for male babies at risk of
haemophilia.B
Fetal blood sampling (FBS) and fetal scalp electrode (FSE) should be avoided in babies expectedto have severe or moderate haemophilia. In babies potentially affected with mild haemophilia,judicious use of FBS and FSE can be considered, in order to facilitate vaginal delivery and avoidmorbidity associated with caesarean section in labour. This decision should be made by a seniorobstetrician. Where FBS is used, sustained pressure under direct vision should be used toensure haemostasis. P
The plan for intrapartum management and the second stage of labour, involving a seniorobstetrician, should be documented.P
There is no evidence to recommend special measures for delivery in women carrying femalefetuses. A female fetus who is at risk of carrying severe haemophilia B may theoretically bemore at risk of ICH/ECH and this should be considered in the birth plan.P
The optimal mode of delivery for a carrier may be affected by obstetric considerations, the woman’s
own personal wishes and logistical factors, such as where the family reside in relation to the mostappropriate delivery unit. Therefore, the mode of delivery should be discussed with the woman andmultidisciplinary team, taking into account individual factors, including bleeding risk to the baby accordingto the stratiﬁcation tables (Appendix II and IV) and obstetric issues, such as fetal presentation, priorlabour experience and maternal risk, as well as future reproductive expectations.
45
A number of publications have reported the relationship between mode of delivery and the risk of ICH andECH in neonates in the general population and in those with inherited bleeding disorders. In a largeretrospective population study of liveborn singleton infants, the risk of ICH was highest in babies deliveredby forceps, ventouse extraction and emergency caesarean section during labour. Elective caesarean sectionwas associated with the lowest risk, followed by uncomplicated vaginal delivery. This translated to oddsratios, compared with uncomplicated vaginal delivery, of 2.86 (95% CI 1.87 –4.37) for forceps delivery, 2.21
(95% CI 1.68 –2.91) for vacuum extraction and 2.10 (95% CI 1.64 –2.68) for caesarean section during labour.
Sequential instrumentation (vacuum and forceps) had the highest odds ratio of 7.45 (95% CI 4.06 –13.68),
whereas the odds ratio for a planned caesarean section was 0.69 (95% CI 0.39 –1.24).
14
The increased risk of bleeding in association with assisted vaginal delivery has been demonstrated in a
cohort of babies with haemophilia; among six babies who developed intra- or extracranial bleeding, fourwere born by assisted vaginal delivery, one by emergency caesarean and one by uncomplicated vaginaldelivery. All cases had no known family history of haemophilia.
45A United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre
Doctors’ Organisation (UKHCDO) survey of the neonatal outcomes of babies born with severehaemophilia in UK haemophilia centres between 2003 and 2013 has shown an incidence of ICH inhaemophilia A of 6.2/1000 patient years (95% CI 4.32 –8.95) and for haemophilia B, 4.1/1000 patient years
(95% CI 1.5 –10.81). Of 17 recorded cases of ICH, nine occurred in association with spontaneous vaginal
delivery (SVD), four with assisted vaginal delivery (these males had no known family history of haemophilia),three with elective caesarean section and one with emergency caesarean section. Interestingly, two of thesecases had no prior family history of haemophilia and for the third, it is not known.Evidence
level 2 ++
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e218 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Retrospective studies of babies with haemophilia have conﬁrmed the highest risk from assisted vaginal
delivery, especially ventouse. However, it has been more difﬁcult to deﬁne the relative risk of ICH in
uncomplicated SVD compared with caesarean section, and there is a lack of data comparing emergency
and elective caesarean delivery. There is, therefore, considerable debate about the best mode of deliveryfor babies affected with haemophilia.
46–48In the literature, two cases of ICH have been reported in
283 neonates with haemophilia delivered by caesarean section; one was a preterm baby delivered at27 weeks of gestation, while 22 cases of ICH have been reported among 816 affected babies delivered bySVD.
23–25,49A systematic review of the literature and meta-analysis showed the lowest risk of ICH with
caesarean section, with an odds ratio of 0.34 (95% CI 0.14 –0.83).26A multicentre study in the Gulf
region, where over 80% of women deliver vaginally due to the cultural desire for large families, showedICH in 5/163 (3.1%) neonates with severe haemophilia; 2/131 (1.5%) from uncomplicated vaginal delivery;2/6 (33.3%) from instrumental delivery; and 1/26 (3.8%) from caesarean section although this was apreterm baby of 32 weeks of gestation.
50Evidence
level 3
Ventouse and midcavity or rotational forceps are associated with a signiﬁcantly increased risk of ICH and
should be avoided.14,49,51,52Low-cavity forceps may be used and are likely to be preferable to caesarean
section in the second stage of labour.Evidence
level 2 +
A planned caesarean section should be offered for the delivery of affected male babies, especially those
with severe and moderate haemophilia. However, there needs to be a full discussion of the advantagesand disadvantages; caesarean section is associated with an increase in fetal and maternal morbidity,
53
which escalates with multiple repeat caesarean deliveries.54The optimal mode of delivery will depend on
maternal and fetal bleeding risks (Appendix II and IV), prior labour experience and reproductiveexpectations.
Caesarean section prior to 39
+0completed weeks of gestation increases the risk of neonatal respiratory
morbidity.55–57ICH is also increased in prematurity.Evidence
level 4
Induction of labour is not routinely indicated, however, timed delivery in order to optimise the available
expertise, may be preferable to ensure robust out of hours arrangements.58,59Evidence
level 2 +
There is a lack of good quality data reporting the risk of haemorrhage with the use of FBS or FSE in
babies at risk of bleeding disorders. Two case reports were identiﬁed where FBS was associated withscalp haemorrhage in babies postnatally diagnosed with haemophilia.
60,61One case series reported the
use of FBS in an affected male baby with no adverse consequences.52There were no identiﬁed case
reports of bleeding secondary to the use of FSE in fetal bleeding disorders.Evidence
level 4
The cut-off value for predicted factor VIII or IX level, above which no birth restrictions are necessary, has not been
deﬁned. Although mild haemophilia is unlikely to be associated with severe bleeding at birth (Appendix II).
Prolonged labour is associated with an increased risk of uterine atony and the need for instrumental vaginal
delivery, thereby increasing bleeding risk to both mother and baby.62Since the use of ventouse extraction,
midcavity forceps and, in many cases, invasive fetal monitoring are contraindicated when the fetus is knownor suspected to have haemophilia, the chance of emergency caesarean section is increased.Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e219 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Female fetuses who are carriers have a small risk of very low factor levels due to extreme lyonisation,
but this needs to be weighed up against the possibly greater risks of withholding instrumental delivery
and invasive fetal monitoring. As factor IX levels are lower at birth and are not increased by the stress of
delivery, female carriers of severe haemophilia B are theoretically at higher risk. A consultant obstetricianshould be involved for decision making during labour.
63Evidence
level 4
4.10 How can analgesia and anaesthesia be managed safely?
Factor VIII/IX levels of more than 0.5 iu/ml are required for the insertion and removal of
epidural catheter and for spinal anaesthesia.D
Experienced clinicians should be involved in decisions about whether or not to perform acentral neuraxial anaesthetic technique, and the woman should be given all the informationshe needs to make an informed choice.P
The most suitable form of analgesia depends on the context of the delivery. All carriers shouldhave the opportunity to discuss analgesia with a senior anaesthetist prior to delivery. A clearplan for analgesia and anaesthesia should be available in the maternal records.D
Intramuscular injections should generally be avoided if factor Vlll/IX levels are less than0.5 iu/ml. They may be used when a woman ’s factor VIII/IX is maintained in the normal range
by clotting factor support or DDAVP.P
One of the complications of central neuraxial blockade is the development of compressive epidural
haematoma with subsequent neurological injury. The third National Audit Project identiﬁed theincidence of vertebral canal haematoma after central neuraxial blockade in all patients as 0.85/100 000(95% CI 0.0 –1.8 per 100 000).
64Ruppen et al.65reviewed the incidence of epidural haematoma, infection
and neurological injury after central neuraxial blockade for obstetric indications in 27 studies of1.37 million women and found an incidence of epidural haematoma of 1 in 168 000.Evidence
level 3
There are inherent problems in making recommendations about the safety of performing central neuraxial
blockade in patients with abnormalities of coagulation. The rarity of the abnormality in combination with
the infrequent nature of the complication means that it is difﬁcult to make accurate estimates of the
incidence of complications related to the abnormality of coagulation. Factor levels of more than 0.5 iu/mlare considered adequate for all types of neuraxial anaesthesia although the evidence for this is limited, beingrestricted to case reports and small case series.
66This would also apply to the removal of the catheter
where bleeding risk is similar, if not slightly greater. ‘Single shot’ spinal and epidural anaesthesia avoid thisconcern, but require repeated procedures if prolonged anaesthesia is needed.Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e220 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
These considerations have been extensively discussed in the national guideline on ‘Regional anaesthesia
and patients with abnormalities of coagulation’.67They state that there may be circumstances in which
although the use of a regional technique for a patient with abnormal coagulation may put the patient atsigniﬁcant risk as a result, the alternative for this patient (often a general anaesthetic) may expose themto even greater risk. While the guideline focuses on acquired disorders of haemostasis, the principlesoutlined in the document can be extended to the delivery of central neuraxial blockade in pregnantwomen with inherited bleeding disorders.
Knowledge of the factor VIII/IX level at 32 –34 weeks of gestation allows the anaesthetist to discuss the
possibilities for analgesia and anaesthesia. Epidural analgesia is the most effective form of pain relief inlabour. In addition, there is clear evidence of the safety of central neuraxial blockade (epidural and spinalanaesthesia) compared with general anaesthesia for caesarean section.
64National recommendations are
that more than 95% of category 4 (planned) caesarean sections and more than 85% of category 1caesarean sections (performed where there is an immediate threat to the life of the mother or the baby)be performed under central neuraxial blockade.
67
Intramuscular injections may be associated with painful haematomas although a study in haemophiliacboys suggested that the risk was overestimated.
68In general, they should be avoided when the clotting
factor levels have failed to normalise and have not been maintained in the normal range by clotting factorsupport or DDAVP. However, they may be considered after risk/beneﬁt analysis if not giving theintramuscular medication poses additional risks.Evidence
level 4
4.11 What is the haemostatic management during labour?
If clotting factor levels are less than 0.5 iu/ml, DDAVP should be given to raise factor VIII, or
factor IX concentrate should be given to raise factor IX, aiming for 1.0 iu/ml.P
Tranexamic acid could be considered as sole therapy for women with low normal levels or inconjunction with DDAVP to increase factor VIII, or with substantive factor IX treatment.P
Treatment should be given as close to delivery as possible.P
DDAVP should be used to raise factor VIII levels. Factor IX does not respond to DDAVP and factor concentrate is
required to raise factor IX levels (see section 4.8). The authors consider the optimal timing for treatment to be afterthe point of established labour.
There is limited evidence for the use of tranexamic acid in PPH, but systematic reviews suggest probable
efﬁcacy in the absence of clear safety concerns (see section 4.12).
69–71If tranexamic acid is administered
at the onset of established labour by intravenous injection, then it is able to exert an antiﬁbrinolyticeffect immediately, at the time of placental separation.Evidence
level 2 +
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e221 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.12 What is the postpartum management?
To minimise the risk of PPH, it is important to recommend/offer active management of the
third stage of labour.P
Levels of factor VIII/IX should be maintained above 0.5 iu/ml for at least 3 days following anuncomplicated vaginal delivery or 5 days following instrumental delivery or caesarean section.Management should be guided by results of factor assays.D
Tranexamic acid should be continued postpartum until lochia is minimal.B
Pharmacological thromboprophylaxis should generally be avoided where the factor level is0.6 iu/ml or less, but will need to be considered in women with thrombotic risk factors, withcareful balance of risks.P
Following discharge from hospital, the haemophilia centre should maintain contact with thewoman who should be advised to report any increase in postpartum blood loss.P
The risk of bleeding in carriers of haemophilia is increased for both primary and secondary PPH.52Those
with low levels in the third trimester can have higher risk even following factor concentrate.72Carriers
should be identiﬁed as being at increased risk of PPH and offered uterotonics for the third stage of labour.73
Clotting factor levels fall from 2 days postpartum and al though the mechanism for ces sation of bleeding is largely
mechanical (through uterine c ontraction), borderline levels of factor VIII and IX are associated with increased
risk of PPH.6Thus, haemostatic levels should be maintained in the initial postpartum period. Where treatment
has been given, a factor assay should be repeated 6 –12 hours later and top-up treatment given if needed, as
consumption of factor can be greater during this time. For caesarean section and other surgical procedures,levels should not be allowed to fall below 0.5 iu/ml for at least 5 days, to ensure adequate haemostasis.
74Evidence
level 4
There is limited evidence for the use of tranexamic acid in PPH, but systematic reviews suggest probable
efﬁcacy in the absence of clear safety concerns.69–71There appears to be no long-term adverse outcome
for children whose mothers took tranexamic acid while breastfeeding.63Women should be advised to
take tranexamic acid following delivery until the bleeding has become like their usual menstrual period oruntil the bleeding has stopped. Following caesarean section, tranexamic acid should be taken for aminimum of 7 days postoperatively (see section 5.5).Evidence
level 2 +
If factor VIII or IX levels have normalised, or treatment given to ensure a minimum level of 0.5 iu/ml, then it
is possible that the risk of venous thromboembolism may outweigh the risk of PPH. However, the risk of
secondary PPH may be high even despite replacement therapy72and therefore, a careful assessment of
blood loss and thrombotic risk should be performed daily, and thromboprophylaxis prescribed if indicated.
Carriers of haemophilia have an increased duration of lochia, ranging from 21 –58 days.75A woman
should be advised that the rate of blood loss should lessen over time. If the rate of blood loss increasesor changes to become bright red, the woman should present for assessment of clotting factor level andof any obstetric cause of an increase in bleeding.
73Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e222 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.13 What is the neonatal management?
A plan for diagnostic testing of the neonate following delivery, including cord blood sampling,
should be included in the maternal pregnancy management plan.P
Coagulation results in neonates should be interpreted against age-adjusted reference ranges.D
Cord blood sampling and diagnostic testing is recommended for all male babies born tomothers who are carriers of haemophilia A/B although some mild cases may require retestingat 3–6 months of age.D
Cord blood sampling and diagnostic testing of female babies born to mothers who are carriers
of haemophilia is not recommended.D
Parents of neonates diagnosed with haemophilia should be informed of the diagnosis in a timelymanner and arrangements should be made for neonatal follow-up at a haemophilia centre.P
In a neonate with low factor levels, vitamin K should be administered by an oral regimen andfollowing neonate bloodspot screening, pressure should be sustained to avoid excess bleeding.P
Cranial ultrasound (US) should be considered prior to discharge in all neonates with severe ormoderate haemophilia.P
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be undertaken in neonates with symptoms orsigns suggestive of ICH even in the presence of a normal cranial US.D
In neonates with haemophilia, information on the symptoms and signs of ICH should beprovided at the time of discharge.P
Short-term primary prophylaxis should be considered in severe and moderate haemophilia ininfants considered to be at increased risk of bleeding due to trauma at delivery or prematurity.D
Clinical bleeding events in neonates with haemophilia should be managed in accordance withtreatment guidelines.D
Neonate males with haemophilia, especially those with severe and moderate disease, are at increased risk
of haemorrhage in the neonate period. It is therefore important that, if haemophilia is suspected, thediagnosis is conﬁrmed soon after birth, as this will facilitate appropriate management (Appendix V).However, it should be noted that 50% of haemophilia cases arise without a family history and are notanticipated antenatally.
4Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e223 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Haemostatic proteins are signiﬁcantly affected by gestational and postnatal age. The diagnosis of
haemophilia during the neonatal period requires an understanding of the effect of age on the haemostaticsystem and the use of appropriate age-adjusted normal ranges.
76
It may not always be necessary or informative to test for mild haemophilia during the neonatal period.This will depend on the severity in the family and the likelihood of being able to make a diagnosis in thisage group (see Appendix V).Evidence
level 2 /C0
Where testing is appropriate at birth, it is usually suggested that a cord blood sample is obtained
following delivery to avoid the potential trauma of venepuncture. However, an abnormal result should beveriﬁed by a venepuncture sample. Molecular diagnostic studies can also be useful in some cases.
27
In normal neonates, factor VIII levels are within the normal adult range at birth, whereas factor IX levelsare usually about 50% of adult values and are further reduced in preterm neonates. It is thereforepossible to conﬁrm a diagnosis of severe or moderate haemophilia A in a neonate regardless of thegestational age. In mild haemophilia A, due to the stress of delivery, factor VIII levels may be normal andrepeat testing is recommended at 3 –6 months of age.
27
It is usually possible to diagnose severe and moderate haemophilia B at birth, but conﬁrmation of mild
haemophilia B is complicated by overlap with normal values, necessitating repeat testing at 3 –6 months
of age or molecular analysis if the genetic defect is known.27
The risk of bleeding in female neonates who are obligate or potential carriers of haemophilia A or Bappears to be very low and neonate screening is therefore not routinely advised.
27Evidence
level 4
Intramuscular vitamin K can result in localised bleeding in babies with haemophilia, including muscle
haematomas.77Intramuscular vitamin K should therefore be withheld until the results of diagnostic
investigations are available, but if there is likely to be a signiﬁcant delay, oral vitamin K should beadministered. If haemophilia is diagnosed, oral vitamin K should be administered according to a standardregimen. Administration of 1 mg oral vitamin K is as efﬁcient as intramuscular administration of the samedose in the prevention of classical haemorrhagic disease in the neonate.
78Evidence
level 3
Given the risk of ICH in neonates with severe inherited bleeding disorders, cranial US has been proposed as a
possible screening test for early detection of ICH. Although readily available and easy to perform, there areinadequate data to allow the efﬁcacy of this type of screening to be assessed and there is no consensus on theoptimal timing of screening. It should also be noted that cranial US is not the most sensitive imaging technique forthe detection of subdural haemorrhage, which is the most common site of bleeding. Despite these reservations,cranial US may be considered prior to discharge in neonates with severe and moderately severe disorders.
Alternative scanning techniques, including MRI, have been used in normal neonates and demonstrate that
bleeding is not uncommon following delivery, is usually clinically silent and resolves on follow-up imaging.There are no published data on neonates with inherited bleeding disorders. At the present time, routineMRI scan is not advised, but should be considered in any infant with symptoms or signs suggestive ofICH.
27Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e224 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
It is not currently standard practice to administer short-term prophylaxis with factor concentrate in
severe or moderate haemophilia, and there are no data with which to assess effectiveness and no agreedregimen. Prophylaxis should, however, be considered where there has been trauma at delivery (forexample, following instrumental delivery or prolonged second stage of labour) and in preterm infants.
27Evidence
level 3
5. von Willebrand disease (VWD)
5.1 What is the classiﬁcation and inheritance?
VWD is classi ﬁed according to whether the de ﬁciency of VWF is partial quantitative (type 1),
qualitative (type 2) or severe quantitative (type 3). The classi ﬁcation is important for diagnosis,
treatment and counselling of patients. However, it does not reliably predict response to therapyand has a variable association with VWF gene mutations.B
Clinicians counselling these women should be aware that inheritance of VWD is autosomal andvariably dominant or recessive, depending on the VWD type.P
Genetic counselling about the risk of disease transmission, and its variable penetrance andexpression, should be provided for all women with VWD.P
VWD results from a quantitative or qualitative deﬁciency of VWF, which is a large and complex
glycoprotein essential for platelet-dependant primary haemostasis and also for carriage of factor VIII inthe circulation. VWD is considered to be the most common inherited bleeding disorder. The prevalenceof clinically relevant VWD is no more than 1/10 000 but less symptomatic cases might be moreprevalent, up to 1/1000.
79It is classiﬁed according to the nature of the deﬁciency; the diagnostic
approach to VWD has been reviewed by Ng et al.80
Clinically relevant type I VWD is a partial quantitative deﬁciency of VWF characterised by concordantreductions in VWF protein and functional activity levels of less than 0.3 iu/ml. The relationship betweenVWF level and VWD phenotype is only partially explained by speciﬁc VWF gene mutations as there aremultifactorial genetic and environmental inﬂuences on VWF levels. Inheritance of type 1 VWD istherefore not straightforward, and is characterised by variable penetrance and expressivity of the VWDphenotype. It is now recommended that patients with a bleeding history and VWF activity of 0.3 –0.5 iu/ml
should be regarded as having ‘low VWF’ rather than VWD.
81Alternative causes for bleeding, such as
platelet function defects, should be sought in these borderline patients and a well taken bleeding history inthe subject and family, using a standardised bleeding score, will help to assess risk. When VWF levels areless than 0.3 iu/ml, the likelihood of there being a mutation in the VWF gene is far greater and the pattern ofinheritance in such cases is likely to be autosomal dominant and penetrant.
82–84
Type 2 VWD results from a variety of qualitative VWF defects, which usually demonstrate discordant
reductions in VWF functional activity (VWF activity:VWF antigen ratio of less than 0.6). The principalabnormality may be a selective loss in high-molecular-weight VWF multimers, as seen in type 2A VWD,increased or reduced binding to platelet glycoprotein (GP) Ib (types 2B and 2M VWD, respectively), orreduced binding to factor VIII (type 2N VWD).
80Evidence
level 1 +
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e225 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Inheritance of type 2 VWD is generally dominant. Genetic diagnosis is generally not clinically helpful.
Thrombocytopenia may be exacerbated during pregnancy in patients with type 2B VWD and carefulmonitoring of VWF levels and platelet count is essential.
85
Type 2N VWD has recessive inheritance. Recognition and differentiation of type 2N VWD fromhaemophilia A or from a haemophilia A carrier is required for valid genetic counselling, accurate carrierdiagnosis and appropriate treatment of bleeding episodes. Genetic diagnosis has an important role toinform genetic counselling in type 2N VWD.
85,86Evidence
level 4
Type 3 VWD is characterised by virtually absent VWF and consequently, signiﬁcantly lowered factor VIII
levels. The prevalence of type 3 VWD in the UK is around 1/1 000 000 of the general populationalthough more frequent in communities where consanguineous marriages are common.
81Evidence
level 1 +
Type 3 VWD has recessive inheritance, with frequent consanguinity. Genetic diagnosis has important
applications to inform genetic counselling, to identify asymptomatic carriers and to provide informationregarding options for PND (ﬁrst trimester via CVS or third trimester via amniocentesis to inform clinicalmanagement of childbirth —see Appendix III).
87Evidence
level 4
5.2 What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby?
Clinicians should be aware that women with VWD have an increased risk of antepartum,
primary and secondary PPH.B
All women should receive counselling about risks of increased bleeding, especially women withtype I VWD whose VWF level does not rise above 0.5 iu/ml by term, or type 2 or 3 VWD.B
VWF and factor VIII levels start to rise from early ﬁrst trimester and rise progressively throughout
pregnancy to two to three times the baseline value at term.88This rise is usually adequate to rectify the
VWF deﬁciency in many patients with type 1 VWD, in whom levels normalise by the time of delivery.However, in patients with severe VWF deﬁciency, for example, a baseline VWF level of less than 0.15 iu/ml,VWF and factor VIII levels may fail to normalise.
89In patients with type 2 VWD who exhibit qualitative
abnormalities of VWF, the abnormalities may not correct and may even worsen.90This is especially the case
in type 2B VWD where thrombocytopenia, with its attendant increase in bleeding risk, may be aggravatedby the rise in dysfunctional VWF.
85In type 2N VWD, because the defect is due to impaired binding of the
abnormal VWF, the factor VIII levels do not rise. In patients with type 3 VWD there is minimal or no rise inVWF levels.
91Levels of VWF and factor VIII start to fall at around 3 days after delivery,92but the time to
return to baseline varies between a few days and several weeks.88,93 –95Evidence
level 2
During pregnancy and childbirth, women with VWD have a signiﬁcantly increased risk of bleeding;
antepartum haemorrhage is increased ten-fold, primary PPH occurs in 15 –30% of women, while
secondary PPH occurs in approximately 25%. The need for blood transfusion is increased ﬁve-fold andmortality rate is increased ten-fold compared with women without VWD.
96Although perineal
haematoma is a rare complication of normal vaginal delivery, a higher frequency of this has beenobserved in women with VWD. However, there does not appear to be an increased risk of miscarriage,preterm labour, placental abruption, fetal growth restriction or intrauterine fetal death.
97Where
miscarriage does occur, this can be complicated by signiﬁcant bleeding.91Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e226 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Neonatal VWF levels are physiologically increased at birth. This confers some protection against
bleeding, but it can make the diagnosis of VWD difﬁcult during the neonatal period.97Neonates with type 2,
type 3 and more severe type 1 VWD will have reduced levels at birth and may be at increased risk of
bleeding. Despite this theoretical risk, bleeding problems in neonates with VWD, including type 3 disease,appear to be uncommon, and life-threatening bleeding secondary to ICH has only been reported very rarelyand cases have often had additional risk factors for bleeding. In a single centre experience of six cases ofVWD with ICH reported from Canada, no cases presented neonatally, and in a UK survey of ICH inchildren with inherited bleeding disorders, there were no neonatal cases with VWD.
98,99Evidence
level 3
5.3 What is the prepregnancy and antenatal management?
Prior to conception, the bleeding phenotype should be assessed, historical diagnosis reviewed
and response to DDAVP established.D
Safe management requires a multidisciplinary approach.P
All women with VWD should have VWF antigen levels and activity, and factor VIII levelschecked at booking, in the third trimester and prior to any invasive procedures.P
Women with type 1 VWD who achieve normal VWF levels can be safely managed in standardobstetric units in collaboration with haemophilia centre staff.P
Women with types 2 and 3, or severe type 1 VWD should be referred for prenatal care anddelivery to a centre where there are specialists in high-risk obstetrics, as well as a haemophiliacentre. Facilities for laboratory monitoring of VWF and factor VIII levels are essential.D
Clinicians should aim for factor VIII and VWF ristocetin cofactor (VWF:RCo) activity levels of0.5 iu/ml or above to cover surgical procedures or spontaneous miscarriage.P
Where invasive procedures are required, if VWF activity or factor VIII levels are less than0.50 iu/ml, women should receive haemostatic support in the form of DDAVP, whereresponsive, or VWF-containing concentrates.P
Treatment should be with DDAVP in preference to blood-derived factor concentrates wherepossible. This is safe for use in pregnancy and at delivery, but should be avoided in pre-eclampsia.D
Fluid intake should be restricted to 1 litre for 24 hours following DDAVP administration toprevent maternal hyponatraemia. If additional ﬂuid is required, electrolytes should be monitored.D
Clinicians should be aware that patients with type 2B VWD may develop thrombocytopenia
following DDAVP treatment.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e227 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If VWF replacement therapy is required, a concentrate containing factor VIII and VWF,
manufactured from a safe plasma source with adequate viral testing and inactivation proceduresshould be used.P
Target peak VWF activity levels should be 1.0 iu/ml and levels maintained above 0.5 iu/ml untilhaemostasis is secured.P
For most antenatal procedures, a single preoperative treatment is suf ﬁcient, but in some cases,
a second dose may be required at 12 –24 hours, depending on the nature of the procedure and
the measured levels.P
In light of the reclassiﬁcation of mild VWD that occurred in 2014,80the fact that levels increase with age100
and variable bleeding phenotypes, any historical diagnosis should be reviewed prior to pregnancy. The
severity of the bleeding phenotype should be reassessed, including personal bleeding history and responseto previous haemostatic challenges. Bleeding scores, such as the bleeding assessment tool endorsed by theInternational Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis, may be helpful in predicting the likelihood of ableeding disorder.
101,102Baseline investigations and accuracy of diagnosis should be checked.Evidence
level 4
Iron deﬁciency is common in patients with VWD due to heavy menstrual bleeding.103,104Haemoglobin
level and iron status should be checked and iron supplements given if necessary.Evidence
level 3
Where plasma products have already been used in the past, screening for transfusion-transmitted infections should
be performed. Vaccination to hepatitis A and B should be done if not already immune and consent for administrationof plasma-derived concentrate should be obtained after the counselling of risks.
Safe management of VWD requires a multidisciplinary approach involving the haemophilia team, laboratory staff,
obstetricians, midwives, anaesthetists and neonatologists. The patient should be fully informed of potential bleedingrisks and the plan for management of pregnancy, delivery and the postpartum period. This should begin prior toconception and should be reviewed as pregnancy advances.
There is variability in haemostatic response to pregnancy in different types and subtypes of VWD. In
normal women, VWF and factor VIII increase signiﬁcantly with levels exceeding 1 iu/ml by term. In type1 VWD, a progressive increase of VWF and factor VIII levels also occurs, with levels reaching greaterthan 0.5 iu/ml in most women.
90However, caution should be exercised because there is heterogeneity
of phenotypes and genotypes underlying type 1 VWD and careful evaluation of all pregnant women witha diagnosis of VWD is recommended. In general, women with levels at baseline of VWF and factor VIIIof more than 0.3 iu/ml are likely to achieve normal levels at the end of pregnancy.
105There is usually
poor increment in women with a basal level less than 0.15 –0.2 iu/ml.89,106In type 2A VWD and type 2M
VWD during pregnancy, the defect does not correct. A signiﬁcant increase of factor VIII and VWFantigen occurs, but VWF activity remains markedly reduced.
Most women with type 1 VWD achieve levels above 0.5 iu/ml by term and can be delivered as normal
with central neuraxial anaesthesia if needed.
89Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e228 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
DDAVP
DDAVP is generally safe in pregnancy and at delivery37,88,107at a dose of 0.3 micrograms/kg of prepregnancy body
weight, administered intravenously or subcutaneously. The advantages of DDAVP are its wide availability and mostimportantly, the avoidance of blood products.
Response to DDAVP can be variable in different types. DDAVP may not be suitable in patients with baseline VWF
or factor VIII levels of less than 0.15 iu/ml as they may not achieve sufﬁcient post-infusion levels for haemostasis. The
best way to predict response to DDAVP is to carry out a trial infusion once type 2B has been excluded. Inparticular, as shown by Rodeghiero et al.,
108the response is consistent over time in the same patient and the
response pattern is reproducible within the patient’s affected relatives.
DDAVP increases the VWF level by three- to ﬁve-fold, which normalises VWF and factor VIII levels in
most cases of type 1 and some subcategories of type 2. Some subtypes of type 1 VWD, such as VWDVicenza, show decreased survival of endogenously produced VWF following DDAVP as compared withnormal survival of exogenously administered clotting factor concentrates. However, successful managementof delivery with DDAVP has been described in VWD Vicenza despite the basal factor VIII/VWF not risingsigniﬁcantly in pregnancy.
109In type 2B VWD, a transient thrombocytopenia occurs frequently after
DDAVP administration and the therapeutic response is poor, therefore, it is not usually recommended fortype 2B.
110In type 2N VWD, the abnormal binding of factor VIII to VWF shortens the response. DDAVP
should not be used in type 3 VWD patients as they lack releasable stores of VWF and do not respond toDDAVP.
Treatment with DDAVP should be avoided in patients who are intolerant or show adverse effects. It
should also be avoided in women with pre-eclampsia.
107There are anecdotal reports of myocardial
infarction, and DDAVP should be avoided in patients known to have arterial disease or uncontrolledhypertension.
111,112During intravenous infusion, hypotension, headache and facial ﬂushing are common,
but generally mild. Blood pressure should be monitored before and after infusion. Fluid intake should berestricted to 1 litre for the following 24 hours to prevent maternal hyponatraemia. Repeatedadministration should be carefully monitored as there is a potential for tachyphylaxis with decliningresponse.
106,113Evidence
level 3
VWF concentrates
There are many situations where DDAVP may be contraindicated or ineffective, and replacement with
VWF concentrates is necessary in these cases. VWF concentrates usually contain factor VIII as well asVWF. Several different licensed plasma-derived high purity and intermediate purity VWF-containingconcentrates are available. These concentrates are available as lyophilised powders and can beadministered by slow bolus intravenous infusion after reconstitution with water for injection. Theamount of factor VIII varies widely between different preparations and the VWF antigen/VWF:RCo ratioshould be taken into consideration. For example, with high purity VWF concentrates, with little factorVIII, it may take more than 12 hours for the factor VIII to rise to normal.
114,115Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e229 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
VWF concentrates are pooled plasma products and all available concentrates have an excellent safety
record. They undergo viral inactivation measures, which are integral to the manufacturing process;
however, some viruses, such as parvovirus and hepatitis A, are relatively resistant to these inactivation
techniques. No cases of HIV, hepatitis B or hepatitis C have been documented, despite decades of use.115Evidence
level 3
5.4 What is the intrapartum management?
The timing of treatment should be as near to delivery as possible, and pre- and post-treatment
levels of VWF activity and factor VIII levels should be measured and repeated after delivery, orif labour is prolonged.P
Tranexamic acid should be considered in combination with treatment for all those with VWFactivity less than 0.5 iu/ml, or as sole therapy for those with levels above 0.5 iu/ml if clinicallyindicated. This can be given orally or intravenously, and can be started prior to delivery.P
Platelet transfusions, as well as VWF factor replacement, may sometimes be required in
type 2B VWD.D
The mode of delivery should be guided by obstetric indications. Spontaneous labour and
normal vaginal delivery should be permitted if there are no other obstetric concerns, tominimise risk of intervention.P
For fetuses at risk of having type 2 or 3 VWD, FBS, external cephalic version, fetal scalpmonitoring, ventouse delivery and midcavity forceps should be avoided.P
Recovery and half-life of factor VIII and VWF:RCo varies among patients and within individuals in different clinical
settings. Delivery can be associated with rapid consumption of factor VIII and VWF, and the half-life can be reducedin the immediate postpartum.
Tranexamic acid, 1 g intravenously, may be helpful for low, normal VWF:RCo levels where VWF-containing
concentrates are not thought necessary. It can also be given in conjunction with VWF concentrate and DDAVP.
Severe thrombocytopenia can occur in patients with type 2B VWD due to a rise in the abnormal VWF
during pregnancy, and enhancing platelet binding and clearance. This can further aggravate the bleedingrisk.
116Platelet transfusions may therefore be required to maintain platelet count above 50 9109/litre.84,85Evidence
level 3
Although VWF levels are normally elevated at birth, neonates with type 2, type 3 and more severe forms
of type 1 disease will have reduced levels of VWF with or without factor VIII and may be at increasedrisk of both ICH and ECH.
97,98Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e230 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
5.5 How can analgesia and anaesthesia be safely managed?
For patients with type 1 VWD, where VWF activity has been normalised by pregnancy or
treatment, central neuraxial anaesthesia can be offered.P
For patients with type 2 disease, central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided unless VWFactivity is more than 0.5 iu/ml and the haemostatic defect has been corrected; this may bedifﬁcult to achieve in type 2 and central neuraxial anaesthesia should not be given in cases of
type 3.P
For patients with type 2N VWD, central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided unlessfactor VIII level is more than 0.5 iu/ml.P
Prior to delivery, all women should be given the opportunity to discuss analgesia with a seniorobstetric anaesthetist.P
In patients where an epidural catheter has been placed, consideration should be given to theneed for repeat treatment prior to catheter removal, as the risk of bleeding is no less thanwith insertion.D
Intramuscular injections and postnatal nonsteroidal anti-in ﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are only
suitable in the short term when VWF activity and factor VIII are more than 0.5 iu/ml.P
Central neuraxial anaesthesia (spinal and epidural) can be regarded as safe in women with type 1 VWD
when VWF activity is greater than 0.5 iu/ml. In type 2 and 3 VWD, haemostasis in theory may not normaliseeven with replacement therapy because of associated platelet dysfunction.
117While general anaesthesia may
be seen as safer from the point of view of the bleeding risk, it poses signiﬁcant additional risks and a risk/beneﬁt analysis is required for these patients, involving a senior obstetric anaesthetist.
Indwelling catheters should generally be avoided, but where used, additional treatment should be
considered for catheter removal, as the risk of bleeding is no less than at catheter insertion.
66,118Evidence
level 4
Intramuscular injections should be avoided in patients with low levels of VWF:RCo or factor VIII as painful
intramuscular haematomas may occur unless haemostatic support is provided. NSAIDs affect platelet function andcan contribute to the bleeding tendency.
5.6 What is the postpartum management?
It is important to ensure that VWF activity and factor VIII levels are maintained at more than
0.5 iu/ml for at least 3 days following uncomplicated vaginal delivery and at least 5 daysfollowing instrumental delivery or after caesarean section. Management should be guided byresults of laboratory investigations.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e231 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Women with VWD should be considered for tranexamic acid for the postpartum period. A
standard dose is 1 g three to four times a day for 7 –14 days. In some cases, prolonged
administration for 2 –3 weeks or more may be necessary.P
If thromboprophylaxis is indicated, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) may be given to
inpatients with adequate correction of VWF:RCo and factor VIII levels. When pharmacologicalthromboprophylaxis is contraindicated, mechanical methods should be employed.P
Women with VWD should be made aware of the risk of delayed bleeding and be encouragedto report excessive bleeding. For women with more severe cases, haemoglobin should bemonitored and regular contact with the patient maintained for several weeks. Patients withtype 3 VWD may require treatment with VWF concentrate for 2 –3 weeks or even longer
following delivery.P
The risk of postpartum bleeding is signiﬁcant in women with VWD and can persist for several weeks.
The pregnancy-induced increase in factor VIII and VWF is maintained in the ﬁrst 48 hours after delivery,but VWF levels start to decline on day 3 post delivery.
91In normal pregnancies, the median duration of
bleeding after childbirth is 21 –27 days, with delayed or secondary PPH occurring in less than 1% of cases.
In women with VWD, this is much more common, affecting 20 –25% of cases. The average time of
presentation with PPH in women with VWD is 10 –20 days after delivery.88,89,119Evidence
level 4
For patients with signiﬁcantly low prepregnancy levels of VWF, DDAVP should be considered in known responders.
For type 2 and 3 disease, or severe type 1, care should be taken to ensure that VWF and factor VIII activity levelsare maintained at more than 0.5 iu/ml for at least 3 days following vaginal delivery or 5 days after caesarean section.If the bleeding risk is prolonged by complicated delivery and delayed recovery, or development of sepsis, normallevels should be maintained for longer. This should be achieved by repeated administration of coagulation factorconcentrates with regular monitoring of VWF and factor VIII levels.
Tranexamic acid can be used during the puerperium. A limited quantity is secreted in breast milk, but is
unlikely to produce an antiﬁbrinolytic effect in the infant.
63,120Evidence
level 3
Thromboprophylaxis is sometimes indicated if women have other risk factors for venous thromboembolism. While
VWF and factor VIII levels are maintained in the normal range, women may be considered for prophylactic LMWH ifindicated. Heparin should be avoided if VWF level or factor VIII level is less than 0.5 iu/ml.
Follow-up is important as many women may accept heavy vaginal bleeding as normal and do not report it. Telephone
contact should be maintained with the patient and a follow-up haemoglobin considered at 2 weeks postpartum.
The combined contraceptive pill is useful for these women in the postpartum period for hormonal reduction in
bleeding as well as increasing VWF production. It can be used postpartum if not breastfeeding,
121with or without
tranexamic acid.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e232 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
5.7 What is the neonatal management?
A plan for the diagnostic testing of the neonate following delivery, including cord blood
sampling, should be included in the maternal pregnancy management plan.P
Cord blood samples for VWF activity should be taken for babies at risk of type 2 and 3 VWD.P
For neonates at risk of type 2 or 3 VWD, vitamin K should be given orally, unless VWF activityis shown to be normal.D
Neonates with type 3 VWD should be considered for routine cranial imaging prior to dischargeand for short-term prophylaxis, with factor concentrate, if there has been signi ﬁcant potential
trauma at delivery.D
In normal neonates, VWF antigen and activity levels are usually elevated at birth.96Diagnosis of mild
VWD is therefore likely to be difﬁcult in the neonatal period as mild conditions can be masked. Testingis usually deferred until around 6 months of age unless there are clinical bleeding issues. It is, however,usually possible to diagnose more severe type 2 and type 3 disease in this age group, and a cord sampleshould be obtained for factor VIII, VWF activity and antigen assays. All results should be interpretedagainst age-adjusted normal ranges. Referral for follow-up testing should be arranged prior to discharge.
Neonates with type 3 VWD will have very low/undetectable levels of factor VIII and VWF, and may be at
increased risk of ICH although the incidence of this complication is poorly deﬁned. Neonates withreduced VWF activity may also be at risk of muscle bleeds following intramuscular injection and shouldreceive vitamin K orally.
97Evidence
level 4
6. Factor XI de ﬁciency
6.1 What is the inheritance?
Factor XI de ﬁciency is an uncommon autosomal disorder which has both recessive and
dominant inheritance patterns.B
The incidence in the non-Jewish population is 1/1 000 000; it is common in Ashkenazi Jewswith heterozygosity in 8% and homozygosity in 0.2 –0.5%.A
Clinicians should be aware that there is intra- and inter-individual variation in bleeding phenotype.D
Factor XI is a glycoprotein that plays a role in the ampliﬁcation of the coagulation process after the initial
production of thrombin. Factor XI deﬁciency is a bleeding disorder with an autosomal inheritance. Theinheritance pattern is complex, with both dominant and recessive inheritance patterns described.However, some heterozygotes demonstrate a bleeding tendency.
122,123Evidence
level 2 ++
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e233 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Severe factor XI deﬁciency is rare in the general population with an incidence of 1/1 000 000.124
However, it is common among the Jewish population, especially Ashkenazi Jews. In this population, the
heterozygous form occurs in 8 –9%125and homozygosity in 0.2 –0.5%.126,127Evidence
level 1 +
Clinicians should be aware that clinical phenotypes vary even among individuals with the same factor
level. In part, this may be due to differences in platelet function and levels of VWF.128,129The bleeding
tendency can also be variable in the same individual, in response to different haemostatic challenges. Thebleeding risk is highest if surgery or trauma involves sites of increased ﬁbrinolysis. This relates to theantiﬁbrinolytic role of factor XI, through the activation of thrombin activatable ﬁbrinolysis inhibitor.
130Evidence
level 3
6.2 What are the different phenotypes?
Plasma levels of factor XI show poor correlation with bleeding symptoms.B
Spontaneous bleeding is rare, even with very low factor XI levels. However, these patients are
often at risk of bleeding following surgery or trauma.C
Heterozygotes have mild or moderate reduction in factor XI levels (more than 0.15 –0.20 iu/ml).
Most are asymptomatic, but patients with even mild reductions in factor XI (0.5 –0.7 iu/ml) may
have a bleeding tendency.C
The clinical phenotype in factor XI deﬁciency is heterogeneous. There is a poor correlation between
factor level and bleeding tendency;129however, Peyvandi et al.131demonstrated a weak correlation
between factor XI level and clinical phenotype from data collected via the European Network of RareBleeding Disorders registry. Patients who suffered severe bleeding had a factor XI activity range of0.09–0.41 iu/ml, while asymptomatic cases had levels between 0.14 and 0.39 iu/ml.Evidence
level 2 +
Patients with homozygosity or compound heterozygosity have factor levels of less than 0.15 –0.20 iu/ml.
Although these are classed as severely deﬁcient, spontaneous bleeding is rare. Bleeding usually occursafter surgery and trauma, especially when the site is rich in ﬁbrinolytic activity, such as the oral and nasalmucosa, and genitourinary system.
132Many patients with severe reduction in factor XI level do not have
a bleeding tendency.133,134Evidence
level 3
Heterozygotes have mild to moderate reduction in factor XI level (levels between 0.15 and 0.70 iu/ml).129
Some laboratories may quote an upper limit of 0.5 iu/ml, but cases with bleeding tendency have been
described in individuals with levels between 0.5 and 0.7 iu/ml.129Evidence
level 2 +
6.3 What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby?
Factor XI does not usually increase during pregnancy; however, levels should be checked at
booking, in the third trimester and prior to invasive procedures.C
Women with factor XI de ﬁciency may suffer excessive bleeding after miscarriage or
termination, especially if they have a bleeding phenotype.C
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e234 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
There is increased risk of PPH in factor XI-de ﬁcient women, which is highest in those with a bleeding
phenotype and of blood group O, and least in non-O blood groups with a nonbleeding phenotype.C
Patients with factor XI de ﬁciency should be assessed for the presence of other potentially
compounding factors, such as low VWF levels and platelet dysfunction.C
No special precautions for the baby are required for delivery unless the neonate is at risk ofhomozygosity or compound heterozygosity.D
There are reports of increased levels of factor XI in pregnancy. Factor XI level should be checked in the
third trimester or prior to invasive or surgical procedures.135
The risk of miscarriage does not appear to be increased, however, women may suffer excessive bleedingafter miscarriage or termination. The risk is particularly increased in those women with a bleedingphenotype.
90,136
The risk of PPH is increased in factor XI-deﬁcient women, in both homozygotes (17 –30%)137and
heterozygotes, with an overall risk of 16 –22%.136,138This risk is increased in those with a bleeding
phenotype, with a relative risk of 7.2 (95% CI 1.99 –25.90).136,138A 2015 study suggests that having blood
group O increases the risk of PPH; those with blood group O had nearly a ﬁve-fold increased risk
compared with the non-O group (26.4% versus 6.3%); those with blood group O and ‘bleeding’phenotype had the highest risk with 32.8% of women having a PPH. Women with non-O blood groupand nonbleeding phenotype, in contrast, had the lowest risk at 5.7%, i.e. near-normal PPH risk.
139
It is likely that other clotting factors, such as levels of VWF, and platelet function may play a role indetermining the bleeding tendency or otherwise in factor XI-deﬁcient patients. Therefore, other relevantclotting factors should be measured to help assess bleeding tendency.
128Evidence
level 2 +
There are no reports of spontaneous bleeding or ICH in neonates. PND is not necessary as the
morbidity with factor XI deﬁciency is low. Haemorrhage due to peripartum events is rare, but trauma tothe head should be avoided if there is risk of homozygosity or compound heterozygosity. Neonatalfactor XI level is approximately half that of adult levels.
96If the child is a male and circumcision is
planned, a sample should be taken to help direct management for this. Mild factor XI deﬁciency cannotbe reliably diagnosed until after the ﬁrst few months.Evidence
level 3
6.4 What are the therapeutic options?
Treatment options include tranexamic acid, factor XI concentrate and fresh frozen plasma (FFP),
however, women with a nonbleeding phenotype or unknown status can often be managedexpectantly.C
Tranexamic acid should not be given simultaneously with prophylactic factor XI concentrate asthis is considered to increase thrombotic risk. For many women, it is likely that tranexamic acidalone will be suf ﬁcient to prevent PPH.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e235 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If FFP is given to raise factor XI levels, solvent detergent (SD)-FFP should be used when
available.D
Recombinant factor VIIa is not licensed for this condition and is generally not recommended,except if there is an inhibitor to factor XI.D
Treatment options include tranexamic acid, factor XI concentrate and FFP.132,134Issues with factor XI
concentrate are the risk of thrombosis and (rarely) inhibitor development in patients with verylow factor XI levels. Reports of thrombosis were originally published in the 1990s
140,141and guidelines
on restricting dose to prevent the level rising above lower levels of 0.7 iu/ml were established. Morerecently, lower doses have been recommended, as some individuals still had thrombotic events.
142As
this is a blood product, there is also the very rare risk of transfusion-transmitted infection or allergicreactions. Low-dose recombinant activated factor VIIa has been used successfully in patients with severefactor XI deﬁciency undergoing surgery.
143It avoids the need for plasma derived products, but as yet,
there is insufﬁcient evidence to make a recommendation for its use.Evidence
level 2 /C0
Factor XI inhibitors may occur after factor XI replacement in cases with homozygous factor XI
deﬁciency. One study demonstrated inhibitor antibodies in 7 of 188 cases, all of whom had the samegenetic defect,
144which suggests that the risks and beneﬁts of factor XI treatment need to be carefully
assessed. Low-dose recombinant activated factor VIIa with tranexamic acid has been shown to behaemostatically effective during surgery in factor XI deﬁcient patients with inhibitors
145and in one case,
activated prothrombin complex concentrate was given to cover caesarean delivery.146Evidence
level 3
Most women can be managed with tranexamic acid alone, but where prophylactic factor XI is required,
concomitant use of tranexamic acid should be avoided.147Evidence
level 4
FFP contains variable amounts of factor XI, but commercially available SD-FFP has less variation than single
donor methylene blue-treated FFP and a mean factor XI activity of 0.7 –0.9 iu/ml. Transfusion-transmitted
infection or allergic reactions are possible in addition to risk of thrombosis or inhibitor development inhomozygotes.
123Evidence
level 3
Off-label recombinant factor VIIa has been used occasionally, especially if an inhibitor is present.143
However, as the effect cannot easily be measured, the safe dose is unknown and it has been associated
with thrombosis.148Evidence
level 4
One study reports development of a protocol used perioperatively for ﬁve procedures in patients with
inhibitors using tranexamic acid from 2 hours preoperatively until 7 –14 days postoperatively in addition
to a single infusion of low-dose recombinant factor VIIa.145Evidence
level 3
6.5 What is the antenatal, intrapartum and postpartum management?
Factor XI or tranexamic acid is not usually required antenatally unless an invasive procedure is
undertaken or if there is bleeding following miscarriage or surgical procedure.C
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e236 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Delivery plans need to be individualised. Prophylactic factor XI replacement should be
considered if homozygous/compound heterozygous, previous history of PPH or general bleedinghistory. Otherwise, management can be expectant, with tranexamic acid alone and factorreplacement reserved for excess bleeding.C
There is no increased risk of antenatal bleeding or spontaneous miscarriage with factor XI
deﬁciency.136,138
Due to the unpredictable nature of bleeding and the lik ely unchanged factor XI level during the pregnancy,
treatment plans around labour and de livery need to be individualised. Fac tors to be considered are: personal
history of bleeding (a standardised bleeding ass essment tool is helpful to assess phenotype),101family history of
bleeding, mode of delivery, previous obstetric history , blood group and factor XI level if very low (less than
0.1–0.2 iu/ml). Some authors suggest that prophylactic tre atment for all modes of delivery should be given for
patients with homozygous or compound heterozygous disease,149while others argue that factor replacement is
not mandatory. In a retrospective study in 2005, Salomon et al.137studied outcome in 62 women with severe
factor XI deﬁciency. Overall, 43 women in 93 deliver ies had no PPHs (69.4%); eig ht of which were caesarean
sections. Haemorrhage occurred in 19 deliveries; 17 of which occurred in six women. They concluded that
treatment could be reserved for those that demonstrate a bleeding tendency.Evidence
level 3
6.6 Can central neuraxial anaesthesia be given?
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should not be given to women with low factor XI levels with a
known bleeding phenotype, where the phenotype is not clear or when there is a severereduction in level. In those with a nonbleeding phenotype, discussion and counselling should begiven regarding the risks and bene ﬁts of allowing neuraxial anaesthesia with or without factor
replacement.P
Results of retrospective studies138,139do not suggest an increased risk of bleeding with the use of regional
block in women with factor XI deﬁciency. However, there is an extremely low risk in the general populationand these small studies are not powered to demonstrate if there is an increase in risk in the factor XI-deﬁcient population. The risks and beneﬁts need to be discussed on an individual basis. Where there is aclear nonbleeding phenotype, the balance of risks may be in favour of use of central neuraxial anaesthesia,especially if via a single pass spinal injection. However, due to its rarity and variable bleeding tendency wherethere is a clear or possible personal bleeding history (i.e. in those women who have not had an invasiveprocedure to establish whether they have a bleeding phenotype), central neuraxial anaesthesia should bewithheld or prophylaxis given to raise the factor XI level. Reports with adequate replacement suggest thatthis is safe in preventing spinal haematoma.
150,151Again, however, these studies are very small and not
powered to detect a difference in the incidence of bleeding with central neuraxial anaesthesia.Evidence
level 3
7. Rare bleeding disorders
7.1 What are they?
Clinicians should be aware that rare bleeding disorders include inherited de ﬁciencies of
ﬁbrinogen, factors II, V, VII, X, XI and XIII, combined factor V and factor VIII (factor V+VIII)
deﬁciencies, and congenital de ﬁciency of vitamin K-dependent factors.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e237 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Rare bleeding disorders have been deﬁned as monogenic bleeding disorders caused by deﬁciency of a
soluble coagulation factor (or factors) other than VWD and haemophilia A or B.122,152They represent
3–5% of all inherited coagulation deﬁciencies and include inherited deﬁciencies of ﬁbrinogen, factors II, V,
VII, X, XI and XIII, combined factor V +VIII deﬁciencies, and congenital deﬁciency of vitamin K-dependent
factors. Factor XI and ﬁbrinogen deﬁciency are discussed in separate sections 6 and 8. The evidence tosupport the majority of statements is weak and recommendations are derived from expert opinion withreference to small published retrospective case series and open label observational studies.
123,131Such
data are also subject to ascertainment bias and may overestimate the severity of bleeding attributable tospeciﬁc factor levels. Recommendations made in this guideline are consistent with the current BritishSociety for Haematology guidelines on rare coagulation disorders.
123Evidence
level 4
7.2 What is the inheritance of factors II, V, VII, X and XIII, and combined factor V +VIII
deﬁciencies?
Genetic counselling should be provided, with the understanding that most rare inherited
bleeding disorders are autosomal recessive in inheritance and heterozygote carriers are usuallyasymptomatic. For affected women or asymptomatic heterozygous carriers, consanguinityshould be established to allow counselling, screening when possible and formulation of adelivery plan for a potentially affected baby.D
The prevalence of severe deﬁciency (homozygous or compound heterozygous) in the general population
ranges from approximately 1 in 2 000 000 for factor II and XIII deﬁciency, 1 in 1 000 000 for factor V, Xand V +VIII deﬁciency and 1 in 500 000 for factor VII deﬁciency.
122The prevalence is higher in areas with
high consanguinity rates. Heterozygotes (parents and children of the probands) often have approximatelyhalf-normal levels of coagulation factors and are usually asymptomatic
122,153,154although some authors
suggest that there may be an increase in bleeding symptoms in carriers.155,156Babies at risk of
homozygosity or compound heterozygosity are at signiﬁcant risk of bleeding following delivery, includingICH.
122,131Evidence
level 4
7.3 What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby, and what are the treatment options?
Clinicians should appreciate that coagulation factor levels can change during pregnancy.
However, this is unlikely to in ﬂuence haemostasis in women with severe de ﬁciency.
Management should take into account both the factor level and whether there is a clinicalhistory of bleeding.C
Treatment plans may need to be modi ﬁed according to the nature of individual bleeds or
procedures, and to the background bleeding phenotype of each case. Factor replacementtherapy is usually advised for delivery in women with severe coagulation factor de ﬁciency
and/or a bleeding history. Tranexamic acid at a dose of 15 –20 mg/kg or 1 g four times daily
alone can be used for minor bleeds and in combination with factor replacement.D
If the baby is at risk of severe de ﬁciency, the delivery plan should include avoidance of
ventouse, midcavity forceps, FBS and FSE.P
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e238 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Central neuraxial anaesthesia, postpartum pharmacological thromboprophylaxis and NSAIDs
should usually be avoided in women with severe de ﬁciencies as it may be dif ﬁcult to guarantee
consistent normalisation of haemostasis even after treatment. They may be used afterindividual assessment if adequate replacement therapy is con ﬁrmed.P
The association between coagulation factor activity level and clinical bleeding severity is more apparent
for factor X, factor XIII and combined factor V +VIII deﬁciencies, with a weaker association for factor V
and factor VII deﬁciencies.131Factor VII and X levels increase during pregnancy, but levels usually remain
insufﬁcient for haemostasis in severely affected cases.157,158Factor II and factor V do not increase during
pregnancy;87,159factor XIII decreases during normal pregnancy.160
If available, speciﬁc recombinant or virally inactivated plasma-derived factor concentrates should be usedin preference to FFP or cryoprecipitate.
123Tranexamic acid may be useful alone for minor bleeds or as
an adjunct to replacement therapy without signiﬁcantly increasing the risk of thrombosis.161Where
treatment is given, it should be in established labour or prior to caesarean section.Evidence
level 3
Assisted vaginal delivery and invasive fetal monitoring is not normally contraindicated for neonates
expected to be heterozygous carriers of these rare bleeding disorders as there is insufﬁcient evidencefrom case reports to justify restricting these helpful aids to delivery. Heterozygous individuals commonlydo not manifest a bleeding tendency
122,154although this may not be the case for factor VII deﬁciency
where 2% of patients with a severe bleeding phenotype are heterozygotes.162If there is a risk of a
severely affected neonate (homozygous or compound heterozygous), full restrictions are required (as persevere haemophilia) (see Appendix IV).Evidence
level 4
Central neuraxial anaesthesia, pharmacological thromboprophylaxis and NSAIDs should usually be avoided unless
conﬁdent that normal haemostasis is achieved. When a factor concentrate is available and adequate factor levels aremaintained, these interventions can be considered on a case-by-case basis with specialist input and appropriatelaboratory monitoring.
Prothrombin (factor II) deﬁciency
If factor II activity is less than 0.2 iu/ml and there is signi ﬁcant bleeding, established labour or
prior to caesarean section, give prothrombin complex concentrate 20 –40 iu/kg to achieve factor II
activity 0.2 –0.4 iu/ml. Consider further prothrombin complex concentrate 10 –20 iu/kg at 48-hour
intervals to maintain factor II activity more than 0.2 iu/ml for at least 3 days. Women alreadyreceiving prophylactic prothrombin complex concentrate can continue it throughout pregnancy.D
Case reports have described associations among factor II deﬁciency and antepartum haemorrhage (APH),
pregnancy loss and PPH.163,164Some women may already be on prophylaxis with prothrombin complex
concentrate to maintain factor II trough levels of more than 0.1 iu/ml, which can continue duringpregnancy. Minor bleeds can be managed with tranexamic acid, 1 g four times a day. Management withprothrombin complex concentrate, 20 –40 iu/kg during labour, is recommended aiming to maintain factor II
activity more than 0.2 iu/ml for at least 3 days.
123,163Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e239 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Factor V deﬁciency
For signi ﬁcant bleeding or delivery in women with factor V activity less than 0.2 iu/ml,
15–25 ml/kg FFP should be considered once in established labour or before caesarean section
to achieve factor V activity 0.2 –0.4 iu/ml with further FFP 10 ml/kg at 12-hour intervals to
maintain factor V activity more than 0.2 iu/ml for at least 3 days. Where possible, SD-FFPshould be used to reduce infective risk.D
For severe bleeding or caesarean section, consider additional platelet transfusion.D
Factor V deﬁciency has been associated with PPH.165,166Cases have been described of patients with
factor V activity more than 0.1 iu/ml and severe bleeding, therefore, clinical history (for example, usingthe International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis bleeding assessment tool)
101should be
considered in addition to laboratory levels. Peyvandi et al.131identiﬁed a factor V level for asymptomatic
patients of 0.12 iu/ml (95% CI 0 –0.34). There is currently no factor concentrate available, so treatment
with a pathogen-reduced FFP (e.g. SD-FFP) has been recommended.167For minor bleeding, tranexamic
acid can be used, however, for more signiﬁcant bleeding or delivery in women with severe factorV deﬁciency, SD-FFP has been used successfully. Recombinant factor VIIa has also been used off label, forexample, in patients with FFP allergy.
168,169
Platelet concentrates have been used as an additional source of factor V in combination with SD-FFP.170Evidence
level 3
Severe factor VII deﬁciency
For factor VII activity less than 0.2 iu/ml in the third trimester with prior history of bleeding,
consider recombinant factor VIIa 15 –30 micrograms/kg every 4 –6 hours for at least 3 or 5 days
following caesarean section. For all other women, recombinant factor VIIa 15 –30 micrograms/kg
is recommended only in response to abnormal bleeding. For mild bleeding, tranexamic acid(15–20 mg/kg or 1 g four times daily) can be used. For severe bleeding, recombinant factor VIIa
15–30 micrograms/kg can be given and repeated if required every 4 –6 hours, usually for a
minimum of three doses.D
Mild asymptomatic factor VII deﬁciency is not uncommon and is usually identiﬁed because of an isolated
abnormal prothrombin time.155,171In addition, it does not require any treatment or restrictions in
pregnancy although severe bleeding is more likely with factor VII levels less than 0.01 iu/ml.172Data from
the European Registry of Rare Bleeding Disorders identiﬁed a factor level between 0.15 and 0.35 iu/mlfor asymptomatic patients, however, the correlation of factor level with bleeding was weak.
131A bleeding
history appears more predictive of further bleeding than the factor VII level.173APH, PPH and pregnancy
loss have been reported,156,174,175however, women with no history of bleeding do not appear to be at
increased risk of PPH.176Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e240 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Severe factor X deﬁciency
For delivery in women with factor X activity less than 0.3 iu/ml in the third trimester who have
a history of bleeding and all those who require caesarean section, use prothrombin complexconcentrate 20 –40 iu/kg (or factor X concentrate if available) to achieve factor X activity more
than 0.4 iu/ml. Consider further prothrombin complex concentrate 10 –20 iu/kg once daily to
maintain factor X activity more than 0.3 iu/ml for at least 3 days. Antenatal prophylaxis maybe considered in women with a history of recurrent bleeding or adverse pregnancy outcomeusing prothrombin complex concentrate 20 –30 iu/kg two or three times a week to maintain
trough factor X more than 0.01 iu/ml.D
APH, pregnancy loss and PPH have been described in patients with factor X deﬁciency.177,178Prophylaxis
with replacement therapy has been used antenatally for women with previous adverse pregnancyoutcomes.
179Reported replacement regimens have been variable and we have made recommendations
consistent with the UKHCDO guidelines on the management of rare bleeding disorders.123If a licensed
factor X concentrate is available, then this could be used as an alternative to a prothrombin complexconcentrate.Evidence
level 3
Severe factor XIII deﬁciency
During pregnancy, increased intensity prophylaxis is required using factor XIII plasma
concentrate or recombinant factor XIII (if A-subunit de ﬁciency). Dosing frequency should be
increased from every 28 days to every 14 –21 days to maintain factor XIII more than 0.2 iu/ml.
For delivery, consider additional factor XIII concentrate 10 –40 iu/kg once in established labour
or before caesarean section, depending on the interval since last prophylaxis.D
Severe factor XIII deﬁciency is associated with bleeding and a high rate of pregnancy loss without
treatment.180Long-term prophylaxis with factor XIII concentrate is recommended in all cases of severe
deﬁciency with a personal or family history of bleeding,123with either a plasma-derived181or
recombinant factor XIII concentrate in patients with A-subunit deﬁciency.182Prophylaxis should be
continued and intensiﬁed in pregnancy to reduce the risk of pregnancy loss and PPH.160,183Although
there has been a suggestion that heterozygous carriers may experience trauma-related bleeding,156this
has not been studied systematically and there is evidence that maintaining levels of 0.03 –0.10 iu/ml can
be sufﬁcient to prevent bleeding in severely affected patients.184,185Evidence
level 3
Factor V+VIII deﬁciency
For delivery in women with combined factor V+VIII de ﬁciency, if factor V activity less than
0.2 iu/ml in the third trimester, consider SD-FFP 15 –25 ml/kg once in established labour or
before caesarean section to achieve factor V activity 0.2 –0.4 iu/ml. Consider further SD-FFP
10 ml/kg once every 12 hours to maintain factor V activity more than 0.2 iu/ml for at least3 days. Consider additional recombinant factor VIII if the factor VIII activity is less than 0.5 iu/mlin the third trimester.D
Combined factor V +VIII deﬁciency has been associated with PPH.186,187Factor VIII levels, but not factor V
levels, increase in pregnancy.87,188Various treatment strategies have been used in pregnancy, including
recombinant factor VIII alone, or combinations of FFP, recombinant factor VIII and DDAVP.123,188Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e241 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
8. Fibrinogen disorders
8.1 What is the nature and inheritance of aﬁbrinogenaemia, hypoﬁbrinogenaemia and
dysﬁbrinogenaemia?
Clinicians should be aware that ﬁbrinogen disorders can be autosomal recessive
(aﬁbrinogenaemia) or autosomal dominant (with quantitative and/or qualitative defects) and
are associated with a variable clinical phenotype.D
Severe ﬁbrinogen deﬁciency (aﬁbrinogenaemia) is an autosomal recessive disorder and is associated with
mild-to-severe bleeding and has a prevalence of 1/1 000 000.122,131,189,190Partial quantitative
(hypoﬁbrinogenaemia), with or without qualitative defects (dysﬁbrinogenaemia), can be autosomaldominant in inheritance and may be asymptomatic or associated with a variable risk of bleeding and/orvenous and arterial thrombosis.
191–194Poor wound healing and splenic rupture have also been reported
with severe and partial ﬁbrinogen deﬁciency.193Laboratory diagnosis of aﬁbrinogenaemia is
straightforward, but diagnosis of hypoﬁbrinogenaemia and dysﬁbrinogenaemia may be unreliable in theneonate, requiring retesting in later life.
123Evidence
level 4
8.2 What are the risks in pregnancy to mother and baby?
Clinicians should be aware that severe ﬁbrinogen de ﬁciency may be associated with bleeding,
but quantitative and qualitative de ﬁciency can also be associated with thrombosis and
pregnancy loss.D
Aﬁbrinogenaemia, hypoﬁbrinogenaemia and dysﬁbrinogenaemia have been variably associated with APH,
PPH, venous thrombosis and pregnancy loss.175,195 –197In the neonate, aﬁbrinogenaemia has been
associated with ICH and umbilical bleeding.189,198Although ﬁbrinogen levels increase during pregnancy,87
this does not necessarily protect against complications.Evidence
level 3
8.3 What is the management of pregnancy and delivery?
If functional ﬁbrinogen is less than 0.5 g/litre, consider prophylaxis throughout pregnancy with
ﬁbrinogen concentrate initially 50 –100 mg/kg twice per week, adjusted to maintain trough
ﬁbrinogen activity more than 1 g/litre. Higher doses of ﬁbrinogen concentrate are likely to be
required to maintain ﬁbrinogen activity as pregnancy progresses. Consider additional ﬁbrinogen
concentrate for established labour to ensure ﬁbrinogen activity more than 1.5 g/litre for at
least 3 days .Tranexamic acid can be used for minor bleeding.D
Because of the variable clinical phenotype associated with hypo ﬁbrinogenaemia and
dysﬁbrinogenaemia, a personal and/or family history is required for management decisions. If
there is no personal or family history of bleeding or thrombosis, expectant management isrecommended for pregnant women or the neonate.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e242 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Fibrinogen replacement therapy is associated with a high risk of thrombosis and requires
vigilance. Pregnant women with a thrombotic phenotype or other risk factors for venousthrombosis, and with a low risk of bleeding, should be considered for thromboprophylaxis withLMWH.P
Central neuraxial anaesthesia, NSAIDs and intramuscular injections should generally be avoidedfor women with severe ﬁbrinogen de ﬁciency, or a personal or family history of bleeding, due to
the dif ﬁculty in assuring correction with factor concentrate. They may be used after individual
assessment if adequate replacement therapy is con ﬁrmed.P
The use of midcavity forceps, rotational forceps, ventouse, FBS and FSE should be avoided in a
baby at risk of ﬁbrinogen de ﬁciency associated with a bleeding phenotype.P
Plasma-derived ﬁbrinogen concentrate is recommended for treatment or prevention of bleeding in severe
cases123although tranexamic acid is an option for minor bleeding. If ﬁbrinogen concentrate is not
available, cryoprecipitate can be used.190Antenatal prophylaxis with ﬁbrinogen replacement therapy is
recommended for severe ﬁbrinogen deﬁciency (for reducing the risk of bleeding and pregnancy loss) andthere is evidence of better outcomes if started preconception.
164Higher doses of ﬁbrinogen concentrate
are likely to be required to maintain ﬁbrinogen activity as pregnancy progresses.197,199Additional
ﬁbrinogen concentrate should be considered for established labour to ensure ﬁbrinogen activity morethan 1.5 g/litre for at least 3 days.
123Continuous infusion is an option to minimise peaks and troughs.199
Women with dysﬁbrinogenaemia can experience similar pregnancy complications to women withhypoﬁbrinogenaemia. There are isolated case reports suggesting that these may be prevented byﬁbrinogen replacement throughout pregnancy.
196,200Case reviews have highlighted that
dysﬁbrinogenaemia is often asymptomatic.191,192,194
Thrombotic complications are very common in patients with congenital ﬁbrinogen deﬁciency, with orwithout ﬁbrinogen replacement therapy.
198LMWH prophylaxis has been used both antenatally and
postpartum.200,201
Fibrinogen replacement therapy does not necessarily prevent all pregnancy complications,198possibly due
to difﬁculty maintaining adequate trough levels.Evidence
level 3
Severe ﬁbrinogen deﬁciency is associated with a risk of neonatal ICH.164,189Evidencelevel 4
9. Platelet function disorders
Clinicians should be aware that the spectrum of bleeding in patients with platelet function
disorders varies and may ﬁrst present in pregnancy.D
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e243 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Women known to have a platelet dysfunction disorder should receive prepregnancy counselling
from a multidisciplinary specialist team with expertise in caring for patients with plateletfunction disorders.P
There is a variety of disorders of platelet function, giving rise to mucocutaneous bleeding. The most
severe conditions include Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia (GT) and Bernard Soulier Syndrome (BSS), causedby deﬁciency of functioning integrins, GP IIb/IIIa or Ib, respectively. Bleeding severity ranges from minorbleeds to potentially fatal haemorrhages and differs among affected individuals, even within the samefamily.
202,203Evidence
level 4
Pregnancy and childbirth present signiﬁcant haemorrhagic risks and require careful management. Women
should be informed of their risk before becoming pregnant.204Evidence
level 3
9.1 Bernard Soulier Syndrome (BSS)
9.1.1 What is the aetiology?
Clinicians should be aware that BSS is caused by genetic abnormality of an important platelet
adhesion receptor (GP Ib-IX-V receptor) and is often associated with a severe bleedingphenotype.P
BSS is caused by quantitative or qualitative deﬁciency of the membrane GP Ib-IX-V complex, leading to
abnormal adhesion of platelets. More than 30 genetic mutations have been identiﬁed, determining variousseverities of bleeding.
205Bleeding often starts in childhood with oral bleeding and epistaxis, but patients
may be ﬁrst diagnosed in pregnancy. Menorrhagia is common and can be challenging to manage.202BSS is
associated with thrombocytopenia and large platelets, and could be confused with immunethrombocytopenic purpura, particularly as the platelet count can be as low as less than 30 910
9/litre
and can vary in the same individual.202Evidence
level 3
9.1.2 What is the inheritance?
BSS is an autosomal recessive disorder. In areas of high consanguinity, it may be prudent to
test the father using platelet ﬂow cytometry for GP Ib surface density.P
BSS is mainly inherited as an autosomal recessive trait; heterozygosity is usually asymptomatic. The fetus of
an affected mother will be heterozygous providing the father is not a carrier. In areas of high consanguinity,it may be prudent to test the father using platelet ﬂow cytometry for GP Ib surface density.
206Evidence
level 4
9.1.3 What are the maternal risks?
BSS is associated with signi ﬁcant risk of primary and secondary PPH, and wound haematoma.
Management of delivery, therefore, requires careful planning with the multidisciplinary team.A
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e244 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Peripartum haemostatic management should be guided by assessment of the individual
phenotype.D
Patients with a bleeding history should be given a platelet transfusion prophylactically atdelivery or before caesarean section, in combination with tranexamic acid. Platelets should behuman leucocyte antigen (HLA)-matched where possible to reduce the risk of alloimmunisationand platelet refractoriness. D
Tranexamic acid should be given at the onset of labour and continued regularly through thepostpartum period until lochia is minimal.D
DDAVP has variable ef ﬁcacy and is unlikely to be useful as sole therapy in BSS.D
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided.P
A systematic review of the literature identiﬁed reports of 30 pregnancies among 18 women. Primary
PPH occurred in 33% and secondary in 40%. Two women had emergency hysterectomy and bloodtransfusion was required in 15.
207Wound haematomas are also reported, in relation to caesarean
section wound and perineal trauma.208–210Evidence
level 2 ++
Depending on the individual bleeding phenotype, required treatment can range from expectant management
only to prophylactic platelet transfusions in combination with intravenous tranexamic acid.204
There are few reports in the literature to guide the management of BSS in pregnancy, but case reportsand mini case series show that prophylactic platelet transfusions are the treatment of choice in mostcases. However, platelet transfusion is associated with risk of alloimmunisation and each platelettransfusion should be considered carefully.
211
Observational studies and case reports have demonstrated the successful use of tranexamic acid in theprevention and treatment of bleeding after vaginal delivery and caesarean section, with reduced amountof blood loss and requirement for transfusion.
71
In some cases, there can be shortening of the bleeding time with DDAVP,212,213but the effect is not
reliable and it is unlikely to be sufﬁcient as sole therapy in the context of pregnancy. If used, attention
should be given to ﬂuid restriction for the ensuing 24 hours (see section 4.9).Evidence
level 4
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided in women with BSS even after treatment with platelets, due to the
uncertain individual response to platelets and possibility of platelet refractoriness.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e245 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
9.2 Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia (GT)
9.2.1 What is the aetiology?
Clinicians should be aware that GT is a disorder of platelet function with autosomal recessive
inheritance and is often associated with severe bleeding tendency.P
GT is caused by lack of or nonfunctioning GP IIb/IIIa due to missense mutations in ITGA2B and ITGB3. Platelet –platelet
aggregation is impaired, with defective primary haemostasis and clinical presentation in early childhood.
9.2.2 What are the maternal risks?
GT is associated with signi ﬁcant risk of intrapartum and PPH, and a careful plan of
management is needed for women preparing for labour and delivery.B
HLA-matched platelet transfusions and/or recombinant factor VIIa should be givenprophylactically, at delivery, for patients with a history of bleeding. Repeat doses may berequired depending on the clinical picture.D
DDAVP has not been shown to be effective in GT and is unlikely to be helpful.P
Tranexamic acid should be given from the onset of established labour and continued regularlythrough the postpartum period until lochia is minimal.P
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided.P
A systematic review of 40 cases of GT in pregnancy, described in the literature, found antenatal bleeding
in 50% of women, primary PPH in 34% and secondary PPH in 24%. While antenatal bleeding tended tobe mild, postpartum bleeding was frequently severe and occurred up to 20 days after delivery, with amedian time of 10 days.
214Evidence
level 2 /C0
A systematic review214showed only partial success with prophylactic platelet transfusion prior to
delivery, with PPH in 38% of treated women compared with 63% in women who had not receivedplatelets. Platelets should be HLA-selected, starting with one to two adult doses and further dosesdepending on observed bleeding.
Recombinant factor VIIa is licensed for use in patients with GT who have antibodies to GP IIb/IIIa
and/or HLA, and with past or present refractoriness to platelet transfusions.
215The recommended
dosage is 90 micrograms/kg (range 80 –120 micrograms/kg) by intravenous injection every 2 hours (range
1.5–2.5 hours). At least three doses should be administered to secure haemostasis in patients with active
bleeding. Due to the low prevalence of patients with GT and platelet refractoriness, the clinicalexperience with this treatment is limited. The UKHCDO guideline from 2006 suggested thatrecombinant factor VIIa in combination with tranexamic acid may help to reduce the need for platelettransfusion,
204however, in three case reports, it was not found to be successful.214Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e246 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
DDAVP has been tried in some patients with GT and may shorten bleeding time, but there is no notable
clinical efﬁcacy.216Tranexamic acid may be helpful as sole therapy and in combination with platelets for
the prevention or treatment of bleeding.Evidence
level 4
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should be avoided in women with severe platelet function defects even after treatment
with platelets due to the uncertain individual response to platelets and possibility of platelet refractoriness.
9.2.3 What are the risks to the fetus?
Maternal alloimmunisation to paternally-derived fetal platelet antigens (GP IIb/IIIa) may cause
fetal thrombocytopenia and risk of ICH and other fetal bleeding.B
If fetal-maternal alloimmunisation does not occur, there is no need to restrict aids to delivery.P
The necessity for platelet transfusions leads to a high prevalence of alloimmunisation against human
platelet antigen or HLA epitopes, with platelet refractoriness and risk of fetal maternalalloimmunisation.
217Of 40 pregnancies reviewed, three fetuses (7%) died from ICH between 24 and
31 weeks of gestation.214The risk is highest in women who have received multiple platelet transfusions,
but may also occur in nontransfused women with absent expression of GP IIb/IIIa who developantibodies when presented with paternally-derived fetal GP IIb/IIIa epitopes.Evidence
level 2 ++
If alloimmunisation does not occur, there is no need to restrict interventions during labour unless there is a
suggestion of carrier status in the father or consanguinity, putting the baby at risk of severe disease.
9.2.4 What are the treatment options?
Women should be monitored for platelet-speci ﬁc alloantibodies at booking, and at 28 and
34 weeks of gestation.C
If fetal-maternal alloimmunisation occurs, management should involve a fetal medicine unitwith experience of these conditions, and treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin with orwithout steroids should be considered.D
Amniocentesis with platelet typing may be considered in cases of paternal heterozygosity.P
If the baby is at risk of homozygous GT or fetomaternal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FMAIT),restrictions to delivery should be applied, as for all babies at risk of ICH. This includesavoidance of ventouse, midcavity forceps, FSE and fetal scalp sampling. Depending on risk, anelective caesarean section may be considered. B
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e247 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Neonatal care of potential alloimmunisation requires a cord platelet count and withholding
intramuscular vitamin K until the result is known, or administering it orally. A platelet countbelow the normal range should be repeated at day 3 –5 when the platelet nadir is reached, due
to development of the neonatal spleen. Platelet transfusion should be given if the plateletcount is less than 30 310
9/litre.D
Women should be monitored for alloantibodies at bookin g, and at 28 and 34 weeks of gestation. Antibody titres
are not currently measured as there is conﬂictin g evidence for correlation with bleeding risk.218,219Increased
fetal risk can be expected if the mother has platelet re fractoriness or previous fetal thrombocytopenia.Evidence
level 2 +
There is no evidence to guide management of FMAIT in GT, but if alloimmunisation occurs, treatment
with intravenous immunoglobulin with or without steroids should be considered, as for FMAIT unrelatedto inherited platelet disorders.
220–222
The zygosity of the father will indicate whether the risk to the baby is 50% or 100%, and amniocentesis
with platelet typing may be considered in cases of paternal heterozygosity. This would need cover withplatelet transfusion to avoid maternal bleeding. Antenatal FBS should be avoided because of bleeding riskto the mother or affected fetus.
223–225Evidence
level 4
The majority of cases of ICH associated with FMAIT occur in utero and early delivery by caesarean
section is usual practice.222Evidence
level 2 ++
Neonatal thrombocytopenia from FMAIT can result in painful muscle haematomas from intramuscular
injections and vitamin K should be withheld until the diagnosis is excluded or given orally. Platelettransfusion should be given if the platelet count is less than 30 910
9/litre, or if bruising or bleeding is
visible. Platelets should be ABO and rhesus D compatible, free from antibody and screened forcytomegalovirus. In babies with FMAIT, response is likely to be short lived due to circulating maternalantibody. Intravenous immunoglobulin may provide a more sustained response, but there is usually adelay of 24 –48 hours before a satisfactory rise in platelet count is obtained.
226Evidence
level 4
9.3 Other congenital platelet function defects
9.3.1 What are the therapeutic options?
Women with mild platelet function disorders may require treatment to cover delivery.P
DDAVP and/or tranexamic acid can be used to cover delivery.D
Tranexamic acid should be continued postpartum until lochia is minimal.P
Central neuraxial anaesthesia should only be given if the risks are considered to be outweighed
by the bene ﬁts and the haemostatic defect has been corrected. A platelet transfusion may be
necessary beforehand and epidural catheter should not be left in situ.P
Patients with mild platelet function defects, such as storage pool disease, signalling defects or ADP receptor
abnormality, do not usually bleed spontaneously, but require treatment during haemostatic challenges.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e248 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Although DDAVP does not appear to have a direct effect on platelets, the increase in ultra large VWF
multimers improves platelet adhesion and a good response is usually obtained with DDAVP in patients
with mild platelet function defects.216,227DDAVP should be given in established labour, with platelets
held in reserve if excess bleeding occurs. The antidiuretic effect of DDAVP requires that the patient beﬂuid restricted to 1 litre for 24 hours after administration.Evidence
level 3
For mild platelet dysfunction, if individual circumstances dictate that the risks of central neuraxial anaesthesia are
outweighed by the beneﬁts, spinal anaesthesia is preferred to epidural given its lower bleeding risk and immediatewithdrawal. A platelet transfusion should be considered beforehand.
10. Management of women with inherited bleeding disorders who request termination of
pregnancy
Women who have disorders with a medium or high bleeding risk (Appendix II) require
multidisciplinary management in a unit with 24-hour access to blood products, factorreplacement and specialist haematological advice.P
Factor levels should be measured in haemophilia carriers, women with VWD and women withknown factor de ﬁciencies (factor VII, X, XI and XIII) prior to medical or surgical termination.P
Factor levels should be corrected to those indicated for labour with the treatments outlined
above and maintained for 24 hours post procedure.P
Bleeding post procedure should be closely observed as an inpatient and similar treatmentsoutlined for post-natal management should be employed.P
In the days and weeks following the procedure, open access to gynaecology units andhaemophilia centres must be arranged as the risk of bleeding can continue for several weeks.P
Many of the principles used to manage women during labour and the postpartum period are applied to this group of
women. Early referral to specialised services is essential to optimise management in this patient group.
The majority of women requesting termination of pregnancy will be in the ﬁrst or early second trimesters. Clotting
factor levels will therefore be similar to nonpregnant levels and the increases observed in pregnancy will not haveoccurred.
There is no evidence giving speciﬁc data to inform the choice of method of termination although many clinicians
prefer surgical methods because of the risk of unpredictable bleeding with medical and conservative management,and the limitation of having to admit the mother for several days.
Therapeutic cover for the procedure depends on the speciﬁc bleeding disorder but oral tranexamic acid is usually
sufﬁcient afterwards until bleeding has settled and for at least 5 days. It is appropriate to consider an ultrasoundexamination prior to discharge to ensure the uterus is empty with no retained products of conception. All womenshould be informed to report any excess bleeding and have direct contact with the haemophilia centre, with earlygynaecological review.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e249 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
11. Recommendations for future research
Multicentre studies are required to determine the:
/C15optimal timing and use of tranexamic acid and DDAVP
/C15best approach to imaging for ICH in the neonate
/C15suitability of long-acting factor concentrates to cover delivery
/C15effectiveness of immunoglobulin and steroids in the treatment of fetal alloimmune thrombocytopenia related to
maternal platelet disorders.
12. Auditable topics
/C15Percentage of women who receive prepregnancy counselling (100%).
/C15Blood loss and appropriateness of transfusion at delivery (90% appropriate).
/C15Percentage of women, with moderate or severely low baseline factor levels, who have postpartum levelsmeasured and documented (100%).
13. Useful links and support groups
/C15UK Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organisation [www.ukhcdo.org/].
/C15World Federation of Haemophilia [www.wfh.org/].
/C15Talking Red - a project of the Haemophilia Society [http://www.talkingred.org/].
References
1. Bowen DJ. Haemophilia A and haemophilia B: molecular insights.
Mol Pathol 2002;55:127 –44.
2. Wacey AI, Tuddenham EG. Mutation databases on the Web.
J Med Genet 1998;35:529 –33.
3. de Brasi C, El-Maarri O, Perry DJ, Oldenburg J, Pezeshkpoor B,
Goodeve A. Genetic testing in bleeding disorders. Haemophilia
2014;20 Suppl 4:54 –8.
4. Kasper CK, Lin JC. Prevalence of sporadic and familial
haemophilia. Haemophilia 2007;13:90 –2.
5. Richards M, Williams M, Chalmers E, Liesner R, Collins P,
Vidler V, et al. A United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors’Organization guideline approved by the British Committee for
Standards in Haematology: guideline on the use of prophylactic
factor VIII concentrate in children and adults with severehaemophilia A. Br J Haematol 2010;149:498 –507.
6. Miesbach W, Alesci S, Geisen C, Oldenburg J. Association
between phenotype and genotype in carriers of haemophilia A.
Haemophilia 2011;17:246 –51.
7. Iorio A, Halimeh S, Holzhauer S, Goldenberg N, Marchesini E,
Marcucci M, et al. Rate of inhibitor development in previously
untreated hemophilia A patients treated with plasma-derived or
recombinant factor VIII concentrates: a systematic review.J Thromb Haemost 2010;8:1256 –65.
8. Plug I, Mauser-Bunschoten EP, Br €ocker-Vriends AH, van Amstel HK,
v a nd e rB o mJ G ,v a nD i e m e n - H o m a nJ E ,e ta l .B l e e d i n gi nc a r r i e r so f
hemophilia. Blood 2006;108:52 –6.9. Renault NK, Dyack S, Dobson MJ, Costa T, Lam WL, Greer WL.
Heritable skewed X-chromosome inactivation leads to haemophilia
A expression in heterozygous females. Eur J Hum Genet
2007;15:628 –37.
10. Orstavik KH, Scheibel E, Ingerslev J, Schwartz M. Absence of
correlation between X chromosome inactivation pattern and
plasma concentration of factor VIII and factor IX in carriers ofhaemophilia A and B. Thromb Haemost 2000;83:433 –7.
11. Chi C, Lee CA, Shiltagh N, Khan A, Pollard D, Kadir RA.
Pregnancy in carriers of haemophilia. Haemophilia 2008;14:
56–64.
12. Sachs BP, Acker D, Tuomala R, Brown E. The incidence of
symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage in term appropriate-for-
gestation-age infants. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 1987;26:355 –8.
13. Hanigan WC, Powell FC, Miller TC, Wright RM. Symptomatic
intracranial haemorrhage in full-term infants. Childs Nerv Syst
1995;11:698 –707.
14. Towner D, Castro MA, Eby-Wilkens E, Gilbert WM. Effect of
mode of delivery in nulliparous women on neonatal intracranialinjury. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1709 –14.
15. Hughes CA, Harley EH, Milmoe G, Bala R, Martorella A. Birth
trauma in the head and neck. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1999;125:193 –9.
16. Mosavat SA, Zamani M. The incidence of birth trauma among
live born term neonates at a referral hospital in Rafsanjan, Iran.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
2008;21:337 –9.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e250 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
17. Ljung RC, Sj €orin E. Origin of mutation in sporadic cases of
haemophilia A. Br J Haematol 1999;106:870 –4.
18. Yoffe G, Buchanan GR. Intracranial hemorrhage in newborn and
young infants with hemophilia. J Pediatr 1988;113:333 –6.
19. Klinge J, Auberger K, Auerswald G, Brackmann HH,
Mauz-K €orholz C, Kreuz W. Prevalence and outcome of
intracranial haemorrhage in haemophiliacs --a survey of the
paediatric group of the German Society of Thrombosis and
Haemostasis (GTH). Eur J Pediatr 1999;158 Suppl 3:S162 –5.
20. Revel-Vilk S, Golomb MR, Achonu C, Stain AM, Armstrong D,
Barnes MA, et al. Effect of intracranial bleeds on the health andquality of life of boys with hemophilia. J Pediatr 2004;144:490 –5.
21. MacLean PE, Fijnvandraat K, Beijlevelt M, Peters M. The impact
of unaware carriership on the clinical presentation ofhaemophilia. Haemophilia 2004;10:560 –4.
22. Tarantino MD, Gupta SL, Brusky RM. The incidence and
outcome of intracranial haemorrhage in newborns with
haemophilia: analysis of the Nationwide Inpatient Sampledatabase. Haemophilia 2007;13:380 –2.
23. Kulkarni R, Soucie JM, Lusher J, Presley R, Shapiro A, Gill J,
et al.; Haemophilia Treatment Center Network Investigation.Sites of initial bleeding episodes, mode of delivery and age ofdiagnosis in babies with haemophilia diagnosed before the age of
2 years: a report from The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention’s (CDC) Universal Data Collection (UDC) project.Haemophilia 2009;15:1281 –90.
24. Kenet G, Chan AKC, Soucie JM, Kulkarni R. Bleeding disorders
in neonates. Haemophilia 2010;16 Suppl 5:168 –75.
25. Richards M, Lavigne Lissalde G, Combescure C, Batorova A,
Dolan G, Fischer K, et al.; European Haemophilia Treatment and
Standardization Board. Neonatal bleeding in haemophilia: a
European cohort study. Br J Haematol 2012;156:374 –82.
26. Davies J, Kadir RA. Mode of delivery and cranial bleeding in
newborns with haemophilia: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of the literature. Haemophilia 2016;22:32 –8.
27. Chalmers E, Williams M, Brennand J, Liesner R, Collins P,
Richards M; Paediatric Working Party of United KingdomHaemophilia Doctors’ Organization. Guideline on the
management of haemophilia in the fetus and neonate. Br J
Haematol 2011;154:208 –15.
2 8 . K u l k a r n iR ,P o n d e rK P ,J a m e sA H ,S o u c i eJ M ,K o e r p e rM ,H o o t sW K ,
et al. Unresolved issues in diagnosis and management of inherited
bleeding disorders in the perinatal period: a White Paper of the
Perinatal Task Force of the Medical and Scientiﬁc Advisory Councilof the National Hemophilia Foundation, USA. Haemophilia
2006;12:205 –11.
29. Maternal obesity and maternal he alth [www.noo.org. uk/NOO_about_
obesity/maternal_obesity/maternalhealth]. Accessed 2015 Oct 7.
30. NHS England. Clinical Commissioning Policy: Pre-implantation Genetic
Diagnosis (PGD) . Leeds: NHS England, 2014 [www.england.nhs.uk/
wp-content/uploads/2014/04/e01-med-gen-0414.pdf]. Accessed2016 Jun 15.
31. Fern /C19
andez RM, Peci ~na A, S /C19anchez B, Lozano-Arana MD,
Garc/C19ıa-Lozano JC, P /C19erez-Garrido R, et al. Experience of
preimplantation genetic diagnosis for hemophilia at the UniversityHospital Virgen Del Roc /C19ıo in Spain: technical and clinical
overview. Biomed Res Int 2015;2015:406096.
32. Kadir RA, Sabin CA, Goldman E, Pollard D, Economides DL,
Lee CA. Reproductive choices of women in families withhaemophilia. Haemophilia 2000;6:33 –40.
33. Tengborn L, Blomb €ack M, Berntorp E. Tranexamic acid --an old
drug still going strong and making a revival. Thromb Res 2015;135:
231–42.34. Mannucci PM, Canciani MT, Rota L, Donovan BS. Response of
factor VIII/von Willebrand factor to DDAVP in healthy subjects
and patients with haemophilia A and von Willebrand’s disease.Brit J Haematol 1981;47:283 –93.
35. Kaufmann JE, Vischer UM. Cellular mechanisms of the hemostatic
effects of desmopressin (DDAVP). J Thromb Haemost
2003;1:682 –9.
36. Leissinger C, Carcao M, Gill JC, Journeycake J, Singleton T,
Valentino L. Desmopressin (DDAVP) in the management of patients
with congenital bleeding disorders. Haemophilia 2014;20:158 –67.
37. Trigg DE, Stergiotou I, Peitsidis P, Kadir RA. A systematic
review: The use of desmopressin for treatment and prophylaxis
of bleeding disorders in pregnancy. Haemophilia 2012;18:25 –33.
38. Street AM, Ljung R, Lavery SA. Management of carriers and
babies with haemophilia. Haemophilia 2008;14 Suppl 3:181 –7.
39. Abdul-Kadir R, Davies J, Halimeh S, Chi C. Advances in pregnancy
management in carriers of hemophilia. J Appl Hematol 2013;4:125.
40. Mannucci PM. Use of desmopressin (DDAVP) during early
pregnancy in factor VIII-deﬁcient women. Blood 2005;105:3382.
41. Kn €oﬂer R, Koscielny J, Tauer JT, Huhn B, Gneuss A, Kuhlisch E,
et al. Desmopressin testing in haemophilia A patients and carriers:results of a multi centre survey. Hamostaseologie 2012;32:271 –5.
42. Dunkley SM, Russell SJ, Rowell JA, Barnes CD, Baker RI, Sarson MI,
et al.; Australian Haemophilia Centre Directors’ Organisation. A
consensus statement on the management of pregnancy and deliveryin women who are carriers of or have bleeding disorders. Med J Aust
2009;191:460 –3.
43. Grootscholten K, Kok M, Oei SG, Mol BW, van der Post JA.
External cephalic version-related risks: a meta-analysis. Obstet
Gynecol 2008;112:1143 –51.
44. Kok M, Cnossen J, Gravendeel L, van der Post J, Opmeer B, Mol BW.
Clinical factors to predict the outcome of external cephalic version: ametaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2008;199:630.e1 –7; discussion e1
–5.
45. Altisent C, Martorell M, Vidal F, S /C19anchez MA, Parra R. The
optimal mode of delivery for the haemophilia carrier expecting an
affected infant: further considerations. Haemophilia 2011;17:818 –9.
46. Ljung R. The optimal mode of delivery for the haemophilia
carrier expecting an affected infant is vaginal delivery.
Haemophilia 2010;16:415 –9.
47. Madan B, Street AM. What is the optimal mode of delivery for
the haemophilia carrier expecting an affected infant-vaginaldelivery or caesarean delivery? Haemophilia 2010;16:425 –6.
48. James AH, Hoots K. The optimal mode of delivery for the
haemophilia carrier expecting an affected infant is caesareandelivery. Haemophilia 2010;16:420 –4.
49. Ljung R, Lindgren AC, Petrini P, Tengborn L. Normal vaginal
delivery is to be recommended for hemophilia carrier gravidae.Acta Paediatr 1994;83:609 –11.
50. Nazir HF, Al Lawati T, Beshlawi I, AlSharidah S, Elshinawy M,
Alkasim F, et al. Mode of delivery and risk of intracranial
haemorrhage in newborns with severe haemophilia A: amulticentre study in Gulf region. Haemophilia 2016;22:e134 –8.
51. Kletzel M, Miller CH, Becton DL, Chadduck WM, Elser JM.
Postdelivery head bleeding in hemophilic neonates. Causes and
management. Am J Dis Child 1989;143:1107 –10.
52. Kadir RA, Economides DL, Braithwaite J, Goldman E, Lee CA.
The obstetric experience of carriers of haemophilia. Br J Obstet
Gynaecol 1997;104:803 –10.
53. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Caesarean
Section . Consent Advice No. 7. London: RCOG; 2009.
54. Marshall NE, Fu R, Guise JM. Impact of multiple cesarean
deliveries on maternal morbidity: a systematic review. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2011;205:262.e1 –8.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e251 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
55. Hansen AK, Wisborg K, Uldbjerg N, Henriksen TB. Risk of
respiratory morbidity in term infants delivered by elective
caesarean section: cohort study. BMJ 2008;336:85 –7.
56. Morrison JJ, Rennie JM, Milton PJ. Neonatal respiratory
morbidity and mode of delivery at term: inﬂuence of timing
of elective caesarean section. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1995;102:
101–6.
57. Smith GC, Wood AM, White IR, Pell JP, Cameron AD, Dobbie R.
Neonatal respiratory morbidity at term and the risk of childhood
asthma. Arch Dis Child 2004;89:956 –60.
58. Boulvain M, Marcoux S, Bureau M, Fortier M, Fraser W. Risks of
induction of labour in uncomplicated term pregnancies. Paediatr
Perinat Epidemiol 2001;15:131 –8.
59. Arrowsmith S, Wray S, Quenby S. Maternal obesity and labour
complications following induction of labour in prolongedpregnancy. BJOG 2011;118:578 –88.
60. Modanlou H, Smith E, Paul RH, Hon EH. Complications of fetal
blood sampling during labor. The pediatrician should always beinformed when scalp samples have been taken. Clin Pediatr (Phila)
1973;12:603 –6.
61. Sabir H, Stannigel H, Schwarz A, Hoehn T. Perinatal hemorrhagic
shock after fetal scalp blood sampling. Obstet Gynecol
2010;115:419 –20.
62. Cheng YW, Hopkins LM, Caughey AB. How long is too long:
does a prolonged second stage of labor in nulliparous womenaffect maternal and neonatal outcomes? Am J Obstet Gynecol
2004;191:933 –8.
63. Gilad O, Merlob P, Stahl B, Klinger G. Outcome following
tranexamic acid exposure during breastfeeding. Breastfeed Med
2014;9:407 –10.
64. Cook TM, Counsell D, Wildsmith JA; Royal College of
Anaesthetists Third National Audit Project. Major complicationsof central neuraxial block: report on the Third National AuditProject of the Royal College of Anaesthetists. Br J Anaesth
2009;102:179 –90.
65. Ruppen W, Derry S, McQuay HJ, Moore RA. Incidence of
epidural haematoma and neurological injury in cardiovascularpatients with epidural analgesia/anaesthesia: systematic review
and meta-analysis. BMC Anesthesiol 2006;6:10.
66. Choi S, Brull R. Neuraxial techniques in obstetric and non-
obstetric patients with common bleeding diatheses. Anesth Analg
2009;109:648 –60.
67. Working Party; Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain &
Ireland; Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association; RegionalAnaesthesia UK. Regional anaesthesia and patients with
abnormalities of coagulation: the Association of Anaesthetists of
Great Britain & Ireland, The Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association,Regional Anaesthesia UK. Anaesthesia 2013;68:966 –72.
68. Evans D, Shaw A. Safety of intramuscular injection of hepatitis B
vaccine in haemophiliacs. Br Med J 1990;300:1694 –5.
69. Novikova N, Hofmeyr GJ, Cluver C. Tranexamic acid for
preventing postpartum haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2015;(6):CD007872.
70. Sentilhes L, Lasocki S, Ducloy-Bouthors AS, Deruelle P, Dreyfus M,
Perrotin F, et al. Tranexamic acid for the prevention andtreatment of postpartum haemorrhage. Br J Anaesth 2015;114:576 –
87.
71. Peitsidis P, Kadir RA. Antiﬁbrinolytic therapy with tranexamic
acid in pregnancy and postpartum. Expert Opin Pharmacother
2011;12:503 –16.
72. Stoof SC, van Steenbergen HW, Zwagemaker A, Sanders YV,
Cannegieter SC, Duvekot JJ, et al. Primary postpartumhaemorrhage in women with von Willebrand disease or
carriership of haemophilia despite specialised care: a
retrospective survey. Haemophilia 2015;21:505 –12.
73. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Prevention and
Management of Postpartum Haemorrhage . Green-top Guideline
No. 52. London: RCOG; 2009.
74. Chi C, Shiltagh N, Kingman CE, Economides DL, Lee CA, Kadir RA.
Identiﬁcation and management of women with inherited bleeding
disorders: a survey of obstetricians and gynaecologists in the United
Kingdom. Haemophilia 2006;12:405 –12.
75. Chi C, Bapir M, Lee CA, Kadir RA. Puerperal loss (lochia) in
women with or without inherited bleeding disorders. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2010;203:56.e1 –5.
76. Andrew M, Paes B, Milner R, Johnston M, Mitchell L, Tollefsen DM,
et al. Development of the human coagulation system in the healthypremature infant. Blood 1988;72:1651 –7.
77. Kulkarni R, Lusher J. Perinatal management of newborns with
haemophilia. Br J Haematol 2001;112:264 –74.
78. Jørgensen FS, Felding P, Vinther S, Andersen GE. Vitamin K to
neonates. Peroral versus intramuscular administration. Acta
Paediatr Scand 1991;80:304 –7.
79. Sadler JE, Mannucci PM, Berntorp E, Bochkov N, Boulyjenkov V,
Ginsburg D, et al. Impact, diagnosis and treatment of von
Willebrand disease. Thromb Haemost 2000;84:160 –74.
80. Ng C, Motto DG, Di Paola J. Diagnostic approach to von
Willebrand disease. Blood 2015;125:2029 –37.
81. Laffan MA, Lester W, O’Donnell JS, Will A, Tait RC, Goodeve A,
et al. The diagnosis and management of von Willebrand disease: a
United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors Organizationguideline approved by the British Committee for Standards in
Haematology. Br J Haematol 2014;167:453 –65.
82. Eikenboom J, Van Marion V, Putter H, Goodeve A, Rodeghiero F,
Castaman G, et al. Linkage analysis in families diagnosed with type1 von Willebrand disease in the European study, molecular and
clinical markers for the diagnosis and management of type 1 VWD.
J Thromb Haemost 2006;4:774 –82.
83. James PD, Paterson AD, Notley C, Cameron C, Hegadorn C,
Tinlin S, et al. Genetic linkage and association analysis in type 1
von Willebrand disease: results from the Canadian type 1 VWD
study. J Thromb Haemost 2006;4:783 –92.
84. Goodeve A, Eikenboom J, Castaman G, Rodeghiero F, Federici AB,
Batlle J, et al. Phenotype and genotype of a cohort of families
historically diagnosed with type 1 von Willebrand disease in the
European study, Molecular and Clinical Markers for the Diagnosis andManagement of Type 1 von Willebrand Disease (MCMDM-1VWD).
Blood 2007;109:112 –21. Erratum 2008;111:3299 –300.
85. Ranger A, Manning RA, Lyall H, Laffan MA, Millar CM. Pregnancy
in type 2B VWD: a case series.
Haemophilia 2012;18:406 –12.
86. Biguzzi E, Siboni SM, Ossola MW, Zaina B, Migliorini AC, Peyvandi F.
Management of pregnancy in type 2B von Willebrand disease: case
report and literature overview. Haemophilia 2015;21:e98 –103.
87. Kasatkar P, Shetty S, Ghosh K. Prenatal diagnosis in severe von
Willebrand disease families from India using combination of
phenotypic and genotypic assays. Prenat Diagn 2014;34:377 –81.
88. Stirling Y, Woolf L, North WR, Seghatchian MJ, Meade TW.
Haemostasis in normal pregnancy. Thromb Haemost 1984;52:176 –82.
89. Ramasahoye BH, Davies SV, Dasani H, Pearson JF. Obstetric
management in von Willebrand’s disease: a report of 24 pregnanciesand a review of the literature. Haemophilia 1995;1:140 –4.
90. Conti M, Mari D, Conti E, Muggiasca ML, Mannucci PM.
Pregnancy in women with different types of von Willebrand
disease. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:282 –5.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e252 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
91. Kadir RA, Lee CA, Sabin CA, Pollard D, Economides DL.
Pregnancy in women with von Willebrand’s disease or factor XI
deﬁciency. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:314 –21.
92. Huq FY, Kulkarni A, Agbim EC, Riddell A, Tuddenham E, Kadir RA.
Changes in the levels of factor VIII and von Willebrand factor in
the puerperium. Haemophilia 2012;18:241 –5.
93. S /C19anchez-Luceros A, Meschengieser SS, Marchese C, Votta R,
Casais P, Woods AI, et al. Factor VIII and von Willebrand factor
changes during normal pregnancy and puerperium. Blood Coagul
Fibrinolysis 2003;14:647 –51.
94. Mahieu B, Jacobs N, Mahieu S, Naelaerts K, Vertessen F, Weyler J,
et al. Haemostatic changes and acquired activated protein C
resistance in normal pregnancy. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis
2007;18:685 –8.
95. Kjellberg U, Andersson NE, Ros /C19en S, Tengborn L, Hellgren M.
Factor VIII and von Willebrand factor changes during normal
pregnancy and puerperium. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 2003;14:
647–51.
96. James AH, Jamison MG. Bleeding events and other complications
during pregnancy and childbirth in women with von Willebrand
disease. J Thromb Haemost 2007;5:1165 –9.
97. Andrew M, Paes B, Milner R, Johnson M, Mitchell L, Tollefsen DM,
et al. Development of the human coagulation system in the full-
term infant. Blood 1987;70:165 –72.
98. Labarque V, Stain AM, Blanchette V, Kahr WH, Carcao MD.
Intracranial haemorrhage in von Willebrand disease: a report ofsix cases. Haemophilia 2013;19:602 –6.
99. Chalmers E, Alamelu J, Collins P, Mathias M, Payne J, Richards M,
et al. on behalf of the Paediatric and Rare Disorders WorkingParties of UKHCDO. Intracranial haemorrhage in children with
inherited bleeding disorders in the UK 2003 –2013. J Thromb
Haemost 2015;13 Suppl 2:243.
100. Sanders YV, Giezenaar MA, Laros-van Gorkom BA, Meijer K,
van der Bom JG, Cnossen MH, et al.; WiN study group.
von Willebrand disease and aging: an evolving phenotype. J Thromb
Haemost 2014;12:1066 –75.
101. Rodegheiro F, Tosetto A, Abshire T, Arnold DM, Coller B,
James P, et al.; ISTH/SSC joint VWF and Perinatal/Pediatric
Hemostasis Subcommittees Working Group. ISTH/SSC bleeding
assessment tool: a standardised questionnaire and a proposal fora new bleeding score for inherited bleeding disorders. J Thromb
Haemost 2010;8:2063 –5.
102. Rydz N, James PD. The evolution and value of bleeding
assessment tools. J Thromb Haemost 2012;10:2223 –9.
103. Chen YC, Chao TY, Cheng SN, Hu SH, Lius JY. Prevalence of
von Willebrand disease in women with iron deﬁciency anaemia
and menorrhagia in Taiwan. Haemophilia 2008;14:768 –74.
104. Rae C, Furlong W, Horsman J, Pullenayegum E, Demers C,
St-Louis J, et al. Bleeding disorders, menorrhagia and iron
deﬁciency: impacts on health-related quality of life. Haemophilia
2013;19:385 –91.
105. Leone G, Moneta E, Paparatti G, Boni P. Letter: Von
Willebrand’s disease in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 1975;293:456.
106. Castaman G, Tosetto A, Rodeghiero F. Pregnancy and delivery in
women with von Willebrand’s disease and different vonWillebrand factor mutations. Haematologica 2010;95:963 –9.
107. Ray JG. DDAVP use during pregnancy: an analysis of its safety
for mother and child. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1998;53:450 –5.
108. Rodeghiero F, Castaman G, Di Bona E, Ruggeri M. Consistency
of responses to repeated DDAVP infusions in patients with
von Willebrand’s disease and hemophilia A. Blood 1989;74:
1997 –2000.109. Castaman G, Rodeghiero F, Tosetto A, Cappelletti A, Baudo F,
Eikenboom JC, et al. Hemorrhagic symptoms and bleeding risk in
obligatory carriers of type 3 von Willebrand disease: aninternational, multicenter study. J Thromb Haemost 2006;4:2164 –9.
110. Holmberg L, Nilsson IM, Borge L, Gunnarson M, Sj €orin E.
Platelet aggregation induced by 1-desamino-8-D-arginine
vasopressin (DDAVP) in Type IIB von Willebrand’s disease.N Engl J Med 1983;309:816 –21.
111. Bond L, Bevan D. Myocardial infarction in a patient with
hemophilia treated with DDAVP. N Engl J Med 1988;318:121.
112. Bymes JJ, Lacarda A, Moake JL. Thrombosis following
desmopressin for uremic bleeding. Am J Hematol 1988;28:63 –5.
113. Mannucci PM, Bettega D, Cattaneo M. Patterns of development
of tachyphylaxis in patients with haemophilia and von Willebranddisease after repeated doses of desmopressin (DDAVP). Br J
Haematol 1992;82:87 –93.
114. Goudemand J, Negrier C, Ounnoughene N, Sultan Y. Clinical
management of patients with von Willebrand’s disease with aVHP VWF concentrate: the French experience. Haemophilia
1998;4 Suppl 3:48 –52.
115. Borel-Derlon A, Federici AB, Roussel-Robert V, Goudemand J,
Lee CA, Scharrer I, et al. Treatment of severe von Willebranddisease with a high-purity von Willebrand factor concentrate
(Wilfactin): a prospective study of 50 patients. J Thromb Haemost
2007;5:1115 –24.
116. Federici AB, Mannucci PM, Castaman G, Baronciani L, Bucciarelli P,
Canciani MT, et al. Clinical and molecular predictors of
thrombocytopenia and risk of bleeding in patients with von
Willebrand disease type 2B: a cohort study of 67 patients. Blood
2009;113:526 –34.
117. Nichols WL, Hultin MB, James AH, Manco-Johnson MJ,
Montgomery RR, Ortel TL, et al. von Willebrand disease(VWD): evidence-based diagnosis and management guidelines,the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Expert
Panel report (USA). Haemophilia 2008;14:171 –232.
118. Chi C, Lee CA, England A, Hingorani J, Paintsil J, Kadir RA.
Obstetric analgesia and anaesthesia in women with inheritedbleeding disorders. Thromb Haemost 2009;101:1104 –11.
119. Silwer J. von Willebrand’s disease in Sweden. Acta Paediatr Scand
Suppl 1973;238:1 –159.
120. Cyklo-f 500 mg ﬁlm coated tablets [www.medicines.org.uk/emc/
medicine/27753]. Accessed 2015 Oct 7.
121. Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare. Clinical Guidance.
Contraception After Pregnancy . London: FSRH; 2017.
122. Mannucci PM, Duga S, Peyvandi F. Recessively inherited
coagulation disorders. Blood 2004;104:1243 –52.
123. Mumford AD, Ackroyd S, Alikhan R, Bowles L, Chowdary P,
Grainger J, et al.; BCSH Committee. Guideline for the diagnosisand management of the rare coagulation disorders: a United
Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organization guideline
on behalf of the British Committee for Standards inHaematology. Br J Haematol 2014;167:304 –26.
124. Peyvandi F, Duga S, Akhavan S, Mannucci PM. Rare coagulation
deﬁciencies. Haemophilia 2002;8:308 –21.
125. Seligsohn U. Factor XI deﬁciency. Thromb Haemost 1993;70:68 –71.
126. Seligsohn U. High gene frequency of factor XI (PTA) deﬁciency
in Ashkenazi Jews. Blood 1978;51:1223 –8.
127. Shpilberg O, Peretz H, Zivelin A, Yatuv R, Chetrit A, Kulka T,
et al. One of the two common mutations causing factor XIdeﬁciency in Ashkenazi Jews (type II) is also prevalent in Iraqi
Jews, who represent the ancient gene pool of Jews. Blood
1995;85:429 –32.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e253 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
128. Tavori S, Brenner B, Tatarsky I. The effect of combined factor XI
deﬁciency with von Willebrand factor abnormalities on
haemorrhagic diathesis. Thromb Haemost 1990;63:36 –8.
129. Bolton-Maggs PH, Patterson DA, Wensley RT, Tuddenham EG.
Deﬁnition of the bleeding tendency in factor XI-deﬁcient
kindreds --a clinical and laboratory study. Thromb Haemost
1995;73:194 –202.
130. Von dem Borne PA, Bajzar L, Meijers JC, Nesheim ME, Bouma BN.
Thrombin-mediated activation of factor XI results in a thrombin-
activatable ﬁbrinolysis inhibitor-dependent inhibition ofﬁbrinolysis. J Clin Invest 1997;99:2323 –7.
131. Peyvandi F, Palla R, Menegatti M, Siboni SM, Halimeh S, Faeser B,
et al. Coagulation factor activity and clinical bleeding severity in
rare bleeding disorders: results from the European Network ofRare Bleeding Disorders. J Thromb Haemost 2012;10:615 –21.
132. Salomon O, Steinberg DM, Seligshon U. Variable bleeding
manifestations characterize different types of surgery in patients
with severe factor XI deﬁciency enabling parsimonious use ofreplacement therapy. Haemophilia 2006;12:490 –3.
133. Bolton-Maggs PH, Young Wan-Yin B, McCraw AH, Slack J,
Kernoff PB. Inheritance and bleeding in factor XI deﬁciency. Br J
Haematol 1988;69:521 –8.
134. Bolton-Maggs PH. Factor XI deﬁciency –resolving the enigma?
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2009;1:97 –105.
135. Hellgren M, Blomback M. Studies on blood coagulation and
ﬁbrinolysis in pregnancy, during delivery and in the puerperium.Gynecol Obstet Invest 1981;12:141 –54.
136. Myers B, Pavord S, Kean L, Hill M, Dolan G. Pregnancy outcome
in Factor XI deﬁciency: incidence of miscarriage, antenatal andpostnatal haemorrhage in 33 women with Factor XI deﬁciency.
BJOG 2007;114:643 –6.
137. Salomon O, Steinberg DM, Tamarin I, Zivelin A, Seligsohn U.
Plasma replacement therapy during labor is not mandatory forwomen with severe factor XI deﬁciency. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis
2005;16:37 –41.
138. Chi C, Kulkarni A, Lee CA, Kadir RA. The obstetric experience
of women with factor XI deﬁciency. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
2009;88:1095 –100.
139. Myers B, Neal R, Curry N, Kadir R, Pavord S. Blood group, bleeding
phenotype and post-partum haemorrhage in factor XI-deﬁcientwomen. International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis2015 Congress, 20 –25 June 2015, Toronto, Canada. Poster 175.
140. Bolton-Maggs PH, Colvin BT, Satchi G, Lee CA, Lucas GS.
Thrombogenic potential of factor XI concentrate. Lancet
1994;344:748 –9.
141. Mannucci PM, Bauer KA, Santagostino E, Faioni E, Barzegar S,
Coppola R, et al. Activation of the coagulation cascade afterinfusion of a factor XI concentrate in congenitally deﬁcientpatients. Blood 1994;84:1314 –9.
142. Bolton-Maggs P, Goudemand J, Hermans C, Makris M,
de Moerloose P. FXI concentrate use and the risk ofthrombosis. Haemophilia 2014;20:e349 –51.
143. Riddell A, Abdul-Kadir R, Pollard D, Tuddenham E, Gomez K.
Monitoring low dose recombinant factor VIIa therapy in patients
with severe factor XI deﬁciency undergoing surgery. Thromb
Haemost
2011;106:521 –7.
144. Salomon O, Zivelin A, Livnat T, Dardik R, Loewenthal R, Avishai O,
et al. Prevalence, causes, and characterization of factor XIinhibitors in patients with inherited factor XI deﬁciency. Blood
2003;101:4783 –8.
145. Livnat T, Tamarin I, Mor Y, Winckler H, Horowitz Z, Korianski Y,
et al. Recombinant activated factor VII and tranexamic acid arehaemostatically effective during major surgery in factor XI-
deﬁcient patients with inhibitor antibodies. Thromb Haemost
2009;102:487 –92.
146. Ginsberg SS, Clyne LP, McPhedran P, Duffy TP, Hanson T.
Successful childbirth by a patient with congenital factor XI
deﬁciency and an acquired inhibitor. Br J Haematol 1993;84:
172–4.
147. Bolton –Maggs PH. Treatment of Hemophilia: Factor XI deﬁciency
and its management . 3rd ed. Montr /C19eal, Qu /C19ebec: World
Federation of Hemophilia; 2008 [www.exodontia.info/files/Treatment_of_H_mophilia_2008._Factor_XI_Deficiency_Its_Management.pdf]. Accessed 2016 Jul 26.
148. O’Connell NM, Pascoe GM, Riddell AR, Brown SA, Perry DJ,
Lee CA. Prevention of surgical bleeding with recombinantfactor VIIa in patients with factor XI deﬁciency. Blood
2002;100:697a.
149. Lee CA, Chi C, Pavord SR, Bolton-Maggs PH, Pollard DA,
Hinchcliffe-Wood A, et al. The obstetric and gynaecologicalmanagement of women with inherited bleeding disorders --
review with guidelines produced by a taskforce of UK
Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organization. Haemophilia
2006;12:301 –36.
150. Singh A, Harnett MJ, Connors JM, Camann WR. Factor XI
deﬁciency and obstetrical anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2009;108:1882 –5.
151. Reuveni A, Orbach-Zinger S, Eidelman LA, Ginosar Y, Ioscovich A.
Peripartum anesthetic management of patients with Factor XIdeﬁciency. J Perinat Med 2013;42:295 –300.
152. Bolton-Maggs PH, Perry DJ, Chalmers EA, Parapia LA, Wilde JT,
Williams MD, et al. The rare coagulation disorders --review with
guidelines for management from the United Kingdom
Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organisation. Haemophilia
2004;10:593 –628.
153. Herrmann FH, Auerswald G, Ruiz-Saez A, Navarrete M, Pollmann H,
Lopaciuk S, et al.; Greifswald Factor X Deﬁciency Study Group.
Factor X deﬁciency: clinical manifestation of 102 subjects from
Europe and Latin America with mutations in the factor 10 gene.Haemophilia 2006;12:479 –89.
154. Palla R, Peyvandi F, Shapiro AD. Rare bleeding disorders:
diagnosis and treatment. Blood 2015;125:2052 –61.
155. Acharya SS, Coughlin A, Dimichele DM; North American Rare
Bleeding Disorder Study Group. Rare Bleeding DisorderRegistry: deﬁciencies of factors II, V, VII, X, XIII, ﬁbrinogen and
dysﬁbrinogenemias. J Thromb Haemost 2004;2:248 –56.
156. Ivaskevicius V, Biswas A, Bevans C, Schroeder V, Kohler HP,
Rott H, et al. Identiﬁcation of eight novel coagulation factor XIII
subunit A mutations: implied consequences for structure and
function. Haematologica 2010;95:956 –62.
157. Kulkarni AA, Lee CA, Kadir RA. Pregnancy in women with
congenital factor VII deﬁciency.
Haemophilia 2006;12:413 –6.
158. Konje JC, Murphy P, de Chazal R, Davidson A, Taylor D. Severe
factor X deﬁciency and successful pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol
1994;101:910 –1.
159. Condie RG. A serial study of coagulation factors XII, XI and X in
plasma in normal pregnancy and in pregnancy complicated by
pre-eclampsia. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1976;83:636 –9.
160. Sharief LA, Kadir RA. Congenital factor XIII deﬁciency in
women: a systematic review of literature. Haemophilia 2013;19:
e349 –57.
161. Tran HT, Sørensen B, Rea CJ, Bjørnsen S, Ueland T, Pripp AH, et al.
Tranexamic acid as adjunct therapy to bypassing agents in
haemophilia A patients with inhibitors. Haemophilia 2014;20:
369–75.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e254 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
162. Mariani G, Herrmann FH, Dolce A, Batorova A, Etro D,
Peyvandi F, et al.; International Factor VII Deﬁciency Study
Group. Clinical phenotypes and factor VII genotype in congenitalfactor VII deﬁciency. Thromb Haemost 2005;93:481 –7.
163. Catanzarite VA, Novotny WF, Cousins LM, Schneider JM.
Pregnancies in a patient with congenital absence of prothrombin
activity: case report. Am J Perinatol 1997;14:135 –8.
164. Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM. Rare coagulation disorders. Thromb
Haemost 1999;82:1207 –14.
165. Lak M, Shariﬁan R, Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM. Symptoms of
inherited factor V deﬁciency in 35 Iranian patients. Br J Haematol
1998;103:1067 –9.
166. Noia G, De Carolis S, De Stefano V, Ferrazzani S, De Santis L,
Carducci B, et al. Factor V deﬁciency in pregnancy complicated byRh immunization and placenta previa. A case report and review ofthe literature. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1997;76:890 –2.
167. Keeling D, Tait C, Makris M. Guideline on the selection and use
of therapeutic products to treat haemophilia and otherhereditary bleeding disorders. A United Kingdom Haemophilia
Centre Doctors’ Organisation (UKHCDO) guideline approved
by the British Committee for Standards in Haematology.Haemophilia 2008;14:671 –84.
168. Girolami A, Scandellari R, Lombardi AM, Girolami B, Bortoletto E,
Zanon E. Pregnancy and oral contraceptives in factor V deﬁciency:
a study of 22 patients (ﬁve homozygotes and 17 heterozygotes)and review of the literature. Haemophilia 2005;11:26 –30.
169. Coppola A, Maruotti GM, Feola G, Catalano A, Quaglia F,
Tomaiuolo M, et al. Management of patients with factor V
deﬁciency: open issues from the challenging history of a womanwith anaphylactic transfusion reactions. Haemophilia 2010;16:
560–3.
170. Di Paola J, Nugent D, Young G. Current therapy for rare factor
deﬁciencies. Haemophilia 2001;7 Suppl 1:16 –22.
171. Herrmann FH, Wulff K, Auerswald G, Schulman S, Astermark J,
Batorova A, et al.; Greifswald Factor FVII Deﬁciency Study
Group. Factor VII deﬁciency: clinical manifestation of 717subjects from Europe and Latin America with mutations in thefactor 7 gene. Haemophilia 2009;15:267 –80.
172. Bernardi F, Dolce A, Pinotti M, Shapiro AD, Santagostino E,
Peyvandi F, et al.; International Factor VII Deﬁciency StudyGroup. Major differences in bleeding symptoms between factorVII deﬁciency and hemophilia B. J Thromb Haemost 2009;7:774 –9.
173. Di Minno MN, Dolce A, Mariani G; STER Study Group. Bleeding
symptoms at disease presentation and prediction of ensuingbleeding in inherited FVII deﬁciency. Thromb Haemost
2013;109:1051 –9.
174. Fadel HE, Krauss JS. Factor VII deﬁciency and pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 1989;73:453 –4.
175. Kadir R, Chi C, Bolton-Maggs P. Pregnancy and rare bleeding
disorders. Haemophilia 2009;15:990 –1005.
176. Baumann Kreuziger LM, Morton CT, Reding MT. Is prophylaxis
required for delivery in women with factor VII deﬁciency?Haemophilia 2013;19:827 –32.
177. Girolami A, Randi ML, Ruzzon E, Lombardi AM, Girolami B,
Fabris F. Pregnancy and oral contraceptives in congenitalbleeding disorders of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factors. Acta Haematol 2006;115:58
–63.
178. Nance D, Josephson NC, Paulyson-Nunez K, James AH. Factor X
deﬁciency and pregnancy: preconception counselling andtherapeutic options. Haemophilia 2012;18:e277 –85.
179. Kumar M, Mehta P. Congenital coagulopathies and pregnancy:
report of four pregnancies in a factor X-deﬁcient woman. Am J
Hematol 1994;46:241 –4.180. Burrows RF, Ray JG, Burrows EA. Bleeding risk and reproductive
capacity among patients with factor XIII deﬁciency: a case
presentation and review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv
2000;55:103 –8.
181. Nugent D. Corifact
TM/Fibrogammin/C226P in the prophylactic
treatment of hereditary factor XIII deﬁciency: results of a
prospective, multicenter, open-label study. Thromb Res 2012;130
Suppl 2:S12 –4.
182. Inbal A, Oldenburg J, Carcao M, Rosholm A, Tehranchi R,
Nugent D. Recombinant factor XIII: a safe and novel treatmentfor congenital factor XIII deﬁciency. Blood 2012;119:5111 –7.
183. Asahina T, Kobayashi T, Takeuchi K, Kanayama N. Congenital
blood coagulation factor XIII deﬁciency and successful deliveries:
a review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2007;62:255 –60.
184. Anwar R, Miloszewski KJ. Factor XIII deﬁciency. Br J Haematol
1999;107:468 –84.
185. Mannucci PM. Bleeding symptoms in heterozygous factor XIII
[corrected] deﬁciency. Haematologica 2010;95:e6.
186. Seligsohn U, Zivelin A, Zwang E. Combined factor V and factor VIII
deﬁciency among non-Ashkenazi Jews. N Engl J Med
1982;307:1191 –5.
187. Peyvandi F, Tuddenham EG, Akhtari AM, Lak M, Mannucci PM.
Bleeding symptoms in 27 Iranian patients with the combined
deﬁciency of factor V and factor VIII. Br J Haematol 1998;100:773 –6.
188. Oukkache B, El Graoui O, Zafad S. Combined factor V and VIII
deﬁciency and pregnancy. Int J Hematol 2012;96:786 –8.
189. Lak M, Keihani M, Elahi F, Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM. Bleeding
and thrombosis in 55 patients with inherited aﬁbrinogenaemia. Br
J Haematol 1999;107:204 –6.
190. Peyvandi F, Haertel S, Knaub S, Mannucci PM. Incidence of
bleeding symptoms in 100 patients with inherited aﬁbrinogenemia
or hypoﬁbrinogenemia. J Thromb Haemost 2006;4:1634 –7.
191. Haverkate F, Samama M. Familial dysﬁbrinogenemia and
thrombophilia. Report on a study of the SSC Subcommittee on
Fibrinogen. Thromb Haemost 1995;73:151 –61.
192. Miesbach W, Scharrer I, Henschen A, Neerman-Arbez M, Spitzer S,
Galanakis D. Inherited dysﬁbrinogenemia: clinical phenotypesassociated with ﬁve different ﬁbrinogen structure defects. Blood
Coagul Fibrinolysis 2010;21:35 –40.
193. de Moerloose P, Casini A, Neerman-Arbez M. Congenital
ﬁbrinogen disorders: an update. Semin Thromb Hemost
2013;39:585 –95.
194. Shapiro SE, Phillips E, Manning RA, Morse CV, Murden SL,
Laffan MA, et al. Clinical phenotype, laboratory features andgenotype of 35 patients with heritable dysﬁbrinogenaemia. Br J
Haematol 2013;160:220 –7.
195. Goodwin TM. Congenital hypoﬁbrinogenemia in pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol Surv 1989;44:157 –61.
196. Yamanaka Y, Takeuchi K, Sugimoto M, Sato A, Nakago S, Maruo T.
Dysﬁbrinogenemia during pregnancy treated successfully with
ﬁbrinogen. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2003;82:972 –
3.
197. Roqu /C19e H, Stephenson C, Lee MJ, Funai EF, Popiolek D, Kim E,
et al. Pregnancy-related thrombosis in a woman with congenital
aﬁbrinogenemia: a report of two successful pregnancies. Am J
Hematol 2004;76:267 –70.
198. Bornikova L, Peyvandi F, Allen G, Bernstein J, Manco-Johnson MJ.
Fibrinogen replacement therapy for congenital ﬁbrinogen
deﬁciency. J Thromb Haemost 2011;9:1687 –704.
199. Mensah P, Oppenheimer C, Watson C, Pavord S. Congenital
aﬁbrinogenaemia in pregnancy. Haemophilia 2011;17:167 –8.
200. Munoz J, Schering J, Lambing A, Neal S, Goyert G, Green PM,
et al. The dilemma of inherited dysﬁbrinogenemia duringpregnancy. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 2012;23:775 –7.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e255 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
201. Franchini M, Raffaelli R, Musola M, Memmo A, Poli G, Franchi M,
et al. Management of inherited dysﬁbrinogenemia during
pregnancy: a description of four consecutive cases. Ann Hematol
2007;86:693 –4.
202. L /C19opez JA, Andrews RK, Afshar-Kharghan V, Berndt MC.
Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Blood 1998;91:4397 –418.
203. Prabu P, Parapia LA. Bernard-Soulier syndrome in pregnancy. Clin
Lab Haematol 2006;28:198 –201.
204. Bolton-Maggs PH, Chalmers EA, Collins PW, Harrison P, Kitchen S,
Leisner RJ, et al. A review of inherited platelet disorders withguidelines for their management on behalf of the UKHCDO. Br J
Haematol 2006;135:603 –33.
205. Kunishima S, Kamiya T, Saito H. Genetic abnormalities of
Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Int J Hematol 2002;76:319 –27.
206. Harrison P, Mackie I, Mumford A, Briggs C, Liesner R, Winter M,
et al. Guidelines for the laboratory investigation of heritable
disorders of platelet function. Br J Haematol 2011;155:30 –44.
207. Peitsidis P, Datta T, Paﬁlis I, Otomewo O, Tuddenham EG,
Kadir RA. Bernard Soulier syndrome in pregnancy: a systematic
review. Haemophilia 2010;16:584 –91.
208. Michalas S, Malamitsi-Puchner A, Tsevrenis H. Pregnancy and
delivery in Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
1984;63:185 –6.
209. Heslop HE, Hickton CM, Laird E, Tait JD, Doig JR, Beard EJ.
Twin pregnancy and parturition in a patient with the BernardSoulier syndrome. Scand J Haematol 1986;37:71 –3.
210. Zafar S, Sultana S, Iqbal W, Bhatti FA, Khanam Akhtar KA,
Muhammed A, et al. Pregnancy Outcome in Bernard-Soulier
Syndrome Complicated by Preeclampsia. J Turk Ger Gynecol Assoc
2007;8:324 –6.
211. Stroncek DF, Rebulla P. Platelet transfusions. Lancet
2007;370:427 –38.
212. Waldenstr €om E, Holmberg L, Axelsson U, Winqvist I, Nilsson IM.
Bernard-Soulier syndrome in two Swedish families: effect of
DDAVP on bleeding time. Eur J Haematol 1991;46:182 –7.
213. Cattaneo M. Desmopressin in the treatment of patients with
defects of platelet function. Haematologica 2002;87:1122 –4.
214. Siddiq S, Clark A, Mumford A. A systematic review of the
management and outcomes of pregnancy in Glanzmann
thrombasthenia. Haemophilia 2011;17:e858 –69.
215. Roberts HR, Monroe DM, White GC. The use of recombinant
factor VIIa in the treatment of bleeding disorders. Blood
2004;104:3858 –64.
216. Coppola A, Di Minno G. Desmopressin in inherited disorders of
platelet function. Haemophilia 2008;14 Suppl 1:31 –9.
217. Santoro C, Rago A, Biondo F, Conti L, Pulcinelli F, Laurenti L,
et al. Prevalence of allo-immunization anti-HLA and anti-integrinalphaIIbbeta3 in Glanzmann Thrombasthenia patients.Haemophilia 2010;16:805 –12.
218. Ghevaert C, Campbell K, Stafford P, Metcalfe P, Casbard A,
Smith GA, et al. HPA-1a antibody potency and bioactivity do notpredict severity of fetomaternal alloimmune thrombocytopenia.Transfusion 2007;47:1296 –305.
219. Killie MK, Husebekk A, Kaplan C, Taaning E, Skogen B. Maternal
human platelet antigen-1a antibody level correlates with theplatelet count in the newborns: a retrospective study. Transfusion
2007;47:55 –8.
220. Radder CM, Brand A, Kanhai HH. A less invasive treatment
strategy to prevent intracranial hemorrhage in fetal and neonatalalloimmune thrombocytopenia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;185:
683–8.221. Pacheco LD, Berkowitz RL, Moise KJ Jr, Bussel JB, McFarland JG,
Saade GR. Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia: a
management algorithm based on risk stratiﬁcation. Obstet Gynecol
2011;118:1157 –63.
222. Rayment R, Brunskill SJ, Soothill PW, Roberts DJ, Bussel JB,
Murphy MF. Antenatal interventions for fetomaternal alloimmune
thrombocytopenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; (5):
CD004226.
223. Seligsohn U, Mibashan RS, Rodeck CH, Nicolaides KH, Millar DS,
Coller BS. Prenatal diagnosis of Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia.Lancet 1985;28:1419.
224. French DL, Coller BS, Usher S, Berkowitz R, Eng C, Seligsohn U,
et al. Prenatal diagnosis of Glanzmann thrombasthenia using the
polymorphic markers BRCA1 and THRA1 on chromosome 17.Br J Haematol 1998;102:582 –7.
225. Srivastava A, Usher S, Nelson EJ, Jayandharan G, Shaji RV,
Chandy M, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of Glanzmann
thrombasthenia. Natl Med J India 2003;16:207 –8.
226. van der Lugt NM, van Kampen A, Walther FJ, Brand A, Lopriore E.
Outcome and management in neonatal thrombocytopenia due to
maternal idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Vox Sang
2013;105:236 –43.
227. Alamelu J, Liesner R. Modern management of severe platelet
function disorders. Br J Haematol 2010;149:813 –23.
228. Devaney SA, Palomaki GE, Scott JA, Bianchi DW. Noninvasive
fetal sex determination using cell-free fetal DNA: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. JAMA 2011;306:627 –36.
229. Lo YM, Tein MS, Lau TK, Haines CJ, Leung TN, Poon PM, et al.
Quantitative analysis of fetal DNA in maternal plasma and serum:implications for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis. Am J Hum Genet
1998;62:768 –75.
230. Hill M, Finning K, Martin P, Hogg J, Meaney C, Norbury G, et al.
Non-invasive prenatal determination of fetal sex: translatingresearch into clinical practice. Clin Genet 2011;80:68 –75.
231. Cutler J, Chappell LC, Kyle P, Madan B. Third trimester
amniocentesis for diagnosis of inherited bleeding disorders priorto delivery. Haemophilia 2013;19:904 –7.
232. Keeney S, Sempasa B, Sutherland M, Cumming A, Hay C, Nash M,
et al. Management of delivery options informed by third trimester
amniocentesis for inherited bleeding disorders –a single centre
experience. Br J Haematol
2014;165 Suppl 1:45. Abstract 103.
233. Geraedts G, De Wert GM. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis.
Clin Genet 2009;76:315 –25.
234. Michaelides K, Tuddenham EG, Turner C, Lavender B, Lavery SA.
Live birth following the ﬁrst mutation speciﬁc pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis for haemophilia A. Thromb Haemost
2006;95:373 –9.
235. S /C19anchez-Garcia JF, Gallardo D, Navarro J, M /C19arquez C, Gris JM,
S/C19anchez MA, et al. A versatile strategy for preimplantation
genetic diagnosis of haemophilia A based on F8-gene sequencing.
Thromb Haemost 2006;96:839 –45.
236. Lavery S. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis of haemophilia. Br J
Haematol 2009;144:303 –7.
237. Laurie AD, Hill AM, Harraway JR, Fellowes AP, Phillipson GT,
Benny PS, et al. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for hemophilia Ausing indirect linkage analysis and direct genotyping approaches.
J Thromb Haemost 2010;8:783 –9.
238. Tsui NB, Kadir RA, Chan KC, Chi C, Mellars G, Tuddenham EG,
et al. Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of haemophilia bymicroﬂuidics digital PCR analysis of maternal plasma DNA. Blood
2011;117:3684 –91.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e256 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in making decisions
about appropriate treatment for speciﬁc conditions’. Each guideline is systematically developed using a standardised
methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG
Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website at www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These
recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must beevaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variationsin local populations. It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines intoroutine practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations formulated in a
similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
Classi ﬁcation of evidence levels Grades of recommendation
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews
of randomised controlled trials or randomised
controlled trials with a very low risk of bias
AAt least one meta-analysis, systematic review or
RCT rated as 1 ++, and directly applicable to the
target population; orA systematic review of RCTs or a body ofevidence consisting principally of studies rated as1+, directly applicable to the target population
and demonstrating overall consistency of results1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trials or
randomised controlled trials with a low risk
of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of
randomised controlled trials or randomised
controlled trials with a high risk of bias
BA body of evidence including studies rated as 2 ++
directly applicable to the target population, and
demonstrating overall consistency of results; orExtrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1 ++
or 1+2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case –control
or cohort studies or high-quality case –control
or cohort studies with a very low risk of
confounding, bias or chance and a highprobability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case –control or cohort
studies with a low risk of confounding, bias orchance and a moderate probability that therelationship is causalCA body of evidence including studiesrated as 2 +directly applicable to the target
population, and demonstrating overallconsistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated
as 2++
2– Case –control or cohort studies with a high risk
of confounding, bias or chance and a signiﬁcantrisk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case
seriesDEvidence level 3 or 4; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2 +
4 Expert opinionGood practice points
PRecommended best practice based on the
clinical experience of the guideline development
group
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e257 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix II: Strati ﬁcation of maternal bleeding risk
Risk level Strati ﬁcation of maternal bleeding risk Suggested management of delivery
(and note for postpartum care)
High risk /C15Type 3 VWD
/C15Severe (homozygous) rare coagulopathies
/C15Severe platelet function disorders
/C15Haemophilia carriers with a signi ﬁcant bleeding
historyAdequate replacement therapy to be given
after the onset of established labour.
Avoid central neuraxial anaesthesia unless
adequate replacement therapy has beenconﬁrmed.
Maintain normal levels for at least 3 days
postpartum or 5 days for caesarean section.
Medium
risk /C15Type 2 VWD
/C15Mildly reduced third trimester maternal levels
of factor VIII, IX or VWF activity
/C15Factor XI de ﬁciency with clinical bleeding
phenotypeAdequate replacement therapy to be given
after the onset of established labour.
Avoid central neuraxial anaesthesia unless
adequate replacement therapy has beenconﬁrmed.
Maintain normal levels for at least 3 days
postpartum or 5 days for caesarean section.
Mild risk
/C15Mild platelet dysfunction disorders
/C15Carriers for haemophilia with third trimester
factor VIII/IX levels ≥0.5 iu/ml
/C15Type 1 VWD with corrected VWF activity
> 0.5 iu/mlConsider tranexamic acid for delivery and
postpartum.
Unlikely to
be at risk/C15Rare coagulopathies without bleeding
phenotype (e.g. heterozygous factor V, VII, X, XIdeﬁciency)
/C15Factor XII de ﬁciency (any severity)No replacement therapy needed.
Able to have central neuraxial anaesthesia.
Note: Dysﬁbrinogenaemia tends to be associated with thrombosis but may cause bleeding.
Abbreviations: VWD von Willebrand disease; VWF von Willebrand factor.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e258 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix III: Methods for prenatal diagnosis228–238
Investigation/
procedureTiming: weeks of
gestationImportant information Recommendations
Noninvasive
PND for fetalsexdetermination>9 PCR analysis of cffDNA, originating from the placenta and
present in maternal blood, permits noninvasive determinationof fetal sex early in pregnancy. Overall sensitivity of 95% andspeci ﬁcity of 98% are reported.
228cffDNA is detectable from
5 weeks of gestation229and is cleared from the maternal
circulation within hours of childbirth, hence the analysis ispregnancy speci ﬁc.Fetal sexing by analysis of cffDNA in
maternal blood should be offered to allwomen who are carriers ofhaemophilia A or B who have singletonpregnancies. This should be performedafter 9 weeks or more of gestation.
UK laboratories advise testing for cffDNA after at least 9 weeks
of gestation in order to achieve good sensitivity. If the fetus isfemale, no Y chromosome DNA can be detected; however,alternatively, this may be due to the presence of insuf ﬁcient
fetal DNA in the maternal sample. Inconclusive results are
reported in up to 13% of cases and necessitate repeat testing.
230Fetal sex should be con ﬁrmed by US at
20 weeks of gestation.
Sexing by cffDNA testing is not valid in multiple pregnancies
since false sexing of a fetus may occur in the case of vanishing
twin conception; where a male fetus has died and a femalehas survived.
230Ultrasound scanning should always be
performed to exclude multiple pregnancy.
The limitations of fetal sexing by cffDNA analysis must be
explained to patients prior to testing. Fetal sex should beconﬁrmed by US at 20 weeks of gestation.
CVS 11
+0–13+6Genetic analysis is carried out for the familial mutation(s) in
at-risk fetuses (e.g. only male fetuses in X-linked conditions,including haemophilia A and B).CVS may be offered between 11
+0and
13+6weeks of gestation.
An independent maternal blood sample
should be provided to the laboratory
for con ﬁrmatory mutation analysis
alongside the PND sample.
Amniocentesis
for PND in early
pregnancy15+ Genetic analysis is carried out for the familial mutation(s) in
at-risk fetuses (e.g. only male fetuses in X-linked conditions,
including haemophilia A and B).Amniocentesis may be offered after
15 weeks of gestation for PND when CVS
is not available or at > 34 weeks ofgestation to inform clinical managementplans for delivery of an at-risk fetus.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e259 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix III. (Continued)
Investigation/
procedureTiming: weeks of
gestationImportant information Recommendations
Amniocentesis in
late pregnancyto inform clinicalmanagement of
child birth34+ Genetic analysis is carried out for t he familial mutation(s) in order
to inform the delivery of at-risk fetuses (e.g. only male fetuses inX-linked conditions, including haemophilia A and B).
231,232An independent maternal blood sampleshould be provided to the laboratoryfor con ﬁrmatory mutation analysis
alongside the PND sample.
The majority of mutations in VWD, haemophilia A and
haemophilia B can usually be reliably detected in DNAextracted from AF samples, providing there are adequatenumbers of fetal cells in the sample. AF in later pregnancymay contain few viable fetal cells and the resulting quality of
DNA available for extraction may be poor. High-quality DNA is
particularly important for successful genotyping for the F8
intron 22 inversion mutation.
PGD Genetic analysis
performed prior to
implantation of IVF-generated embryoPGD,
233an IVF-based process, is an option for couples at risk
of transmitting a heritable disorder to their offspring:
/C15Couples who wish to avoid having an affected child, but
for religious, cultural or personal reasons would notconsider termination of an affected pregnancy.
/C15Couples with concurrent infertility since PGD requires
couples to undergo IVF.The options for and availability of PGD
should be explained to couples as part
of the genetic counselling process.
Genetic analysis is performed on oocyte/zygote/embryo for:
/C15Gender determination, allowing selective implantation of
female embryos.
/C15Speci ﬁc genetic analysis for causative haemophilia
mutation,234–237permitting the exclusion of affected male
embryos for implantation.
Details of centres offering PGD and practice guidelines for PGD
are available at: https://www.eshre.eu/Data-collection-and-re
search/Consortia/PGD-Consortium/PGD-Consortium-Publica
tions.aspx
Noninvasive
PND for disease-
speci ﬁc
diagnosis>9 Advances in genetic testing technologies offer the possibility to
carry out noninvasive disease-speci ﬁc PND on cffDNA.238These
applications, however, are not yet available in general clinical
practice.
Abbreviations: AF amniotic ﬂuid;cffDNA cell-free fetal DNA; CVS chorionic villus sampling; IVFin vitro fertilisation; PCR polymerase chain reaction; PGD preimplantation
genetic diagnosis; PND prenatal diagnosis; USultrasound; VWD von Willebrand disease.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e260 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix IV: Risk strati ﬁcation of bleeding risk for the fetus/neonate
Risk strati ﬁcation of bleeding risk for the
fetus/neonate
Risk level Possible or con ﬁrmed fetal
diagnosisSuggested management of delivery
High risk /C15Males with severe and moderate
haemophilia A or B
/C15Type 3 VWD
/C15Severe (homozygous) rare
coagulopathies or severe plateletdisordersConsider third trimester amniocentesis to diagnose
disease (see PND table).
Discuss mode of delivery taking maternal and fetal factors
into consideration, but avoid midcavity forceps, ventouse
delivery, FBS, FSE, rotational forceps and external cephalicversion.
Cord sample for factor assay.
Oral vitamin K, unless the result is known to be normal.
Medium
risk
/C15Males with mild haemophilia A or B
/C15Type 2 VWDConsider third trimester amniocentesis to diagnose
disease.
Avoid midcavity forceps, ventouse, rotational forceps and
external cephalic version.
Judicious use of FBS and FSE to facilitate vaginal delivery
Cord sample for factor assay.
Oral vitamin K, unless the result is known to be normal.
Mild risk /C15Clinically moderate or severe type 1
VWD in family
/C15Female fetuses who areobligate/possible carriers of severe
haemophilia B
/C15Mild platelet function disordersConsider avoidance of ventouse and external cephalic
version.
Judicious use of rotational forceps, FBS and FSE.
Unlikely
to be atrisk/C15Clinically mild type 1 VWD infamily
/C15All other obligate/possible
haemophilia carrier female fetuses
/C15Heterozygous rare coagulopathiesNo special precautions.
Abbreviations: FBS fetal blood sampling; FSEfetal scalp electrode; PND prenatal diagnosis; VWD von Willebrand disease.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e261 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix V: Neonatal bleeding risks and management
Factor Risk of early
bleeding in severedeﬁciencyFactor/platelet
activity innormal termneonatesDiagnosis of severe
and moderatedeﬁciencyDiagnosis of mild de ﬁciency
a
Factor VIII ICH incidence 1 –4% Normal or mildly
increasedYes Possible at birth in most cases
but re-test at 3 –6 months to
conﬁrm levels.
Factor IX ICH reported Reduced Yes Testing required at
3–6 months of age.
VWF ICH reported Increased Yes in type 3 and
some type 2
deﬁcienciesTesting should not be
undertaken unless clinically
indicated until 6 months of
age.
Fibrinogen ICH and umbilical
bleeding reportedNormal or
slightly reduced
(assay
dependent)Yes Usually possible at birth.
Conﬁrmation required at
3–6 months of age.
Factor II ICH and umbilical
bleeding reportedReduced Yes Testing required at
3–6 months of age.
Factor V ICH reported Normal or
slightly reducedYes Usually possible at birth.
Conﬁrmation required at
3–6 months of age.
Factor VII ICH reported Reduced Yes Testing required at
3–6 months of age.
Factor X ICH and umbilical
bleeding reportedReduced Yes Testing required at
3–6 months of age.
Factor XI Spontaneous
bleeding seems
uncommonReduced Yes Testing required at
3–6 months of age.
Post-surgical
bleeding reported
Factor XIII ICH and umbilical
bleeding reportedReduced Yes Testing required at
3–6 months of age. Mild
deﬁciencies may not be
clinically signi ﬁcant.
Glanzmann ’s
thrombastheniaSevere bleeding
appears relatively
uncommonNeonatal
platelets are
generally
hyporeactiveYes. PFA-100 can be
used for screening.NA
Deﬁnitive testing is
PMG analysis by
ﬂow cytometry.
Bernard Soulier
syndromeSevere bleeding
appears uncommonNeonatal
platelets are
generally
hyporeactiveYes. PFA-100 can be
used for screening.NA
Deﬁnitive testing is
PMG analysis by
ﬂow cytometry.
aTesting at birth may not be appropriate in all cases.
Abbreviations: ICH intracranial haemorrhage; PFA platelet function assay; PMG platelet membrane glycoprotein; VWF von
Willebrand factor.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e262 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by:
Dr S Pavord FRCP, FRCPath, Oxford; Dr R Rayment FRCP, FRCPath, Cardiff; Dr B Madan FRCP,FRCPath, London; Dr A Cumming PhD, FRCPath, Manchester; Dr W Lester FRCP, FRCPath, Birmingham;
Dr E Chalmers FRCP, FRCPath, Glasgow; Dr B Myers MA, FRCP, FRCPath, Leicester & Lincoln;
Mrs H Maybury MD, MRCOG, Leicester; Dr C Tower PhD, MRCOG, Manchester; Mrs RA Kadir FRCOG,London
AcknowledgementsProfessor C Hay FRCP, FRCPath, Manchester who initiated the guideline; Dr G Gray FRCOG, London who
provided obstetric advice; Dr N Lucas, who provided anaesthetic advice; Ms J Webster Birmingham, whoprovided midwifery advice
and peer reviewed by: Dr C Altisent, University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; Dr L Baumann Kreuziger MD, MS,
Hematology and Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA; Professor M Boulvain MD, PhD,
University of Geneva, Switzerland; British Society of Abortion Care Providers; Dr S Choi MD FRCPC MSc, SunnybrookHealth Sciences Centre, Department of Anesthesia, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Mr K Fareed, Lucknow,India; Dr M Kjær, University of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway; Dr A Mahadik MRCOG, Sydney; Dr F S Malhi FRCOG,
Malaysia; Dr E Morris FRCOG, Norwich; Dr LD Pacheco, University of Texas Medical Branch, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Galveston, TX, USA; Dr S Pirzada, Chandka Medical College, Larkana, Pakistan; RCOG Women’s Network;Dr F Rodeghiero MD, Scientiﬁc Director, Hematology Project Foundation Contr /C18a San Francesco, Vicenza, Italy;
Royal College of Anaesthetists; Royal College of Emergency Medicine; Royal College of General Practitioners;
Dr A S /C19anchez-Luceros, Hemostasis and Thrombosis Department, Hematological Research Institute, National Academy
of Medicine, Buenos Aires, Argentina; Professor L Sentilhes, Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France;
Dr N Singh MRCOG, Bolton; Dr S Zafar, Health Services Academy, Islamabad, Pakistan.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr R Fernando FRCOG, London; Dr M Gupta MRCOG, London.
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta
1MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen2FRCOG, Glasgow; and
Dr AJ Thomson1MRCOG, Paisley.
1co-chairs from June 20142until May 2014.
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conﬂicts of interest. A statement summarising
any conﬂicts of interest for this guideline is available from: www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-
services/guidelines/gtg71/
The ﬁnal version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.
The guideline will be considered for update 3 years after publication, with an intermediate assessment of the need to
update 2 years after publication.
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice.
They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration byobstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular
clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented
by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to be
prescriptive directions deﬁning a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols orguidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
RCOG Green-top Guidelines No. 71 e263 of e263 ª2017 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
 14710528, 2017, 8, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14592 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [28/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License