# Extracted from: BMS - 2024 - Management of unscheduled bleeding on HRT.pdf
# Guideline ID: bms-2024-management-of-unscheduled-bleeding-on-hrt
# Content length: 131769 characters
# Processing date: 1735630252.4687278

BMS | GUIDELINE1 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.This joint guideline has been prepared on behalf of the British Menopause Society, 
in partnership with the British Society of Gynaecological Endoscopy, British 
Gynaecological Cancer Society, Faculty of Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare, 
Getting It Right First Time (GIRFT), Royal College of General Practitioners and the 
Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists.Management of unscheduled bleeding 
on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
The British Menopause Society (BMS) is the specialist authority for 
menopause and post reproductive health in the UK. The BMS educates, 
informs and guides healthcare professionals, working in both 
primary and secondary care, on menopause and all aspects of post 
reproductive health.
BMS guidelines, prepared by the BMS medical advisory council in partnership 
with other specialist organisations and Royal Colleges, address key disorders 
and controversial topics relating to menopause and post reproductive health. 
They reflect new studies together with recent medical and scientific information 
from articles in professional journals, plus informal consensus.
The guidelines are evidence-based, comprehensively referenced and peer 
reviewed and they are regularly updated. 
BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)2 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.CONTENTS
Contributors
Key Messages
Introduction
1. Assessment of women presenting with unscheduled bleeding on HRT 
2. Endometrial cancer risk factors in women taking HRT 
3. When to investigate unscheduled bleeding on HRT 
4. How should unscheduled bleeding on HRT be investigated 
5. Adjusting HRT to reduce unscheduled bleeding episodes 
Abbreviations and Key terms 
References
Appendices
1. Licensed estrogen dose and proportionate progestogen dose
2. Endometrial ultrasound reporting criteria for women with unscheduled bleeding 
3. Recommendations following investigations in women taking HRT
4. Auditable topics 
5. Research prioritiesBMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)3 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Contributors
Lead Authors on behalf of the British Menopause Society (BMS)
Dr Kristyn Manley Consultant Gynaecologist, University Hospitals Bristol & Weston NHS 
Foundation Trust
Mr Timothy Hillard Consultant Gynaecologist, University Hospitals Dorset NHS Trust, Poole
Guideline Development Working Group
Dr Katie Barber Primary Care Physician, Oxford
 British Menopause Society
Professor Justin Clark Consultant Gynaecologist, Birmingham Women’s Hospital
 British Gynaecological Endoscopy Society
Mr Haitham Hamoda Consultant Gynaecologist, King’s College Hospital, London 
 British Menopause Society 
Ms Debra Holloway Consultant Gynaecology Nurse, Guys and St Thomas’ Hospital, London
Mrs Geeta Kumar Consultant Gynaecologist, Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board, 
Wales
 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Dr Bronwyn Middleton Consultant Gynaecologist, University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust
Dr Jo Morrison Consultant Gynaecological Oncologist, Taunton
 British Gynaecological Cancer Society
Mrs Maria Oyston Programme Manager, NHS England, Elective Recovery and 
Transformation Team
Mr Mark Pickering Post CCT Fellow, Gynaecology, University Hospitals Dorset NHS Trust
Dr Jenifer Sassarini Consultant Gynaecologist, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde
 Scottish Menopause Network
Dr Nicola Williams Primary Care Physician, Wandsworth, London
Additional Contributors
• British Menopause Society Medical Advisory Council
• British Gynaecological Cancer Society Scientific Advisory Council
• Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Clinical Quality Board
• Scottish Menopause Network
• SWAG Cancer Alliance 
• Dr Janet Barter, President of the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare
• Dr Heather Currie, Associate Specialist Gynaecologist, Dumfries and Galloway Royal Infirmary
• Dr Heike Gleser, Consultant, Tayside Sexual and Reproductive Health Service
• Dr Tracy Jackson, Gynaecological Cancer Unit Lead, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust
• Dr Amy Keightly, Gynaecological Cancer Unit Lead, Great Western Hospital, Swindon
• Dr Amy Kerstein, Primary Care Physician, Oxford
• Dr Andrew Phillips, Consultant Gynaecological Oncologist, University Hospitals Derby NHS Trust
• Dr Sarah Quinn, Gynaecology Specialist Registrar and RCOG Trainees’ Committee Member 
• Mr David Richmond, GIRFT Gynaecology National LeadBMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)4 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Key Messages 
Assessment of women presenting with unscheduled bleeding on HRT
• When women present with unscheduled bleeding on HRT, clinical assessment 
should start with a comprehensive review detailing bleeding patterns, HRT 
preparations and individual risk factors for cancer. Offer an examination 
(abdominal, pelvic) and, where relevant, initial investigations such as cervical 
screening, lower genital tract swabs and body-mass index (BMI).
Endometrial cancer risk factors in women taking HRT
• Risk factors for endometrial hyperplasia and cancer, independent of 
HRT, should be identified. Major risk factors are BMI ≥ 40 and hereditary 
conditions such as Lynch or Cowden syndrome. Minor risk factors include 
BMI 30-39, diabetes and polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). Optimisation 
of modifiable factors can, in themselves, reduce episodes of unscheduled 
bleeding on HRT and endometrial cancer risk.
• A monthly progestogen dose, in proportion to the estrogen dose, is 
recommended in women with a uterus. 
• In women using sequential HRT (sHRT), offer a minimum of 10 days 
norethisterone (NET) or medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), or 12 days of 
micronised progesterone, per month.
• Women taking a sequential preparation (sHRT) over the age of 45 should be 
offered, after five years of use or by age 54 (whichever comes first), a change 
to continuous combined (ccHRT). 
When to investigate unscheduled bleeding on HRT 
• In the absence of risk factors for endometrial cancer, offer adjustments in the 
progestogen or HRT preparation, for 6 months in total, if unscheduled bleeding 
a) occurs within six months of starting HRT or b) is persisting three months after a 
change in HRT dose or preparation. 
• If unscheduled bleeding continues in low-risk women, after six months of 
adjustments, discuss the options of an urgent ultrasound (within six weeks) 
versus weaning off HRT and consideration of non-hormonal alternatives (to avoid 
invasive investigations). 
• For those women who elect to stop HRT, if the bleeding has settled at a 4-week 
follow-up, and continued cessation of HRT is acceptable, no further investigations 
are required. If the bleeding has settled at a 4-week follow-up and there is a 
preference to restart HRT, offer adjustments in HRT for six months and then an 
urgent ultrasound if bleeding is heavy / persistent during the 6 months or, is 
continuing after this interval.
• Offer an urgent TVS (within 6 weeks) if the first presentation with bleeding occurs 
more than six months after initiating, or three months after changing, the HRT 
preparation.
• Offer an urgent TVS (within 6 weeks), irrespective of interval since starting, or 
changing, HRT preparations if a) bleeding is prolonged / heavy or, b) there are 2 
minor risk factors for endometrial cancer.
• Offer an urgent suspicion of cancer pathway (USCP) referral to women with one 
major or three minor risk factors for endometrial cancer – irrespective of bleeding 
type or interval since starting or changing HRT preparations. Adjustments to the 
progestogen, or stopping HRT, should be offered whilst awaiting assessment.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)5 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.How should unscheduled bleeding on HRT be investigated 
• Women with unscheduled bleeding, in the presence of a uniform 
endometrium which is fully visualised, and measures ≤ 4 mm with ccHRT or ≤ 
7 mm with sHRT, can be reassured that the risk of endometrial cancer is low. 
Offer HRT adjustments for 6 months and then offer endometrial assessment, 
on an urgent pathway, if bleeding increases during the 6 months or, is 
continuing after this interval.
• Women with a thickened endometrium on TVS (> 4 mm for ccHRT or > 7 
mm for sHRT) should be offered referral to the urgent suspicion of cancer 
pathway (USCP) for endometrial assessment (biopsy and / or hysteroscopy). 
• In the presence of a normal endometrial biopsy, discuss adjustments in the 
progestogen and provide reassurance for three months. If hysteroscopy and 
biopsy are normal, reassurance can be provided for six months.
Adjusting HRT to reduce unscheduled bleeding episodes 
• Assess adherence and understanding of how to use the prescribed 
preparation including dose and duration of progestogen – for example, 
would a combined patch or pill reduce administration errors when compared 
to a separate estrogen and progestogen component. 
• Offer all women a 52 mg LNG-IUD; this preparation reduces episodes of 
unscheduled bleeding when compared to all other preparations.
• Oral preparations provide higher rates of amenorrhoea when compared to 
transdermal preparations and could be offered, if there are no risk factors 
for thrombosis, as a) a first-line therapy or b) to women who have recurrent 
unscheduled bleeding with transdermal preparations.
• Offer vaginal estrogens if there are atrophic findings on examination.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)6 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.UNSCHEDULED BLEEDING ON HRT 
1. Assess cancer risk factors and bleeding pattern 
2. Identify HRT regimen, duration, compliance 
3. Offer examination
4. Offer investigations if indicated e.g. cervical screening/genital swabs
ULTRASOUND 
• sHRT ET > 7 mm 
• ccHRT ET > 4 mm
• Endometrium incompletely visualised
MINOR risk factors for endometrial cancer 
• BMI 30-39
• Unopposed estrogen > 3 months but < 6 months
• Tricycling HRT (quarterly progestogen) for > 6 but < 12 months
• > 6 months but < 12 months of using norethisterone or 
medroxyprogesteorne acetate for < 10 days / month or, micronised 
progesterone for < 12 days / month, as part of a sequential regimen
• Where the progestogen dose is not in proportion to the estrogen 
dose for > 12 months (including expired 52 mg LNG-IUD)
• Anovulatory cycles, such as in Polycystic ovarian syndrome
• DiabetesMAJOR risk factors for endometrial cancer 
• BMI ≥ 40
• Genetic predisposition (Lynch / Cowden syndrome)
• Estrogen-only HRT for > 6 months in women with a uterus 
• Tricycling HRT (quarterly progestogen) for > 12 months
• Prolonged sHRT regimen: use for more than 5 years when started in 
women aged ≥ 45
• 12 months or more of using norethisterone or 
medroxyprogesterone acetate for < 10 days / month or, micronised 
progesterone for < 12 days / month, as part of a sequential regimenOPTIMISE HRT 
Endometrial assessment 
if bleeding ongoing 
after 6 months• Heavy / persistent bleeding, or
• 2 minor cancer risk factors, or
• More than 6 months since starting HRT, or
• More than 3 months after a change in dose 
or preparation1 major or 3 minor risk factors 
for endometrial cancer?
Urgent suspicion 
of cancer 
pathway; for TVS
USCP for 
endometrial 
assessmentOPTIMISE HRT 
for 6 months
Bleeding 
ongoing or 
increasing?
Primary Care Primary or 
secondary care 
responsibilitysHRT: sequential ccHRT: continuous combined 
ET: endometrial thickness TVS: transvaginal ultrasound
USCP: urgent suspicion of cancer pathwayUSCPUrgent TVS
(within 6 weeks)YES
YES
YESYESNO
NO
NOBMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)7 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Introduction
Unscheduled bleeding on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is defined as irregular 
bleeding which occurs after initiating, or changing, a HRT preparation which should 
be ‘bleed free’ – continuous combined hormone replacement therapy (ccHRT) or, 
which occurs, in addition to the scheduled monthly withdrawal bleed in persons 
taking sequential preparations (sHRT).(1) Unscheduled bleeding within the first six 
months of initiating HRT or, within three months of a change in dose or preparation 
in those already established on HRT, is common. It can affect up to 38% of people 
using sHRT and 41% using ccHRT.(2) It is a major factor leading to repeat consultations 
and cessation of HRT.(3) 
HRT was prescribed to 1.9 million women in the UK in 2021/2022 – a 35% increase 
from the preceding year. Over the past decade, prescriptions have increased annually, 
by 13.6%, in women aged 50 years or older.(4) In England, estradiol gel and micronised 
progesterone were the top two prescribed HRT items in 2022 with total number 
of identified persons prescribed micronised progesterone increasing by 125%.(5) In 
parallel with this increase in prescribing there has been a rapid rise in unscheduled 
bleeding on HRT and a 43% increase, over the past 3 years, in referrals to the Urgent 
Suspicion of Cancer Pathway (USCP). Overall this change in referral pattern does not 
appear to have resulted in more cancers being diagnosed, which rose by 2% over the 
same interval.(1, 6, 7) An increase in referrals, for those who appear to be at lower risk of 
endometrial cancer, may impact on the ability of organisational structures to attain 
the national ‘28-day faster cancer diagnosis recommendations’ and increase anxiety 
in women awaiting assessment.
The reasons behind this increase are multiple. As well as the steady increase in the use 
of HRT since the NICE guidance in 2015(8), there has been an increase in use of HRT 
amongst peri-menopausal women who, by definition, often have irregular bleeding. 
The wider availability of transdermal preparations has enabled women with complex 
comorbidities, which may be independent risk factors for endometrial cancer, to 
access HRT. In addition, there is an increasing tendency for off-license prescribing of 
higher dose estrogen with sub-optimal dosages of progestogen. Whilst all irregular 
bleeding is distressing, there is a need to prioritise investigations for those with a 
potential increased risk of endometrial cancer, over those in whom endometrial 
cancer is unlikely.
The purpose of this guideline is to provide recommendations which stratify 
management for unscheduled bleeding according to risk of endometrial cancer, 
ensuring best outcomes for all women whilst using NHS resources appropriately. BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)8 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Methodology
On behalf of the British Menopause Society (BMS) an expert review panel was 
established, including primary and secondary care clinicians with expertise in the 
management of menopause, with representatives from key related organisations, 
including the Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists (RCOG), the British 
Gynaecological Cancer Society (BGCS) and the British Society for Gynaecological 
Endoscopy (BSGE), and service development partners from NHS England and GIRFT 
(Getting it Right First Time). For each topic, a focused literature review was completed 
to develop evidence led recommendations which were ratified by consensus 
review within the panel and by guideline groups. In many areas there is a paucity 
of evidence and the recommendations are based on expert opinion. This is a live 
document and as new evidence becomes available, the guidance in these areas will 
be updated. 
No modelling or cost analyses have been performed in drawing up this guideline. 
This is a clinical guideline designed to facilitate and standardise the management 
of women presenting with unscheduled bleeding on HRT. Our focus is on utilising 
resources efficiently to ensure women are not over investigated whilst at the same 
time not missing those in whom endometrial cancer is a possibility. It is recognised 
that many organisations have already drawn up their own guidelines based on their 
own resources and it is hoped this document will serve as a guide to support and 
inform the further development of these guidelines. Suggested topics for audit are 
included.
Within this document we use the terms woman and women’s health. However, it 
is important to acknowledge that it is not only women for whom it is necessary 
to access women’s health and reproductive services in order to maintain their 
gynaecological health. Gynaecological services and delivery of care must be 
appropriate, inclusive and sensitive to the needs of those individuals whose gender 
identity does not align with the sex they were assigned at birth.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)9 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Section 1: Assessment of women presenting with unscheduled bleeding 
on HRT
When women present with unscheduled bleeding on HRT, clinical assessment 
should start with a comprehensive review detailing bleeding patterns, HRT 
preparations and individual risk factors for cancer. Offer an examination 
(abdominal, pelvic) and, where relevant, initial investigations such as cervical 
screening, lower genital tract swabs and body-mass index (BMI).
History
• Last menstrual period or withdrawal bleed (before and during HRT)
• Bleeding pattern before starting HRT
• Pelvic pain and / or deep dyspareunia
• Discharge
• Vulvovaginal and / or urinary symptoms
• Bleeding pattern: 
— Number of episodes per month
— Type; spotting, period-like, flooding
— Duration of bleeding; if prolonged, is it days or weeks
— Regularity; such as mid-cycle or before a withdrawal bleed
— Precipitating factors; such as wiping after urinating or post-coital 
• HRT use: 
— Duration since initiation or change in HRT preparation
— Current preparation, including dose of estrogen and progestogen
— Type of progestogen, total days in the month it is taken and route (oral / 
vaginal)
— Levonorgestrel intrauterine device (52 mg LNG IUD) – type, dose, insertion 
date, thread checks and whether correctly sited
— Adherence to estrogen and progestogen regimen
— Prior preparations and interval of use (including adverse effects that led to 
cessation)
• Application: 
— Where is it applied
— If a patch is used, is it sticking well and is there any irritation
— Awareness of taking the correct order of patches or pills if a sequential 
preparation
— Other sources of estrogen (such as herbal/bioidentical)
— Contraceptive usage, if any(9)
— Pregnancy risk; compliance with progestogen-only pill (POP), date of last 
medroxyprogesterone injection, insertion date of implant
— Cervical screening history: do not delay ongoing assessment if the bleeding 
pattern prevents smear taking
— Sexual history
— Drug interactions; such as anti-epileptics, anti-fungals, COVID vaccinations, 
St John’s Wort 
• Malabsorption syndromes 
• Endometrial cancer risk factors; such as genetic predisposition to endometrial 
cancer (Lynch / Cowden Syndrome), BMI ≥ 30, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) 
and diabetes.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)10 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Examination and initial investigations
To enable informed consent, discuss what the examination is likely to involve, the 
intended benefits of completing these and the benefits and risks of any alternate 
options, including no examination or investigations. Offer, where appropriate and 
acceptable, the following assessments: 
• Abdominal; assess for fibroids, ovarian mass, pain
• Vulvo-vaginal; assess for atrophy, dermatoses, mass, ulceration, prolapse
• Cervical appearance; assess for mass, polyp, ectropion with contact bleeding, 
visible IUD threads 
• Genital tract swabs; vulvovaginal including chlamydia / gonorrhoea (CT/GC) 
screen – if indicated by sexual history i.e. new partner(s) in the past two years, no 
exclusive relationship or current sexually transmitted infection symptoms
• Cervical screening if overdue
• Pregnancy test (if appropriate)
• BMIBMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)1 1 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Section 2: Endometrial cancer risk factors in women taking HRT
The incidence of endometrial cancer in relation to a woman’s individual risk factors 
and specific HRT preparation are outlined in this section. Table 1 summarises this 
evidence and categorises these risk factors into major or minor, to enable triage 
of women who present with unscheduled bleeding onto the correct assessment 
pathway (non-urgent, urgent and urgent suspicion of cancer pathway (USCP)) as 
outlined in Sections 3 and 4. 
Tables 2 and 3 (combined in Appendix 1) outline prescribed estrogen dosages, 
in relation to specific transdermal and oral preparations, and the recommended 
progestogen dose, for ultra-low to high dose estrogen. 
Table 1: Major and minor factors affecting risk of endometrial cancer in women 
taking HRT
Major risk factors • BMI ≥ 40
 • Genetic predisposition to endometrial cancer (Lynch / 
Cowden syndrome)
 • Estrogen-only HRT for more than 6 months in women 
with a uterus 
 • Tricycling HRT (quarterly progestogen course) for more 
than 12 months
 • Prolonged sHRT regimen: use for more than 5 years 
when started in women aged ≥ 45
 • 12 months or more of using norethisterone or 
medroxyprogesterone acetate for < 10 days / month or, 
micronised progesterone for < 12 days / month, as part 
of a sequential regimen
Minor risk factors • BMI 30-39
 • Unopposed estrogen for more than 3 months but less 
than 6 months
 • Tricycling HRT (quarterly progestogen course) for more 
than 6 months but less than 12 months
 • More than 6 months, but less than 12 months, of using 
norethisterone or medroxyprogesterone acetate for < 
10 days / month or, micronised progesterone for < 12 
days / month, as part of a sequential regimen
 • Where the progestogen dose is not in proportion to the 
estrogen dose for > 12 months (including expired 52 
mg LNG-IUD)*
 • Anovulatory cycles, such as in PCOS
 • Diabetes
* There is limited evidence relating to the impact on endometrial cancer risk; this should be a research priority to enable improved stratification of 
risk/pathways (see Table 3).BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)12 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Endometrial cancer risk factors independent of HRT use
• Risk factors for endometrial hyperplasia, independent of HRT, should be 
identified. Major risk factors include BMI ≥ 40 and hereditary conditions 
such as Lynch or Cowden syndrome. Minor risk factors include BMI 30-39, 
diabetes and polycystic ovarian syndrome. Optimisation of modifiable 
factors can, in themselves, reduce episodes of unscheduled bleeding on HRT 
and endometrial cancer risk.
Endometrial cancer is the fourth most common cancer in the UK; the reported 
incidence in women who present with postmenopausal bleeding (PMB), i.e. those 
who are not taking HRT, is 3-10%.(10, 11) The incidence increases with age; rates (per 
100,000 women) rise sharply from the age of 55 and reach a peak at age 70 to 74. 
The age-related incidence in the UK is 0.7% for women aged 50-54, 1.2% aged 55-59, 
1.3% aged 60-64, and 1.5% aged 65-74.(12) 
Genetic factors can increase risk by 30-50%, with conditions such as Lynch and 
Cowden syndrome considered major factors.(13) Obesity is the strongest risk 
factor for endometrial cancer with 40% of cases associated with this; BMI ≥ 40 
confers a tenfold higher risk when compared to a BMI within the normal range.
(14) Consideration of weight loss strategies, and support for this, is associated with a 
reduction in endometrial hyperplasia and cancer risk.(15, 16) Other factors that affect the 
bioavailability of estrogen and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), such as diabetes, 
PCOS and unstable liver disease, can increase endometrial cancer risk.(11) 
Risk of endometrial cancer in HRT users who DO NOT report unscheduled 
bleeding 
Effect of HRT preparation on endometrial cancer risk
• Inform amenorrhoeic postmenopausal women taking a continuous 
combined preparation (ccHRT), which contains standard dose estrogen and a 
proportionate progestogen dose, that endometrial cancer risk appears to be 
lower than in non-HRT users. 
• Women taking a sequential preparation (sHRT) over the age of 45 should be 
offered, after five years of use or by age 54 (whichever comes first), a change 
to ccHRT.
• In women using sHRT, offer a minimum of 10 days norethisterone (NET) or 
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), or 12 days of micronised progesterone, 
per month; recommending two weeks per 28 day cycle with progestogen 
and two weeks without may help to reduce administration and prescribing 
errors. 
• A monthly progestogen dose, in proportion to the estrogen dose, is 
recommended in women with a uterus. It should be noted that more than 
six months of unopposed estrogen or 12 months of tricycling (estrogen 
daily with a progestogen course every 3 months), are major risk factors for 
endometrial cancer.
• Counsel women there are limited data relating to the optimal progestogen 
dose needed to provide endometrial protection in women taking high dose 
estrogen (particularly in perimenopausal women taking sHRT).BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)13 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Continuous combined HRT (ccHRT): 
Administration of daily (continuous) progestogen suppresses endometrial 
growth leading to amenorrhoea and atrophy.(17) This appears to reduce the risk 
of endometrial cancer, compared with non-users, with the greatest effect seen in 
women with a BMI ≥ 30.(18-20) In women who do not report unscheduled bleeding, 
the risk of endometrial cancer with ultra-low to standard dose estrogen, and a 
progestogen dose which is in proportion, is < 1%.(21) There are limited data assessing 
risk with moderate or high dose estradiol use. Table 2 outlines prescribed estrogen, 
in relation to specific transdermal and oral preparations for ultra-low, low, standard, 
moderate and high dosages.
Table 2: Prescribed estrogen dose for ultra-low, low, standard, moderate and 
high dose regimens
 Ultra-low dose Low Dose Standard dose Moderate dose High dose
Oestrogel ½ pump 1 pump 2 pumps 3 pumps 4 pumps
Sandrena 0.25 mg 0.5 mg 1 mg 1.5-2 mg 3 mg*
Lenzetto spray 1 spray 2 sprays 3 sprays 4-5 sprays* 6 sprays*
Patch 12.5 µg 25 µg 50 µg 75 µg 100 µg
Oral estradiol 0.5 mg 1 mg 2 mg 3 mg^ 4 mg^
* Off-license use ^ Off-license use – rarely required to achieve symptom control
mg = milligrams µg = micrograms
Sequential/cyclical HRT (sHRT): 
In women over 50, who have no unscheduled bleeding and use 
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) or norethisterone (NET) for 10-12 days of 
the month, the relative risk of endometrial cancer is similar to non-users. If these 
progestogens are used for less than 10 days, this risk is three-fold higher after 
six months use (RR 3.1, 95% CI 1.7-5.7).(21-23) Micronised progesterone (MP), in 
conjunction with standard dose estrogen, provides endometrial protection if given at 
a dose of 200mg for 12-14 days of the month for up to five years use.(24) 
When compared to non-users, if sHRT (progestogen for 10-12 days) is used for 
more than five years, the risk of endometrial cancer is almost three times higher (RR 
2.9 (95% CI 1.8-4.6)).(21-23) In women who are perimenopausal at the natural age (≥ 
age 45), switching to ccHRT should be offered after five years of sHRT or by age 54 
(whichever comes first). It can also be considered after 12-18 months of sequential 
use, if women want to try ccHRT to see if they can achieve a bleed-free regimen at an 
earlier point.(25)
Tricycling (Long-cycle) Progestogen use and shortened progestogen regimens
This is where estrogen is given daily but a reduced progestogen course (7-10 days) 
is given every three months. When compared to use of a monthly progestogen 
course – NET or MPA for 10-12 days – the incidence of endometrial hyperplasia and 
cancer is higher; 7.5% vs 0% at 12 months (p=0.005) and 11% vs 1.4% by 36 months 
(p=0.01).(26, 27) The risk of endometrial cancer when tricycling incorporates moderate 
or high dose estrogen, or micronised progesterone, is unknown.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)14 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.If a shortened duration of progestogen is considered in women with an intolerance 
to all progestogen types (including 52 mg LNG-IUD and off-license use of standard 
dose estrogen with 150 micrograms of daily desogestrel or x3 noriday tablets i.e. 
1.05 mg NET), and in whom hysterectomy is not suitable or acceptable, informed 
counselling about endometrial risk, and the lack of evidence to support surveillance 
accuracy (six monthly ultrasound), should be discussed and documented.
Unopposed estrogen
There is strong evidence to support an increased risk of endometrial cancer with 
unopposed estrogen (i.e no progestogen use) in people with a uterus. A Cochrane 
review(27) reported high rates of endometrial hyperplasia, compared with placebo, 
after 12 and 24 months of standard dose unopposed estrogen use; OR 8.4 (95% CI 
5.5-12.9) and OR 11.9 (95% CI 7.8-18.1) respectively. At one, two and three years, the 
proportion of women diagnosed with endometrial hyperplasia was 14.7%, 35.5% and 
62% (respectively) – compared with 0.3% in the placebo group. There are limited data 
on risk with moderate or high dose unopposed estrogen use.
Progestogen type and endometrial protection
• Counsel peri- and postmenopausal women considering use of a 52 mg LNG-
IUD that it can be used for endometrial protection with ultra-low to high 
estrogen dosages for up to five years. 
• Counsel women that a) tibolone and, b) progestogens (norethisterone, 
medroxyprogesterone acetate, levonorgestrel, dydrogesterone, micronised 
progesterone) when combined with standard dose estrogen, provide 
equivalent protection against endometrial cancer. 
• Women taking moderate or high dose estrogen should be informed that the 
adequacy of endometrial protection provided by micronised progesterone 
is uncertain. The use of 200 mg as a continuous preparation, and 300 mg as 
a sequential preparation, should be offered if using high dose estrogen or if 
unscheduled bleeding occurs with ultra-low to moderate dose estrogen. 
Levonorgestrel 52 mg intra-uterine device (LNG-IUD) 
Mirena® (52 mg LNG IUD) has a four-year license in the UK for progestogenic 
opposition of estrogen within HRT. The Food and Drug administration recommends 
use with a uterine depth less than or equal to 10 cm and NICE(28) advises against use if 
submucosal fibroids are more than 3 cm. 
Studies have shown all 52 mg LNG IUD offer sufficient endometrial protection 
against ultra-low to high dose estrogen for up to five years of use in both peri- and 
postmenopausal women.(29-33) As a result, it is common and safe practice to use the 
52 mg LNG IUD for five years within HRT regimens (outside manufacturer’s license). 
There are a paucity of data relating to endometrial protection when estrogen above 
high dose is used and whether additional progestogen is required. Women should be 
counselled about this and the limitations of ultrasound in assessing the endometrium 
if unscheduled bleeding occurs (with the higher likelihood that hysteroscopy may 
be required). If at 4 years of use, new unscheduled bleeding develops, a change of 52 
mg LNG IUD should be offered (if cancer exclusion tests are normal), particularly in 
women using over licensed estrogen dosages and in those with a BMI ≥ 40.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)15 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.There are insufficient data to guide whether a malpositioned 52 mg LNG IUD 
provides adequate endometrial protection when used as part of HRT. Discuss with 
the woman a 52 mg LNG IUD may need to be correctly positioned at the fundus 
for maximum effectiveness. In relation to contraceptive use, the FSRH suggest ‘ as a 
general guide any of the following findings would usually be an indication to suggest 
that the IUC is removed and replaced: IUC > 2 cm from the fundus; IUC within the cervical 
canal (fully or partially); or IUC user experiencing symptoms that may be related to 
malpositioned IUC (e.g. pain or bleeding) ’.(29) One study(34) reported an association with 
irregular endometrial suppression and breakthrough bleeding when a specially 
designed intracervical LNG-IUD was compared to fundal placement; until high-
quality studies assess efficacy for endometrial protection in HRT users, women who 
present with unscheduled bleeding and a malpositioned 52 mg LNG IUD should be 
offered alternate progestogens until IUD replacement.
Synthetic Progestogens
Synthetic progestogens such as NET, MPA, levonorgestrel and dydrogesterone, 
provide equivalent endometrial protection when the dose is in proportion to ultra-
low, low, standard or moderate dose estrogen (see Table 3).(27, 35, 36) There are limited 
data assessing optimal dose for endometrial protection when high dose estrogen is 
prescribed. 
Micronised progesterone (MP); dose and duration of use
MP can be used as an oral or vaginal (off-license) preparation. The Kronos Early 
Estrogen Prevention Study (KEEPs) and Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin 
Interventions trials (PEPI)(37, 38) compared sHRT (200 mg MP with standard dose 
estrogen) to placebo, over four years, and both reported equivalent endometrial 
cancer rates. The E3N cohort study(39) assessed endometrial cancer rates in 65,630 HRT 
users over ten years of whom 40% were taking oral MP; use for less than five years did 
not appear to increase risk (hazard ratio (HR) 1.39, 95% CI 0.99-1.97). 
There is limited evidence assessing the long-term endometrial protective effect (> 
5 years) when micronised progesterone is used as a continuous preparation and 
this should be considered a research priority. Although the European Prospective 
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study reported a two-fold association 
between micronised progesterone use and endometrial cancer, when compared with 
non-users (HR 2.42, 95% CI 1.53–3.83), the majority of participants used sequential, 
rather than continuous preparations, and duration of HRT was not adjusted for.(35) 
There are insufficient data to advise on endometrial cancer risk when micronised 
progesterone, at a dose used for low or standard dose estrogen, is used in 
combination with moderate or high dose estrogen. Until evidence relating to safety 
with moderate and high dose estrogen is available, a pragmatic approach needs 
to be considered, as the risk to breast tissue from increasing the progesterone dose 
is also unknown; the use of 200 mg as a continuous preparation and 300 mg as a 
sequential preparation should be offered if using high dose estrogen(24, 39-42) or, if 
unscheduled bleeding occurs with low to moderate dose estrogen (Table 3). This 
should be considered a research priority as high-quality outcomes may enable 
lower dosage use in women taking high-dose estrogen or, conversely, may stratify 
if women with risk factors for endometrial cancer (diabetes, raised BMI) should be 
offered increased dose micronised progesterone with lower estrogen dosages.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)16 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Unbalanced estrogen to progestogen dose 
British Menopause Society (BMS) guidance(25) recommends a progestogen dose in 
proportion to the estrogen dose in people who have a uterus, to reduce unscheduled 
bleeding and endometrial cancer risk.(20, 24, 25, 41) Table 3 summarises this section 
and outlines the progestogen dose that appears to provide adequate endometrial 
protection for different strengths of licensed estrogen dosages (ultra-low, low, 
standard, moderate and high). 
Table 3: Progestogen dose per licensed estrogen dose in the baseline 
population
Estrogen dose Micronised Progesterone Medroxy progesterone Norethisterone LNG-IUD
 continuous sequential continuous sequential continuous sequential (52mg)
Ultra/Low 100 mg 200 mg 2.5 mg 10 mg 5 mg* 5 mg* 
One – forStandard 100 mg 200 mg 2.5-5 mg 10 mg 5 mg* 5 mg* up to 5
Moderate 100 mg 200 mg 5 mg 10 mg 5 mg 5 mg years of
High 200 mg 300 mg 10 mg^ 20 mg^ 5 mg 5 mg use
 
* 1 mg provides endometrial protection for ultra-low to standard dose estrogen but the lowest stand-alone dose currently available in the UK is 
5 mg (off-license use of three noriday POP i.e 1.05 mg, could be considered if 5 mg is not tolerated). 
^ There is limited evidence in relation to optimal MPA dose with high dose estrogen; the advised dose is based on studies reporting 10 mg 
providing protection with up to moderate dose estrogen.
Oral versus vaginal (off-license) micronised progesterone(MP) 
A systematic review of 14 studies(24) assessed the impact, on endometrial histology, of 
using vaginal micronised progesterone. Of the five randomised controlled trials (RCTs) 
included, the comparator groups were 52 mg LNG-IUD, transdermal NET and oral MPA. 
Using vaginal micronised progesterone as either a sequential (200 mg for 12 days) 
or continuous preparation (100 mg / day), for three years, were sufficient to provide 
endometrial protection with standard or low-dose estrogen. There are insufficient data 
to advise on endometrial protection when vaginal MP is used 100 mg alternate days, 
100 mg as a sequential preparation,(24, 25, 41) or for more than three years.
A double-blind placebo-controlled trial with a follow-up of 4.8 years(43), reported that 
45 mg of vaginal MP used for 10 days of the month, in combination with low dose 
estradiol, resulted in higher rates of endometrial hyperplasia (12.7% vs 3.1%, p<0.001).
Histological outcomes in women presenting with unscheduled bleeding on HRT 
and a thickened endometrium on transvaginal ultrasound
• In the absence of individual risk factors for endometrial cancer, 
perimenopausal women taking sHRT, containing ultra-low to standard dose 
estrogen, who have unscheduled bleeding and a thickened endometrium 
should be counselled that endometrial hyperplasia and cancer risk appears 
lower than in women with postmenopausal bleeding. The continuing need 
for sHRT should be regularly assessed as risk increases with duration of use 
(more than 5 years).BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)17 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.• In the absence of individual risk factors for endometrial cancer, 
postmenopausal women taking ccHRT, containing low or standard dose 
estrogen, who have unscheduled bleeding and a thickened endometrium 
should be counselled that endometrial hyperplasia and cancer risk appears 
lower than women with postmenopausal bleeding. However, the continuing 
need for long-term ccHRT should be regularly assessed as risk appears to 
increase with duration of use (more than 5 years). 
• Women should be counselled that risk of endometrial cancer with moderate 
or high dose estrogen plus micronised progesterone is unknown in the 
presence of unscheduled bleeding.
There are limited data on the rates of endometrial cancer in women who present 
with unscheduled bleeding on HRT. Endometrial outcomes in women with a 
thickened endometrium and unscheduled bleeding are summarised in Table 4 (1, 44-
49) – the studies relating to HRT users, although adjusting for confounders such as 
BMI / diabetes, included women using standard dose estrogen, for less than 5 years, 
often in combination with a daily synthetic progestogen and were not adequately 
powered precluding a more robust evaluation of the relative risks of endometrial 
cancer. Where reported, an endometrial thickness of 5 mm or more was used for both 
ccHRT and sHRT. There are limited data assessing outcomes with moderate or high 
dose estrogen (particularly in perimenopausal women who may have intermittent 
endogenous ovarian activity), micronised progesterone or use of ccHRT for more 
than five years – these areas should be considered research priorities.
Table 4: Histological outcomes in women taking standard dose estrogen who 
have unscheduled bleeding and a thickened endometrium on ultrasound scan 
 ccHRT sHRT PMB
Atrophy / Inactive 38-66%* 58%^ 52%
Polyp 6.8-31% 22% 9%
Hyperplasia 1-2% 2.5-16% 11%
Endometrial Cancer 1.3-2% 5% 9%
* The majority of endometrial biopsies in women taking ccHRT are reported as inactive endometrium.
^ The majority of endometrial biopsies in women taking sHRT are reported as weakly proliferative.
These data suggest that over half the women who present with unscheduled 
bleeding and a thickened endometrium will have a normal biopsy and up to 30% will 
have a polyp.(50) 
Endometrial hyperplasia and cancer risk in users of ccHRT containing standard 
dose estrogen appears lower than non-users with PMB. However, risk of diagnosing 
endometrial cancer in women with unscheduled bleeding on ccHRT may increase 
with duration of use; 4:1000 with up to three years use, 9:1000 with 4-6 years use and 
19:1000 with more than six years use.(1) Endometrial cancer risk in women using sHRT 
appears lower than non-users with PMB, but higher than users of ccHRT; risk may 
relate to total duration of sHRT use, progestogen dose and / or total number of days 
in the month of progestogen use – it is important to ascertain these factors when 
discussing and stratifying risk.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)18 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Section 3: When to investigate unscheduled bleeding on HRT 
• In the absence of risk factors for endometrial cancer, offer adjustments in 
the progestogen or HRT preparation for 6 months in total, if unscheduled 
bleeding a) occurs within six months of starting HRT or b) is persisting three 
months after a change in HRT dose or preparation. 
• If unscheduled bleeding continues in low-risk women, after six months of 
adjustments, discuss an urgent ultrasound (within six weeks) versus weaning 
off HRT and consideration of non-hormonal alternatives (to avoid invasive 
investigations) – according to the woman’s preference. 
• Offer an urgent TVS (within 6 weeks) if the first presentation with bleeding 
occurs more than six months after initiating, or three months after changing, 
the HRT preparation.
• Offer an urgent TVS (within 6 weeks), irrespective of interval since starting, 
or changing, HRT preparations if a) bleeding is prolonged / heavy or, b) there 
are 2 minor risk factors for endometrial cancer.
• Offer an urgent suspicion of cancer pathway (USCP) referral to women with 
one major or three minor risk factors for endometrial cancer – irrespective 
of bleeding type or interval since starting or changing HRT preparations. 
Adjustments to the progestogen, or stopping HRT, should be offered whilst 
awaiting assessment.
Which bleeding patterns are considered normal for HRT
It is important when assessing and counselling women who present with 
bleeding on HRT, to understand what is normal for the preparation they are taking. 
Unscheduled bleeding within the first six months of starting any type of HRT occurs 
in up to 40% of women.(51) 
Sequential or cyclical HRT (sHRT) 
This preparation is prescribed for women who are still having periods in the 12 
months preceding the start of HRT (peri-menopausal). Estrogen is used every day 
and a progestogen is given for 10-14 days of the month (dependent upon the type 
prescribed). 90% of women on this preparation will have a cyclical bleed (usually 
at the end of the progestogen phase), lasting 3-7 days which is generally lighter 
than premenopausal menstruation. Prolonged or heavy withdrawal bleeding is not 
normal, nor is persistent (almost daily) bleeding. 
Continuous combined HRT (ccHRT)
This preparation is recommended for women who have had amenorrhoea for 12 
months before starting HRT (including women on contraception or post-ablation). 
Women are expected to be amenorrhoeic on this preparation six months after 
initiation.(25, 51) ccHRT is associated with less unscheduled bleeding than sHRT in 
postmenopausal women.(21, 52-54) If given to perimenopausal women who still have 
menstrual cycles, endogenous follicular activity can lead to irregular bleeding.
Triaging unscheduled bleeding episodes
Once the initial assessment, as outlined in Section 1, has been completed, the 
bleeding pattern and underlying individual risk factors for endometrial cancer 
need to be considered to enable a rational basis for triaging women to either a) 
conservative management (continue with HRT +/- adjust the current preparation) or 
b) refer for investigations (primary care direct access or gynaecological services). BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)19 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Table 5 defines the clinical pathways for assessment of women with unscheduled 
bleeding, detailing the intervals in which investigations should be offered and by 
which health care provider. These definitions and time-frames are adapted from 
the criteria recommended in the NICE guideline ‘Suspected cancer: recognition and 
referral (NG12)’ .(55) While the time-frames for referral should remain standardised, 
the model of care in terms of referral pathway, to reduce the burden on the USCP , 
will vary according to local infrastructure. For example, if resources within primary 
care services cannot provide direct access urgent ultrasound then development of 
an urgent unscheduled bleeding clinic within the gynaecological services could be 
considered. Or, if there is a paucity of experience at adjusting HRT regimens, consider 
gynaecological advice and guidance platforms.
Table 5: Clinical pathways and time-frames for investigating unscheduled 
bleeding on HRT 
Interval in which a 
review or investigation 
should be completed
PATHWAY Non-urgent Urgent USCP
Direct Access: 
The assessment and 
investigation requests are 
completed through primary 
care who retain clinical 
responsibility throughout, 
including acting on the result. Within 12 weeks
No risk factors for 
endometrial cancerWithin 6 weeks 
< 3% risk of endometrial 
cancer
Gynaecological service: 
Seen within a 
gynaecological service e.g 
one-stop, unscheduled 
bleeding or hysteroscopy 
clinic. The service takes the 
responsibility for clinical 
management.Within 6 weeks 
< 3% risk of endometrial 
cancer
Urgent Suspicion of 
Cancer (USCP):
Seen within a fast-track 
gynaecological service (e.g. 
oncology, rapid-access one 
stop or hysteroscopy clinic), 
within the national targets in 
England, Wales or Scotland 
for suspected cancer 
referrals. The service takes 
the responsibility for clinical 
management.Within 2 weeks
> 3% risk of endometrial 
cancerBMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)20 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.When to manage conservatively and offer adjustments to the HRT
The following conservative management strategies can be offered through primary 
care (or an unscheduled bleeding service) for women with no risk factors for 
endometrial cancer , who have had a thorough assessment as outlined in Section 1 
and who do not report heavy, prolonged or daily bleeding. 
• Unscheduled bleeding which occurs within 6 months of initiating either 
ccHRT or sHRT: 
Offer an adjustment in the progestogen or preparation (such as vaginal 
estrogen if vulvovaginal atrophy is present (see Section 5)), totalling six months 
of adjustments after the initial presentation. Ensure that the progestogen is in 
balance with the estrogen dose (see Appendix 1).
• Unscheduled bleeding continuing 3 months after a change in HRT dose or 
preparation:
 If the HRT preparation is changed (such as from a pill to a patch), or the dose is 
increased, ensure the progestogen is in proportion. If unscheduled bleeding is 
occurring three months after this change, offer adjustments to the preparation 
(see Section 5) for six months in total. 
If unscheduled bleeding continues after six months of adjustments, offer an urgent 
(within 6 weeks) direct access transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) with continued changes 
to the progestogen component or, weaning off HRT and consideration of non-
hormonal alternatives (if there is a preference to avoid invasive investigations). 
When to refer for an ultrasound
Urgent pathway (within 6 weeks):
For women who meet the following criteria, offer a direct access urgent TVS (or 
urgent gynaecological service review – dependent upon local resources) versus 
weaning off HRT and consideration of non-hormonal alternatives (to avoid invasive 
investigations). If continuing HRT and attending for ultrasound is the woman’s 
preference, continue to make changes to the progestogen component whilst 
awaiting investigation. 
• Within any time-frame of starting ccHRT / sHRT presenting with:
— Prolonged withdrawal bleeds (more than 7 days), and / or
— Heavy bleeding (flooding and / or clots), and / or
— Persistent bleeding, even light, which occurs most days for 4 weeks or more, 
and / or
— Two minor risk factors for endometrial cancer
• More than six months after starting HRT and:
— Reports bleeding with ccHRT after an interval of amenorrhoea
— Develops unscheduled bleeding on sHRT having had prior, light regular 
withdrawal bleeds
If the endometrial thickness is above the recommended range (> 4 mm if ccHRT 
and > 7 mm if sHRT – see Section 4), refer to the USCP . If the endometrium is within 
recommended ultrasound limits, offer HRT adjustments (see section 5) and if 
unscheduled bleeding persists six months after these changes, or the bleeding 
increases in intensity or frequency during the six months of adjustments, recommend 
referral to the USCP . BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)21 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Urgent Suspicion of Cancer Pathway: 
Refer women with unscheduled bleeding and one major, or three minor, risk factors 
(Table 1) to the USCP irrespective of bleeding pattern or interval since starting, or 
changing, the HRT preparation. 
Can HRT be continued if referring for urgent or USCP assessment 
• If women are referred for histological assessment of the endometrium following 
ultrasound, and HRT is continued, it will not affect the accuracy of the pathological 
assessment, but interpretation would be aided by providing information to the 
histopathologist on the type of HRT regimen (such as sHRT, ccHRT, 52 mg LNG-IUD) 
and additional contraceptives such as the copper IUD or progestogen-only pill.
• In women with no risk factors for cancer who are offered TVS on an urgent 
pathway, discuss ongoing adjustments to the progestogen whilst awaiting 
investigation.
• If there is a strong preference to avoid ultrasound, and there are no risk factors for 
endometrial cancer, discuss weaning off HRT (i.e. reduction in dose over weeks 
until cessation, rather than an abrupt stop) and offer non-hormonal options to 
manage symptoms. 
— If bleeding ceases at a 4 week follow-up, and continuing without HRT is 
acceptable, then no further investigations are required.
— If the bleeding ceases at a 4-week follow-up and there is a preference to restart 
HRT, offer adjustments in HRT for six months. If the bleeding becomes heavy 
/ prolonged / persistent, or continues after the six months of adjustments, 
recommend urgent ultrasound.
— If bleeding continues despite stopping HRT, recommend an USCP referral.
• If an USCP referral is recommended and acceptable, discuss the advantage of 
continuing HRT (ongoing menopausal symptom control) versus the potential 
disadvantage of exacerbating an estrogen driven endometrial cancer.
• If an USCP referral is recommended, and investigations are declined, recommend 
weaning off HRT and offer non-hormonal alternatives. Offer follow-up at 4 weeks; 
recommend USCP referral if bleeding continues on stopping HRT. If bleeding 
ceases and there is a preference to restart HRT, offer adjustments for three months 
before recommending a TVS on an urgent pathway if bleeding is continuing after 
this interval.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)22 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Section 4: How should unscheduled bleeding be investigated
This chapter outlines evidence relating to initial investigations for unscheduled 
bleeding in women who meet the referral criteria in Section 3. Recommendations for 
method of endometrial assessment in women who have a thickened endometrium 
on TVS, and management options relating to subsequent histological outcomes, 
are discussed. Appendix 2 contains suggested ultrasound reporting criteria and 
Appendix 3 summarises the ultrasound and histological outcome recommendations 
made in this section.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound provides high diagnostic accuracy as a first line investigation for women 
who present with postmenopausal bleeding (PMB)(56-60) and is more acceptable to 
women than hysteroscopy or biopsy.(61, 62) Transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) is more 
accurate than transabdominal (TAS) with double-layer endometrial thickness (ET) 
measured at the point of maximal width.(57) Evidence in relation to the sensitivity of 
TVS in predicting cancer risk in women with unscheduled bleeding on HRT is scarce, 
as large studies assessing this in women with PMB often exclude HRT users or do not 
provide subgroup analyses of HRT preparation or dose.
Endometrial measurements which should determine further investigations
• Women with unscheduled bleeding, in the presence of a uniform 
endometrium which is fully visualised, and measures ≤ 4 mm with ccHRT or ≤ 
7 mm with sHRT, can be reassured that the risk of endometrial cancer is low. 
Offer HRT adjustments for 6 months and then offer endometrial assessment, 
on an urgent pathway, if bleeding becomes persistent or heavy during the 6 
months or, is continuing after this interval of adjustments.
• Women with a thickened endometrium on TVS (> 4 mm for ccHRT or > 7 
mm for sHRT) should be offered referral to the urgent suspicion of cancer 
pathway (USCP) for endometrial assessment (biopsy and / or hysteroscopy). 
• When the entire endometrium cannot be visualised on TVS, but the area 
measured is within normal ultrasound limits, offer urgent endometrial 
assessment (within 6 weeks). 
• In the absence of unscheduled bleeding, women with an endometrium ≥ 10 
mm should be offered endometrial assessment – consider endometrial blind 
biopsy if direct access hysteroscopy is not acceptable or feasible (within unit 
resources). If major risk factors for endometrial cancer are present, refer on 
an USCP and, in their absence, refer on an urgent pathway (within six weeks).
• In the absence of unscheduled bleeding, women who have one major or two 
minor risk factors for endometrial cancer, and an incidental ET > 4 mm on 
ccHRT or > 7 mm on sHRT, should be offered endometrial assessment on a 
USCP .BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)23 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Continuous combined preparations 
In studies of women with PMB, TVS ET cut offs of 3 mm, 4 mm and 5 mm are reported 
to have a sensitivity of 98%, 95% and 90% respectively for predicting endometrial 
cancer.(56-60) Based on a 26% (95% CI 25-27%) prevalence (pre-test) probability of 
endometrial disease (carcinoma and hyperplasia) in women with PMB, the post-test 
probability after a negative scan is reduced to 2.4% (95% CI 1.3–3.9%) when an ET 
of ≤ 4 mm is used and 5.0% (95% CI 2.9–9.1%) when ≤ 5 mm is used.(58) TVS ET is less 
accurate at predicting endometrial cancer in Black women because of the higher 
prevalence of fibroids and non-endometrioid histologic subtypes, when compared 
with Caucasian women; sensitivity 47.5% vs 97.9% for an ET > 4 mm and of 43.7% vs 
86% for an ET > 5 mm.(63) A cut-off of > 5 mm would reduce the number of women 
who are referred for further invasive investigations but, when compared to > 4 mm, 
it would reduce the sensitivity and negative predictive value (NPV) of TVS ET for 
endometrial cancer detection in all women.(63-65) 
Women taking ccHRT who have unscheduled bleeding and a ET > 4 mm, should 
currently be managed in a similar way to non-users who present with PMB(66); 
referral to the USCP for endometrial assessment. Blind endometrial biopsy is not 
recommended if the ET is within normal limits as more than two-thirds will have an 
insufficient sample.(67) High quality data, in cHRT users, which assesses endometrial 
pathology in relation to ET should be a research priority as higher ET cut-offs, and 
stratification to an urgent pathway, or prolonged conservative management, may be 
enabled dependent upon estrogen dose, duration of HRT use and progestogen type. 
Sequential (cyclical) preparations 
Studies using standard dose estrogen with 12 days of 200 mg micronised 
progesterone or 10 days of 10 mg MPA report a high NPV (99%) for endometrial 
cancer when an ET of 7 mm or less is visualised.(68, 69) Until high quality evidence 
assesses ultrasonographic variation at different intervals in the cycle (such as 
mid-cycle and immediately after the withdrawal bleed), and correlates this with 
histological outcomes, women taking sHRT who have unscheduled bleeding and an 
ET of > 7mm should be offered referral to the USCP for endometrial assessment. 
Incomplete visualisation of the entire endometrium
Unsatisfactory ultrasound examinations, where the view of the endometrium is 
limited (IUD, fibroids, prior ablation, TAS as TVS declined or not appropriate e.g. 
transgender women who are not sexually active or those with a prior history of 
assault), have been associated with higher rates of endometrial hyperplasia (27% 
vs 7%).(63, 69) Offer an urgent (within 6 weeks) endometrial assessment – discuss 
hysteroscopy (unit resources dependent) over blind biopsy if the endometrium is 
distorted by fibroids – versus weaning off HRT and consideration of non-hormonal 
alternatives (to avoid invasive investigations). 
Recurrent unscheduled bleeding with a normal endometrial profile
Women who have a normal ET on TVS (≤ 4 mm with ccHRT or ≤ 7 mm with sHRT) but 
recurrent bleeding that is ongoing six months after adjustments in the progestogen 
should be offered endometrial assessment on an urgent pathway. If the bleeding 
increases in intensity or frequency – persistent, almost daily bleeding, prolonged 
withdrawal bleeds or flooding – referral should be recommended prior to the six BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)24 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.months. Discuss hysteroscopy, over blind biopsy (dependent upon unit resources), 
as it facilitates a ‘see and treat’ approach, as more than one third of women with 
recurrent unscheduled bleeding will have polyps on assessment.(1, 44-46, 50) 
Fluid in the endometrial cavity but a normal endometrial thickness
The risk of cancer in postmenopausal women with intracavity fluid appears to be 
increased in the presence of genital symptoms (vaginal discharge, abnormal vaginal 
bleeding), a history of colorectal cancer or an abnormal TVS finding (focal cavity 
lesions e.g. polyps).(70) The decision for endometrial evaluation, in the presence of 
endometrial fluid and a normal ET, should be based upon symptoms and cancer risk 
factors (Table 1) – as is the case in women without intracavity fluid. 
Asymptomatic (no unscheduled bleeding) with an incidental thickened 
endometrium 
The diagnostic value of TVS ET in asymptomatic postmenopausal women for 
endometrial cancer is contentious; the diagnostic yield (and prevalence) of 
premalignant and malignant endometrial cells is lower than in women who report 
bleeding (< 1% vs 5%).(71-73) A systematic review concluded that the use of TVS ET as 
a screening test for endometrial cancer could not be justified because of its relatively 
poor predictive ability and the low prevalence; the UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian 
Cancer Screening (UKCTOCs)(72) advise a TVS ET threshold value > 10 mm to minimise 
unnecessary biopsies (high specificity) whilst facilitating the diagnosis of endometrial 
cancer (moderate sensitivity). In the absence of robust accuracy data, the UKCTOCs 
and British Gynaecological Cancer Society (BGCS) 10 mm threshold is recommended 
in women taking HRT.(72, 74) Discuss hysteroscopy as a first line investigation, on 
an urgent pathway, due to the high prevalence of endometrial polyps with a 
substantially thickened endometrium(50, 75) or offer endometrial biopsy if hysteroscopy 
is not acceptable or feasible (within unit resources).
Asymptomatic women with an ET of < 10 mm, who have no major risk factors for 
endometrial cancer, can be offered adjustments in their progestogen. Only offer 
endometrial sampling, on an urgent pathway, if unscheduled bleeding occurs.(66) 
Asymptomatic women who have one major or two minor risk factors for endometrial 
cancer, and an ET > 4 mm on ccHRT or > 7 mm on sHRT, should be offered 
endometrial assessment on an USCP(14, 15) – adjustments to the progestogen should 
be offered at the time of referral.
Endometrial assessment options if a thickened endometrium on TVS
• Offer endometrial assessment if unscheduled bleeding and a thickened 
endometrium on ultrasound. A blind outpatient endometrial biopsy can be 
performed or, hysteroscopy with endometrial sampling, if acceptable to the 
woman and within unit resources
Blind outpatient endometrial biopsy, in comparison to hysteroscopy, is cost-effective 
and quicker to achieve.(64) A systematic review reported that in postmenopausal 
women who had an adequate pipelle biopsy, the post-test probability of cancer 
being present with a positive result was 81.7% (95% CI 59.7 – 92.9%) and 0.9% (95% 
CI 0.4 – 2.4%) with a negative result.(10) The failure rate of blind ‘pipelle’ endometrial 
biopsy, in postmenopausal women, is 12% and inadequate rates are 22%. In women 
taking HRT these proportions may be lower owing to reduced rates of atrophic BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)25 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.changes. They concluded that ‘a positive test result is more accurate for ruling in 
disease than a negative test result is for ruling it out’ , indicating that if hysteroscopy is 
not possible as a first line investigation, it should be offered, if within unit resources 
and dependent upon acceptability to the woman, when outpatient biopsy is 
inadequate or if recurrent episodes occur after a normal blind biopsy and appropriate 
adjustments in the progestogen.(50, 76)
Hysteroscopy has a lower failure rate (3.4%) compared to blind endometrial sampling 
in postmenopausal women. The post-test cancer probability is 71.8% after a positive 
result and 0.6% with a negative result; sensitivity 86.4% and specificity 99.2%.(10) 
Removing focal lesions like polyps, as part of a ‘see-and-treat’ procedure, may improve 
patient experience by reducing the total number of appointments and procedures 
but has to be tempered with available resources and patient choice. A randomised 
control trial reported that half of the women who present with PMB, a TVS ET ≥ 4 
mm and a subsequent negative blind endometrial biopsy will have an endometrial 
polyp and of these polyps, 6% contain endometrial cancer or atypical endometrial 
hyperplasia.(50) However, removal of polyps in the PMB population does not appear 
to reduce bleeding episodes(50) and there is a lack of evidence relating to efficacy with 
recurrent unscheduled bleeding episodes. 
Recommendations for management according to endometrial histology
• If blind endometrial biopsy is reported as normal, offer reassurance and 
adjustments in the progestogen for 3 months. If unscheduled bleeding 
persists after this interval, or becomes heavy / prolonged, offer hysteroscopic 
assessment on an urgent pathway (within six weeks).
• In the presence of a normal biopsy and hysteroscopy, discuss adjustments 
in the progestogen and provide reassurance for six months. If unscheduled 
bleeding persists after this interval, or becomes heavy / prolonged, offer a 
repeat TVS on an urgent pathway.
• A hysteroscopy should be offered, on an urgent pathway (within six weeks), 
in the presence of a thickened ET on TVS and a blind biopsy which is reported 
as an ‘insufficient sample’ . 
• If proliferative endometrium is reported on blind biopsy and there are risk 
factors for endometrial cancer (1 major or 2 minor) and the preparation used 
is ccHRT, offer hysteroscopy. 
• If hyperplasia with atypia or endometrial cancer is reported, advise weaning 
off HRT, discuss non-hormonal alternatives and refer to gynaecology 
oncology on an USCP . 
In the presence of an insufficient sample on blind biopsy, hysteroscopy (outpatient 
or daycase) should be discussed. Biopsies with insufficient tissue for diagnosis can be 
categorised as ‘atrophic’ (inactive), and the woman reassured, if the result is consistent 
with the hysteroscopic appearance of the endometrium.(77) If an insufficient sample 
is obtained, and is inconsistent with the hysteroscopic endometrial appearance, a 
repeat hysteroscopy should be offered, considering different pain control options 
(regional or general anaesthetic) to potentially facilitate an increased endometrial 
tissue yield. BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)26 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.If recommendations for endometrial assessment are offered, based on criteria in 
sections 3 and 4, and there is a preference to avoid biopsy and / or hysteroscopy, 
recommend weaning off HRT and offer non-hormonal alternatives; offer follow-up at 
4 weeks and if bleeding continues after stopping HRT rediscuss the available options. 
If bleeding ceases, and continuing without HRT is acceptable, then no further 
investigations are required. If the bleeding ceases at a 4-week follow-up and there is a 
preference to restart HRT, offer adjustments in HRT for three months. If the bleeding 
becomes heavy / prolonged / persistent, or continues after the three months of 
adjustments, recommend urgent endometrial assessment and cessation of HRT if 
cancer exclusion tests cannot be completed.
In the absence of evidence relating to women with unscheduled bleeding but, in line 
with the recommendations in the (archived) SIGN PMB Guideline(78), women who have a 
normal hysteroscopy and biopsy can be reassured for six months after this outcome even 
if unscheduled bleeding continues. Adjustments to the progestogen, and management 
strategies to reduce cancer risk factors such as diabetes and BMI (if > 30) should be offered 
to reduce the likelihood of recurrent episodes. Reassessment (TVS within 6 weeks) should 
be offered before six months if the nature of the bleeding changes e.g. heavier or more 
persistent. In the absence of evidence relating to women with unscheduled bleeding 
but, in line with expert opinion, if a blind endometrial biopsy without concomitant 
hysteroscopic assessment is reported as normal, reassurance can be provided for three 
months; studies assessing whether this interval can be increased should be a research 
priority. If bleeding is ongoing, despite adjustments in the progestogen, hysteroscopic 
assessment should be offered on an urgent pathway. Reassessment before three months 
should be offered if the nature of the bleeding changes e.g. heavier or more persistent.
If there is proliferative endometrium reported on blind biopsy, there are risk factors 
for endometrial cancer (one major or two minor) and the preparation used is ccHRT, 
offer hysteroscopy to enable targeted assessment of the whole endometrium. If the 
hysteroscopy is normal but unscheduled bleeding continues despite six months of 
adjustment in progestogen dose or type, offer repeat endometrial assessment. If 
proliferation is reported on blind endometrial biopsy in women using sHRT or, there are no 
risk factors for endometrial cancer and using ccHRT, offer adjustments in the progestogen 
for six months; if bleeding persists after this interval, or the nature of the bleeding changes 
e.g. heavier or more persistent prior to the six months, offer hysteroscopic assessment. 
If the endometrial biopsy reports hyperplasia without atypia, manage in line with the 
RCOG/BSGE Green-top Guideline No. 67 Management of Endometrial Hyperplasia:(79)
— Women taking a sequential preparation who wish to continue HRT (having been 
offered, and declined, non-hormonal alternatives), should be advised to change to 
ccHRT – a daily progestogen – offering the 52 mg LNG-IUD first-line or oral high-dose 
NET / MPA (if the LNG-IUD is not acceptable). Discuss a reduction to standard dose 
estrogen, if using moderate or high-dose, whilst awaiting follow-up biopsy results.
— Women taking ccHRT should have their need to continue HRT reviewed. Discuss 
weaning off HRT and starting non-hormonal alternatives versus use of a 52 mg LNG-
IUD as a source of progestogen replacement. If a 52 mg LNG-IUD is already in-situ, 
and within the recommended interval of use, explain the limitations of the available 
evidence in optimising progestogens to lead to reversal of hyperplasia if HRT is 
continued; if weaning off HRT and starting non-hormonal options is not acceptable, 
consider the pros and cons of a hysterectomy.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)27 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Section 5: Adjusting HRT to reduce unscheduled bleeding episodes
Does progestogen type affect rates of unscheduled bleeding?
Levonorgestrel 52 mg intra-uterine device (LNG-IUD) 
The 52 mg LNG-IUD reduces systemic progestogenic adverse effects, is a licensed 
contraceptive, can reduce polyp formation and induce atrophic changes. Non-
proliferative endometrium is reported on histology in 89.5% at 12 months, increasing 
to 94.8% at two years and 97.5% at five years.(80-83) 
Cumulative amenorrhoea with moderate and high dose estrogen has not been 
assessed in any of the pivotal studies. In postmenopausal women taking standard 
dose estrogen, amenorrhoea rates at 12 months with either a 52 mg LNG-IUD, 100 
mg daily oral micronised progesterone (MP) or 100 mg vaginal MP are reported as 
80%, 67% and 53% respectively.(84, 85) 
In perimenopausal women taking standard dose estrogen with either the 52 mg LNG-
IUD or NET, irregular spotting is higher in the 52 mg LNG-IUD group at 3 months (33 vs 
10%) but at 12 months there is no reported difference (80% amenorrhoea).(83) When 
sequential oral MPA (5 mg) was compared to the 52 mg LNG-IUD, proliferation and 
irregular spotting, after 12 months use was higher in the MPA users (38% vs 0%).(86) 
Tibolone 
This oral preparation has estrogenic, progestogenic and androgenic effects; it should 
be considered ccHRT. A RCT of 3240 women reported, at 12 months, higher rates of 
amenorrhoea (78.7%) in those using tibolone when compared to use of standard 
dose estrogen with 2.5 mg/day MPA (44.9%).(87) This finding, and its equivocal 
endometrial safety profile, has been corroborated in other large RCTs.(36) Use of 
tibolone, however, should be cautioned in women over 60 due to the increased risk 
of cerebrovascular events.
Synthetic progestogens
Higher rates of cumulative amenorrhoea, when compared to micronised 
progesterone (MP), have been reported in preparations which contain synthetic 
progestogens (NET, MPA, levonorgestrel) as they are less rapidly metabolised and 
provide high oral bioavailability.(53, 88) Although breast cancer risk may be marginally 
higher with these preparations, in comparison to MP , the pros and cons of use should 
be discussed in women with recurrent unscheduled bleeding.
Micronised progesterone (MP)
Cohort studies have assessed rates of atrophy and proliferation in women taking oral 
MP . In women using ccHRT (standard dose estrogen), atrophic/inactive endometrial 
changes were reported in 100% of women using 200 mg/day(89) and 56.4% if using 
100 mg for 25 of 28 days.(90) In women using sHRT, 12 days of 200 mg MP with low to 
standard dose estrogen, atrophy rates were 20.8% – 56%(91, 92) and proliferation 31%.
(92) Cumulative amenorrhoea rates with moderate or high dose estrogen have not 
been reported.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)28 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Oral bioavailability can be improved if given with food, but this also affects the 
adverse effect profile (such as sedation and progestogenic tolerance). Whether 
this improves episodes of unscheduled bleeding is unclear. In comparison to 
dydrogesterone, there are some data to suggest MP may have a more favourable 
bleeding profile.(88)
Does route of HRT (oral, transdermal, vaginal) affect bleeding profile?
Transdermal versus oral preparations
A systematic review of 45 studies compared bleeding profiles over one year in 
women taking ccHRT as an oral versus transdermal preparation. By three months, 
amenorrhoea was noted in 65-91% of those taking oral preparations and in 40-
65% of those taking transdermal preparations. Cumulative amenorrhoea over 12 
months was lower in the transdermal preparations (9-27%), when compared to oral 
preparations (18-61%), irrespective of the constituents.(93)
As perimenopausal women have higher rates of unscheduled bleeding and 
proliferation on biopsy, than postmenopausal women,(94, 95) an oral preparation (if 
no risk factors for thrombosis), could be offered as either, a first-line therapy or, to 
women whose initial preference was for transdermal but have unscheduled bleeding 
episodes despite adjustments.
Vaginal versus oral micronised progesterone (MP) 
There is no evidence to provide recommendations on whether vaginal MP reduces 
unscheduled bleeding episodes compared to oral use or when compared to other 
progestogens. It would, however, be reasonable to trial this (off-license) over three 
months to assess the impact in women who cannot tolerate other progestogens. 
Reducing recurrent episodes of unscheduled bleeding
Although unscheduled bleeding on HRT is common, there are few studies reporting 
on interventions that reduce recurrent episodes. The suggestions outlined in this 
section are based on the available evidence and clinical experience; see summary in 
Table 6.
These changes can be instituted in primary care settings (GP practices or community 
women’s health ‘hubs’), following queries to gynaecology advice and guidance 
platforms or through secondary care unscheduled bleeding, hysteroscopy or USCP 
clinics.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)29 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Table 6: Recommendations for reducing and managing unscheduled bleeding 
on HRT
Problem Potential adjustments
General Principles • Assess compliance + / – order of pills or patches if using sHRT
 • At initiation of HRT, consider starting with a low dose preparation
 • At initiation of HRT, offer a sequential preparation if women are still 
menstruating and < 55
 • Time the start of sHRT to their natural cycle
 • Offer ccHRT if a) initiating HRT and are postmenopausal or 
b) have been using sHRT for 5 years and are aged more than 50.
 • Offer the 52 mg LNG-IUD, if appropriate, to women initiating HRT, 
particularly if contraception is also required.
 • Offer change of 52 mg LNG IUD if new onset unscheduled bleeding at 
4 years of use and investigations are normal (particularly if BMI ≥ 40)
 • Offer vaginal estrogen if atrophic findings on examination.
Poor compliance of • Change to a combined patch
non-combined • Change to a combined oral preparation – consider one containing
preparations micronised progesterone (MP) if synthetic progestogens not acceptable
 • Take MP at the same time as applying the daily gel
 • Offer the 52 mg LNG-IUD.
Submucosal / • Offer the 52 mg LNG-IUD (if submucosal < 3cm and cavity < 10 cm)
intramural fibroids • Trial an increase in the MP dose
 • Switch to a synthetic progestogen or give additional progestogens
 • Consider resection if submucosal and progestogen adjustments are not 
acceptable or prevents LNG-IUD insertion
 • Reduce to a lower dose estrogen preparation and supplement with 
non-hormonal options if required.
BMI ≥ 30 • Offer weight management strategies
 • Offer the 52 mg LNG-IUD
 • Increase MP to 200 mg continuous or 300 mg sequential
 • Reduce to a lower dose estrogen preparation and supplement with 
non-hormonal options if required.
Perimenopausal and • Desogestrel can suppress endogenous ovarian activity
unscheduled bleeding • If < 50 and low thrombotic (VTE) risk consider switching HRT to a COC
with sHRT • Change to an oral preparation (if BMI < 30 and low risk of VTE)
 • Offer the 52 mg LNG-IUD
 • Increase the MP dose or change to a synthetic progestogen
 • 3-month trial of an additional progestogen on top of the current 
preparation
 • Reduce the estrogen dose and offer non-hormonal alternatives.
Unscheduled bleeding • Change to an oral preparation (if BMI < 30 and low risk of VTE)
with ccHRT • Offer the 52 mg LNG-IUD
 • Increase the MP dose or change to a synthetic progestogen
 • 3-month trial of an additional progestogen on top of the current 
preparation (including women already using a 52 mg LNG IUD)
 • Consider a 6-month trial of sHRT if recently postmenopausal
 • Reduce the estrogen dose and offer non-hormonal alternatives.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)30 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Basic principles
• Ensure compliance; would a combined patch, changed twice weekly, or a daily 
pill be easier than a separate estrogen and progestogen component. Consider 
calendar or phone reminders to enable progestogen component adherence in a 
sequential preparation.
• Assess understanding of how to use products, i.e. taking correct order of pills or patches 
if a sequential preparation and how / where they are applying topical products.
• Ensure the progestogen dose is proportionate to the estrogen dose (See Appendix 1).
• Ensure the correct preparation: sHRT if perimenopausal and ccHRT if menopausal/
prior ablation/amenorrhoea with contraceptive.
• Lower dose HRT achieves greater rates of amenorrhoea and if women have mild 
symptoms, this should be considered when initiating sHRT or ccHRT. 
• Assess lifestyle factors – offer weight loss strategies and support if a raised BMI (≥ 
30) and optimise medical comorbidities.
• Offer vaginal estrogens and/or moisturisers if evidence of localised atrophic 
changes on the vulva and/or vagina.
• Offer all women with a uterus the 52 mg LNG-IUD at the initial HRT consultation 
if appropriate (may not be suitable if uterine malformation, submucosal fibroids 
> 3 cm, history of trauma, endometrial ablation). In particular, counsel women 
who have existing endometrial cancer risk factors (Table 1) about use as the 
progestogenic component.
• Assess contraceptive requirements to reduce unplanned pregnancies.
Managing unscheduled bleeding with sequential preparations (sHRT)
• Irregular bleeding is more common in perimenopausal than pre-menopausal 
women. Unlike contraceptives, HRT will not suppress endogenous ovarian 
activity. Ways to manage this include:
 — Timing the start of a sequential preparation to their natural cycle, i.e. starting 
the estrogen component on day 1 of their period and the progestogen on day 
15 for a 28-day cycle or day 21 for a 35-day cycle. This facilitates the withdrawal 
bleed and their natural cycle bleed occuring at the same time. 
 — Offer desogestrel in addition to HRT. There are a lack of safety data relating 
to endometrial safety with 75 microgram desogestrel in conjunction with 
estrogen replacement; although some studies have reported safety with 
desogestrel 150 micrograms, it is not currently licensed for this use. 
 — Consider a combined oral contraceptive (COC) in women < 50 who are at low 
risk of thrombosis(9) and require contraceptive. Options which contain estradiol 
can provide good symptom control in perimenopausal women. 
• In women using a progestogen separate to the estrogen i.e. non-combined 
preparations, discuss using the progestogen ‘two weeks on and two weeks off’ (rather 
than 10-12 days of the month) to reduce prescribing and administration errors.
• Oral preparations may achieve greater cumulative rates of amenorrhoea than 
transdermal; women using sHRT should be < 55 and if low risk for thrombosis this 
change, in itself, may reduce irregular bleeding.
• Increasing the progestogen dose or changing the progestogen type can be beneficial:
 — Increase oral micronised progesterone (MP) to 300 mg for 14 days of the month(24, 25)
 — Consider using 200 mg MP vaginally for 14 days of the month (off-license use)
 — Change to transdermal estrogen and either oral MPA or NET (if they do not 
absorb estrogen through an oral route, have ongoing bleeding despite 
adjustments in MP dose / route, would not accept a 52 mg LNG-IUD and are 
low risk for thrombosis). BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)31 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited. — If taking a combined preparation, give an additional progestogen (100 mg 
MP , 10 mg MPA or 5 mg NET) for three months. If unscheduled bleeding 
settles with use, but recurs with cessation, discuss long-term use (with the 
potential increased effect on breast tissue and clot risk) if other options are not 
acceptable or efficacious.
 — If separate oral norethisterone leads to cessation of bleeding but the 5 mg 
dose causes adverse progestogenic side effects, consider off-license use of x3 
noriday tablets (1.05 mg norethisterone in total) for 10-14 days in combination 
with low or standard dose estrogen.
 — Re-offer the 52 mg LNG-IUD.
 • If a woman reports spotting before the withdrawal bleed, this may represent 
inadequate stromal formation and increasing the estrogen can, in women 
taking low dose preparations, be of benefit.(96) Ensure the progestogen dose is in 
proportion to the estrogen dose.
 • Reduce the estrogen dose and offer non-hormonal alternatives (lifestyle, 
complementary, pharmacological).
Managing unscheduled bleeding with continuous combined preparations 
(ccHRT)
• Starting ccHRT in women who are perimenopausal can lead to irregular bleeding 
patterns. Switching to sHRT would be appropriate in women who had menstrual 
cycles in the 12 months preceding HRT initiation. 
• If switching to ccHRT from sHRT, amenorrhoea may be achieved more quickly if a 
washout period (1 month) is offered to women who have recurrent unscheduled 
bleeding on sHRT(97, 98) – but this advice needs to be balanced with a transient 
deterioration in menopausal symptoms.
• Lower dose HRT achieves greater rates of amenorrhoea and if women have mild 
symptoms, this could be considered (particularly in women > 60 years).
• If using micronised progesterone (MP), prescribe daily use, rather than days 
1-25 to reduce administration errors. 
• Increasing the progestogen dose or changing the progestogen type can be beneficial:
 — Increase MP to 200 mg per day.(24, 25)
 — Increase MP to 200 mg on days 1-25 of a 28-day cycle (ensure understanding to 
reduce adherence errors)
 — Consider using 200 mg MP vaginally (off-license use)
 — Change to transdermal estrogen and either oral MPA or NET (if they do not 
absorb estrogen through an oral route, find a 52 mg LNG-IUD unacceptable, 
have recurrent bleeding despite adjustments in MP and are low-risk for 
thrombosis). 
 — If taking a combined preparation, an additional progestogen dose can be 
given (100 mg MP , 5 mg MPA or 5 mg NET). Trial for three months to reduce 
endometrial proliferation and if this leads to amenorrhoea during use, but 
bleeding recurrence on cessation, then discuss long-term use (with the 
potential increased effect on breast tissue and clot risk) if other options are not 
acceptable or efficacious.
— If separate oral norethisterone leads to cessation of bleeding but the 5 mg dose 
causes adverse progestogenic side effects, consider daily off-license use of x3 
noriday tablets (1.05 mg norethisterone in total) in combination with low or 
standard dose estrogen.
— Re-offer the 52 mg LNG-IUD.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)32 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.— If at 4 years of use, new unscheduled bleeding develops, offer a change of 52 mg 
LNG IUD, if cancer exclusion investigations are normal – particularly in women 
using more than high dose estrogen and in those with a BMI ≥ 40.
• Oral preparations may achieve greater cumulative rates of amenorrhoea than 
transdermal. If older than age 60, oral preparations are a risk factor for thrombosis, 
but if stopping HRT and switching to non-hormonal alternatives is not acceptable, 
because of quality-of-life effects, then the pros and cons of combined ultra-low 
and low-dose oral preparations, which contain micronised progesterone or 
dydrogesterone (lower breast and thrombotic effects), may be of benefit.
• If unscheduled bleeding persists, despite trying multiple adjustments, discuss 
changing to a sequential regimen for 6-12 months.
• Discuss reducing the estrogen dose and offer non-hormonal alternatives (lifestyle, 
complementary, pharmacological).
Surgical options
Hysteroscopic myomectomy
This can be considered an option in women with heavy bleeding and a normal 
endometrial assessment who have submucosal fibroids which prevent insertion of 
a 52 mg LNG-IUD. Consider if changes to the HRT preparation are not acceptable or 
efficacious. After informed counselling, small, non-vascular and mostly intracavity 
submucosal fibroids (FIGO type 0 and 1) may be suitable for resection in an 
outpatient setting with appropriate pain-relief. However, most submucosal fibroids 
require removal as a day case procedure under regional or general anaesthesia. 
Preparation for hysteroscopic myomectomy may require assessment of fitness 
for a general anaesthetic, a degree of intravascular fluid absorption as well as a 
laparoscopy if uterine perforation occurs. It may also require down-regulation (GnRH 
analogues) with a potential reduction in estrogen dose if moderate or high-dose 
preparations are currently used (which can affect menopause symptom control).
Endometrial Ablation
This day case / outpatient procedure is not recommended as a management option 
in women who have recurrent unscheduled bleeding. Uterine cavity adhesions after 
endometrial ablation often prevent further endometrial evaluation with ultrasound, 
hysteroscopy and/or endometrial biopsy if further episodes of unscheduled bleeding 
occur (which may then necessitate a hysterectomy).
Hysterectomy
This is a major operation and risks of the procedure (bleeding, infection, hernia 
formation, risk of prolapse and bladder dysfunction, plus injury to surrounding 
structures including bladder, bowel and ureters) need to outweigh the benefits 
(management of unscheduled bleeding). All avenues of managing the bleeding 
pattern, including reducing the estrogen dose, stopping HRT with consideration 
of non-hormonal options / lifestyle measures and reasons for 52 mg LNG-IUD non-
acceptability, if relevant, should be explored and documented before considering 
hysterectomy. Medical and individual comorbidities (such as an elevated BMI) can 
increase intraoperative and postoperative surgical and anaesthetic risks; these factors 
would need to be optimised before considering major elective surgery (which may in 
itself improve unscheduled bleeding episodes). BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)33 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Abbreviations and key terms
Term Description
BGCS British Gynaecological Cancer Society
BSGE British Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy
Direct access When an assessment is done by primary care, who then retain clinical 
responsibility throughout, including acting on the result
BMS British Menopause Society
ccHRT Continuous combined HRT: estrogen and progestogen every day
ET Endometrial thickness
HRT Hormone replacement therapy
Hyperplasia Precancerous change
LNG IUD 52 mg levonorgestrel Intrauterine Device 
MP Micronised progesterone 
NICE National Institute of Clinical Excellence
PMB Postmenopausal bleeding
Progestogen Encompasses synthetic progestogens and progesterone unless 
specifically stated otherwise
RCOG Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
RCT Randomised control trial
sHRT Sequential (also known as cyclical) HRT: estrogen every day and, 
depending on the specific preparation, a progestogen for 10 to 14 days 
per month
Synthetic progestogens:
NET Norethisterone
MPA Medroxyprogesterone acetate
Livial Tibolone 
TCRF Transcervical resection of fibroids
Tricycling / Long-cycle Estrogen daily and a reduced progestogen course (every three months)
TVS Transvaginal ultrasound
TAS Transabdominal ultrasound
Urgent pathway Investigation to be complete within 6 weeks
USCP Urgent suspicion of cancer pathway 
VTE Venous thromboembolismBMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)34 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.References
1. Burbos N, Musonda P , Duncan TJ, Crocker SG, Nieto JJ, Morris EP . Postmenopausal 
vaginal bleeding in women using hormone replacement therapy. Menopause Int. 
2012;18(1):5-9.
2. Ettinger B, Li DK, Klein R. Unexpected vaginal bleeding and associated 
gynecologic care in postmenopausal women using hormone replacement 
therapy: comparison of cyclic versus continuous combined schedules. Fertil Steril. 
1998;69(5):865-9.
3. al-Azzawi F, Habiba M. Regular bleeding on hormone replacement therapy: a 
myth? Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1994;101(8):661-2.
4. Alsugeir D, Wei L, Adesuyan M, Cook S, Panay N, Brauer R. Hormone replacement 
therapy prescribing in menopausal women in the UK: a descriptive study. BJGP 
Open. 2022;6(4).
5. NBS Authority. HRT England monthly summary2022. Available from: https://
nhsbsa-opendata.s3.eu-west-2.amazonaws.com/hrt/hrt_June_2022_v001.html.
6. Cheshire and Mersyside Cancer Alliance. Kaye S. Rethinking gynaecology 
pathways for patients with vaginal bleeding on HRT. 2023.
7. NHS England. Cancer Waiting Times. Cancer Alliance Insights Team [Internet]. 
2023. Available from: https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-
areas/cancer-waiting-times/.
8. Lumsden MA. The NICE Guideline – Menopause: diagnosis and management. 
Climacteric. 2016;19(5):426-9.
9. Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare (FSRH). Contraception for women 
aged over 40 years2023. Available from: https://www.fsrh.org/documents/fsrh-
guidance-contraception-for-women-aged-over-40-years-2017/.
10. Clark TJ, Mann CH, Shah N, Khan KS, Song F, Gupta JK. Accuracy of outpatient 
endometrial biopsy in the diagnosis of endometrial cancer: a systematic quantitative 
review. Bjog. 2002;109(3):313-21.
11. Crosbie EJ, Kitson SJ, McAlpine JN, Mukhopadhyay A, Powell ME, Singh N. 
Endometrial cancer. Lancet. 2022;399(10333):1412-28.
12. Cancer research UK. Uterine cancer incidence statistics: 2021 [Available from: https://
www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-professional/cancer-statistics/statistics-by-
cancer-type/uterine-cancer/incidence#heading-Two.
13. Jones ER, O’Flynn H, Njoku K, Crosbie EJ. Detecting endometrial cancer. The 
Obstetrician & Gynaecologist. 2021;23(2):103-12.
14. Crosbie EJ, Zwahlen M, Kitchener HC, Egger M, Renehan AG. Body mass index, 
hormone replacement therapy, and endometrial cancer risk: a meta-analysis. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19(12):3119-30.
15. MacKintosh ML, Derbyshire AE, McVey RJ, Bolton J, Nickkho-Amiry M, Higgins CL, et 
al. The impact of obesity and bariatric surgery on circulating and tissue biomarkers of 
endometrial cancer risk. Int J Cancer. 2019;144(3):641-50.
16. Renehan AG. Bariatric surgery, weight reduction, and cancer prevention. Lancet 
Oncol. 2009;10(7):640-1.
17. Udoff L, Langenberg P , Adashi EY. Combined continuous hormone replacement 
therapy: a critical review. Obstet Gynecol. 1995;86(2):306-16.
18. Anderson GL, Judd HL, Kaunitz AM, Barad DH, Beresford SA, Pettinger M, et al. 
Effects of estrogen plus progestin on gynecologic cancers and associated diagnostic 
procedures: the Women’s Health Initiative randomized trial. Jama. 2003;290(13):1739-
48.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)35 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.19. Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, LaCroix AZ, Kooperberg C, Stefanick ML, 
et al. Risks and benefits of estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal 
women: principal results From the Women’s Health Initiative randomized 
controlled trial. Jama. 2002;288(3):321-33.
20. The Writing Group for the PEPI Trial. Effects of hormone replacement therapy 
on endometrial histology in postmenopausal women. The Postmenopausal 
Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) Trial. Jama. 1996;275(5):370-5.
21. Archer DF, Pickar JH, Bottiglioni F. Bleeding patterns in postmenopausal women 
taking continuous combined or sequential regimens of conjugated estrogens 
with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Menopause Study Group. Obstet Gynecol. 
1994;83(5 Pt 1):686-92.
22. Beresford SA, Weiss NS, Voigt LF, McKnight B. Risk of endometrial cancer in 
relation to use of oestrogen combined with cyclic progestagen therapy in 
postmenopausal women. Lancet. 1997;349(9050):458-61.
23. Weiderpass E, Adami HO, Baron JA, Magnusson C, Bergström R, Lindgren A, et 
al. Risk of endometrial cancer following estrogen replacement with and without 
progestins. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999;91(13):1131-7.
24. Stute P , Neulen J, Wildt L. The impact of micronized progesterone on the 
endometrium: a systematic review. Climacteric. 2016;19(4):316-28.
25. Hamoda H. British Menopause Society tools for clinicians: Progestogens and 
endometrial protection. Post Reprod Health. 2022;28(1):40-6.
26. Cerin A, Heldaas K, Moeller B. Adverse endometrial effects of long-cycle estrogen 
and progestogen replacement therapy. The Scandinavian LongCycle Study 
Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(10):668-9.
27. Furness S, Roberts H, Marjoribanks J, Lethaby A. Hormone therapy in 
postmenopausal women and risk of endometrial hyperplasia. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2012;2012(8):Cd000402.
28. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: Clinical Guidelines. Heavy 
menstrual bleeding: assessment and management. London: National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 2021.
29. Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare Guideline (FSRH): Intrauterine 
Contraceptive2023 21st November 2023. Available from: www.fsrh-clinical-
guideline-intrauterine-contraception-amended-11jul2023-.pdf.
30. Hampton NR, Rees MC, Lowe DG, Rauramo I, Barlow D, Guillebaud J. 
Levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) with conjugated oral equine 
estrogen: a successful regimen for HRT in perimenopausal women. Hum Reprod. 
2005;20(9):2653-60.
31. Varila E, Wahlström T, Rauramo I. A 5-year follow-up study on the use of a 
levonorgestrel intrauterine system in women receiving hormone replacement 
therapy. Fertil Steril. 2001;76(5):969-73.
32. Suvanto-Luukkonen E, Kauppila A. The levonorgestrel intrauterine system in 
menopausal hormone replacement therapy: five-year experience. Fertil Steril. 
1999;72(1):161-3.
33. Bednarek PH, Jensen JT. Safety, efficacy and patient acceptability of the 
contraceptive and non-contraceptive uses of the LNG-IUS. Int J Womens Health. 
2010;1:45-58.
34. Pakarinen PI, Suvisaari J, Luukkainen T, Lähteenmäki P . Intracervical and fundal 
administration of levonorgestrel for contraception: endometrial thickness, 
patterns of bleeding, and persisting ovarian follicles. Fertil Steril. 1997;68(1):59-64.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)36 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.35. Allen NE, Tsilidis KK, Key TJ, Dossus L, Kaaks R, Lund E, et al. Menopausal hormone 
therapy and risk of endometrial carcinoma among postmenopausal women 
in the European Prospective Investigation Into Cancer and Nutrition. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2010;172(12):1394-403.
36. Langer RD, Landgren BM, Rymer J, Helmond FA. Effects of tibolone and 
continuous combined conjugated equine estrogen/medroxyprogesterone 
acetate on the endometrium and vaginal bleeding: results of the OPAL study. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 2006;195(5):1320-7.
37. The Writing Group for the PEPI Trial. Effects of estrogen or estrogen/
progestin regimens on heart disease risk factors in postmenopausal women. 
The Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) Trial. Jama. 
1995;273(3):199-208.
38. Harman SM, Black DM, Naftolin F, Brinton EA, Budoff MJ, Cedars MI, et al. Arterial 
imaging outcomes and cardiovascular risk factors in recently menopausal 
women: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(4):249-60.
39. Fournier A, Dossus L, Mesrine S, Vilier A, Boutron-Ruault MC, Clavel-Chapelon F, et 
al. Risks of endometrial cancer associated with different hormone replacement 
therapies in the E3N cohort, 1992-2008. Am J Epidemiol. 2014;180(5):508-17.
40. Birkhäuser MH, Panay N, Archer DF, Barlow D, Burger H, Gambacciani M, et al. 
Updated practical recommendations for hormone replacement therapy in the 
peri- and postmenopause. Climacteric. 2008;11(2):108-23.
41. Hodis HN, Mack WJ, Henderson VW, Shoupe D, Budoff MJ, Hwang-Levine J, et al. 
Vascular Effects of Early versus Late Postmenopausal Treatment with Estradiol. N 
Engl J Med. 2016;374(13):1221-31.
42. Hipolito Rodrigues MA, Gompel A. Micronized progesterone, progestins, and 
menopause hormone therapy. Women Health. 2021;61(1):3-14.
43. Sriprasert I, Mert M, Mack WJ, Hodis HN, Shoupe D. Use of oral estradiol 
plus vaginal progesterone in healthy postmenopausal women. Maturitas. 
2021;154:13-9.
44. Abdullahi Idle S, Hamoda H. Outcomes of endometrial assessment in women 
with unscheduled bleeding on hormone replacement therapy. Post Reprod 
Health. 2019;25(2):95-9.
45. Feeley KM, Wells M. Hormone replacement therapy and the endometrium. J Clin 
Pathol. 2001;54(6):435-40.
46. Levine D, Gosink BB, Johnson LA. Change in endometrial thickness in 
postmenopausal women undergoing hormone replacement therapy. Radiology. 
1995;197(3):603-8.
47. Sturdee DW, Ulrich LG, Barlow DH, Wells M, Campbell MJ, Vessey MP , et al. The 
endometrial response to sequential and continuous combined oestrogen-
progestogen replacement therapy. Bjog. 2000;107(11):1392-400.
48. Clarke MA, Long BJ, Del Mar Morillo A, Arbyn M, Bakkum-Gamez JN, Wentzensen 
N. Association of Endometrial Cancer Risk With Postmenopausal Bleeding 
in Women: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 
2018;178(9):1210-22.
49. Gredmark T, Kvint S, Havel G, Mattsson LA. Histopathological findings in women 
with postmenopausal bleeding. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1995;102(2):133-6.
50. van Hanegem N, Breijer MC, Slockers SA, Zafarmand MH, Geomini P , Catshoek R, 
et al. Diagnostic workup for postmenopausal bleeding: a randomised controlled 
trial. Bjog. 2017;124(2):231-40.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)37 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.51. Mattsson L, Ipsen HE, Granqvist CJ, Kokot-Kierepa M. Ultra-low-dose estradiol and 
norethisterone acetate: bleeding patterns and other outcomes over 52 weeks of 
therapy. Climacteric. 2015;18(3):419-25.
52. Habiba MA, Bell SC, Abrams K, al-Azzawi F. Endometrial responses to hormone 
replacement therapy: the bleeding pattern. Hum Reprod. 1996;11(3):503-8.
53. Thorneycroft IH, Gibbons WE. Vaginal bleeding patterns in women receiving 
hormone replacement therapy. Impact of various progestogen regimens. J 
Reprod Med. 1999;44(2 Suppl):209-14.
54. Ylikorkala O, Rozenberg S. Efficacy and tolerability of fully transdermal hormone 
replacement in sequential or continuous therapy at two doses of progestogen in 
postmenopausal women. Maturitas. 2000;37(2):83-93.
55. NICE. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence Guideline. Suspected 
Cancer: Recognition and Referral NG122023 21st November 2023. Available from: 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng12.
56. Ferrazzi E, Torri V, Trio D, Zannoni E, Filiberto S, Dordoni D. Sonographic 
endometrial thickness: a useful test to predict atrophy in patients with 
postmenopausal bleeding. An Italian multicenter study. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol. 1996;7(5):315-21.
57. Gull B, Karlsson B, Milsom I, Granberg S. Can ultrasound replace dilation 
and curettage? A longitudinal evaluation of postmenopausal bleeding and 
transvaginal sonographic measurement of the endometrium as predictors of 
endometrial cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003;188(2):401-8.
58. Gupta JK, Chien PF, Voit D, Clark TJ, Khan KS. Ultrasonographic endometrial 
thickness for diagnosing endometrial pathology in women with postmenopausal 
bleeding: a meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2002;81(9):799-816.
59. Timmermans A, Opmeer BC, Khan KS, Bachmann LM, Epstein E, Clark TJ, et al. 
Endometrial thickness measurement for detecting endometrial cancer in women 
with postmenopausal bleeding: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2010;116(1):160-7.
60. Wong AS, Lao TT, Cheung CW, Yeung SW, Fan HL, Ng PS, et al. Reappraisal 
of endometrial thickness for the detection of endometrial cancer in 
postmenopausal bleeding: a retrospective cohort study. Bjog. 2016;123(3):439-46.
61. Timmermans A, Opmeer BC, Veersema S, Mol BW. Patients’ preferences in the 
evaluation of postmenopausal bleeding. Bjog. 2007;114(9):1146-9.
62. Fung LWY, Cheung ECW, Wong ASW, Sahota DS, Lao TTH. Patient acceptance 
of transvaginal sonographic endometrial thickness assessment compared 
with hysteroscopy and biopsy for exclusion of endometrial cancer in cases of 
postmenopausal bleeding. Hong Kong Med J. 2022;28(2):133-9.
63. Doll KM, Romano SS, Marsh EE, Robinson WR. Estimated Performance of 
Transvaginal Ultrasonography for Evaluation of Postmenopausal Bleeding 
in a Simulated Cohort of Black and White Women in the US. JAMA Oncol. 
2021;7(8):1158-65.
64. Clark TJ, Barton PM, Coomarasamy A, Gupta JK, Khan KS. Investigating 
postmenopausal bleeding for endometrial cancer: cost-effectiveness of initial 
diagnostic strategies. Bjog. 2006;113(5):502-10.
65. Cooper NA, Barton PM, Breijer M, Caffrey O, Opmeer BC, Timmermans A, et al. 
Cost-effectiveness of diagnostic strategies for the management of abnormal 
uterine bleeding (heavy menstrual bleeding and post-menopausal bleeding): a 
decision analysis. Health Technol Assess. 2014;18(24):1-201, v-vi.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)38 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.66. Morrison J, Balega J, Buckley L, Clamp A, Crosbie E, Drew Y, et al. British 
Gynaecological Cancer Society (BGCS) uterine cancer guidelines: 
Recommendations for practice. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2022;270:50-89.
67. Van den Bosch T, Van Schoubroeck D, Domali E, Vergote I, Moerman P , Amant F, et 
al. A thin and regular endometrium on ultrasound is very unlikely in patients with 
endometrial malignancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2007;29(6):674-9.
68. Affinito P , Palomba S, Pellicano M, Sorrentino C, Di Carlo C, Morgera R, et al. 
Ultrasonographic measurement of endometrial thickness during hormonal 
replacement therapy in postmenopausal women. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 
1998;11(5):343-6.
69. Langer RD, Pierce JJ, O’Hanlan KA, Johnson SR, Espeland MA, Trabal JF, et 
al. Transvaginal ultrasonography compared with endometrial biopsy for 
the detection of endometrial disease. Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin 
Interventions Trial. N Engl J Med. 1997;337(25):1792-8.
70. Li Z, Li L. The incidence and predictors of gynecologic malignancies among 
postmenopausal patients with endometrial fluid collection. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 
2019;299(4):1071-6.
71. Breijer MC, Peeters JA, Opmeer BC, Clark TJ, Verheijen RH, Mol BW, et al. Capacity 
of endometrial thickness measurement to diagnose endometrial carcinoma in 
asymptomatic postmenopausal women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2012;40(6):621-9.
72. Jacobs I, Gentry-Maharaj A, Burnell M, Manchanda R, Singh N, Sharma A, et 
al. Sensitivity of transvaginal ultrasound screening for endometrial cancer in 
postmenopausal women: a case-control study within the UKCTOCS cohort. 
Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(1):38-48.
73. Vitale SG, Riemma G, Haimovich S, Carugno J, Alonso Pacheco L, Perez-Medina T, et 
al. Risk of endometrial cancer in asymptomatic postmenopausal women in relation 
to ultrasonographic endometrial thickness: systematic review and diagnostic test 
accuracy meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2023;228(1):22-35.e2.
74. Smith-Bindman R, Weiss E, Feldstein V. How thick is too thick? When endometrial 
thickness should prompt biopsy in postmenopausal women without vaginal 
bleeding. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2004;24(5):558-65.
75. Ghoubara A, Emovon E, Sundar S, Ewies A. Thickened endometrium in 
asymptomatic postmenopausal women – determining an optimum threshold for 
prediction of atypical hyperplasia and cancer. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2018;38(8):1146-9.
76. Clark TJ. Hysteroscopy is needed in the diagnostic workup of postmenopausal 
bleeding. Bjog. 2017;124(2):241.
77. EMA. Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use European Medicines 
Agency: Guideline on the clinical investigation of medicinal products for 
hormone replacement therapy of oestrogen deficiency symptoms in 
postmenopausal women. EMEA/CHMP/021/972005 21st November 2023. 
Available from: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/clinical-investigation-medicinal-
products-hormone-replacement-therapy-oestrogen-deficiency-symptoms.
78. SIGN. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network: Investigation of 
postmenopausal bleeding: a national clinical guideline2002 21st November 2023. 
Available from: Investigation of post-menopausal bleeding (sign.ac.uk).
79. RCOG. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Management of 
Endometrial Hyperplasia Greentop Guideline No 672016 21st November 2023. 
Available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/media/knmjbj5c/gtg_67_endometrial_
hyperplasia.pdf.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)39 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.80. Suhonen SP , Allonen HO, Lähteenmäki P . Sustained-release estradiol implants and 
a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device in hormone replacement therapy. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1995;172(2 Pt 1):562-7.
81. Antoniou G, Kalogirou D, Karakitsos P , Antoniou D, Kalogirou O, Giannikos L. 
Transdermal estrogen with a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device for 
climacteric complaints versus estradiol-releasing vaginal ring with a vaginal 
progesterone suppository: clinical and endometrial responses. Maturitas. 
1997;26(2):103-11.
82. Depypere HT, Hillard T, Erkkola R, Lukkari-Lax E, Kunz M, Rautiainen P , et al. A 
60-month non-comparative study on bleeding profiles with the levonorgestrel 
intrauterine system from the late transition period to estrogen supplemented 
menopause. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2010;153(2):176-80.
83. Raudaskoski TH, Lahti EI, Kauppila AJ, Apaja-Sarkkinen MA, Laatikainen TJ. 
Transdermal estrogen with a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device for 
climacteric complaints: clinical and endometrial responses. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1995;172(1 Pt 1):114-9.
84. Suvanto-Luukkonen E, Sundström H, Penttinen J, Läärä E, Pramila S, Kauppila 
A. Percutaneous estradiol gel with an intrauterine levonorgestrel releasing 
device or natural progesterone in hormone replacement therapy. Maturitas. 
1997;26(3):211-7.
85. Suvanto-Luukkonen E, Malinen H, Sundström H, Penttinen J, Kauppila A. 
Endometrial morphology during hormone replacement therapy with estradiol 
gel combined to levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device or natural 
progesterone. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 1998;77(7):758-63.
86. Raudaskoski T, Tapanainen J, Tomás E, Luotola H, Pekonen F, Ronni-Sivula H, et al. 
Intrauterine 10 microg and 20 microg levonorgestrel systems in postmenopausal 
women receiving oral oestrogen replacement therapy: clinical, endometrial and 
metabolic response. Bjog. 2002;109(2):136-44.
87. Archer DF, Hendrix S, Gallagher JC, Rymer J, Skouby S, Ferenczy A, et al. 
Endometrial effects of tibolone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92(3):911-8.
88. Di Carlo C, Sammartino A, Di Spiezio Sardo A, Tommaselli GA, Guida M, Mandato 
VD, et al. Bleeding patterns during continuous estradiol with different sequential 
progestogens therapy. Menopause. 2005;12(5):520-5.
89. Darj E, Nilsson S, Axelsson O, Hellberg D. Clinical and endometrial effects 
of oestradiol and progesterone in post-menopausal women. Maturitas. 
1991;13(2):109-15.
90. Gillet JY, Andre G, Faguer B, Erny R, Buvat-Herbaut M, Domin MA, et al. Induction 
of amenorrhea during hormone replacement therapy: optimal micronized 
progesterone dose. A multicenter study. Maturitas. 1994;19(2):103-15.
91. Pélissier C, Maroni M, Yaneva H, Brin S, Peltier-Pujol F, Jondet M. Chlormadinone 
acetate versus micronized progesterone in the sequential combined hormone 
replacement therapy of the menopause. Maturitas. 2001;40(1):85-94.
92. Dupont A, Dupont P , Cusan L, Tremblay M, Rioux J, Cloutier D, et al. Comparative 
endocrinological and clinical effects of percutaneous estradiol and oral 
conjugated estrogens as replacement therapy in menopausal women. Maturitas. 
1991;13(4):297-311.
93. Pickar JH, Archer DF, Goldstein SR, Kagan R, Bernick B, Mirkin S. Uterine bleeding 
with hormone therapies in menopausal women: a systematic review. Climacteric. 
2020;23(6):550-8.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)40 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.94. von Holst T, Lang E, Winkler U, Keil D. Bleeding patterns in peri and 
postmenopausal women taking a continuous combined regimen of estradiol 
with norethisterone acetate or a conventional sequential regimen of conjugated 
equine estrogens with medrogestone. Maturitas. 2002;43(4):265-75.
95. Rouskova D, Mittmann K, Schumacher U, Dietrich H, Zimmermann T. 
Effectiveness, tolerability and acceptance of an oral estradiol/levonorgestrel 
formulation for the treatment of menopausal complaints: a non-interventional 
observational study over six cycles of 28 days. Gynecol Endocrinol. 
2014;30(10):712-6.
96. Lou YY, Kannappar J, Sathiyathasan S. Unscheduled bleeding on HRT – do we 
always need to investigate for endometrial pathology? International Journal of 
Reproduction, Contraception, Obstetrics and Gynecology. 2017;6(10):4174-8.
97. Hillard T. Management of bleeding problems with hormone replacement therapy. 
J Fam Plann Reprod Health Care. 2002;28(4):182-4.
98. Hillard T, Lunsden LM, Rees M. Bleeding on sequential HRT and endometrial 
thickness predict success of transition from sequential hormone replacement 
therapy to continuous combined transdermal hormone replacement therapy. J Br 
Menopause Soc 2001;7:18-9.
PUBLISHED: APRIL 2024 
NEXT REVIEW DATE: APRIL 2027 BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)41 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Appendices
Appendix 1: Licensed estrogen dose and proportionate progestogen dose
Appendix 2: Endometrial ultrasound reporting criteria for women with 
unscheduled bleeding
Appendix 3: Recommendations pertaining to investigation outcomes in 
women taking HRT 
Appendix 4: Auditable topics
Appendix 5: Research prioritiesBMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)42 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Appendix 1: Licensed estrogen dose and proportionate progestogen dose
‘The dose of the progestogen should be proportionate to the dose of estrogen. Women 
who require high dose estrogen intake should consider having their progestogen dose 
increased to ensure adequate endometrial protection. ’ 
BMS 2022 Recommendation
Key: Prescribed estrogen dose for ultra-low, low, standard, moderate and high 
dose regimens
 Ultra-low dose Low Dose Standard dose Moderate dose High dose
Oestrogel ½ pump 1 pump 2 pumps 3 pumps 4 pumps
Sandrena 0.25 mg 0.5 mg 1 mg 1.5-2 mg 3 mg*
Lenzetto spray 1 spray 2 sprays 3 sprays 4-5 sprays* 6 sprays*
Patch 12.5 µg 25 µg 50 µg 75 µg 100 µg
Oral estradiol 0.5 mg 1 mg 2 mg 3 mg^ 4 mg^
* Off-license use ^ Off-license use – rarely required to achieve symptom control
mg = milligrams µg = micrograms
Progestogen dose per licensed estrogen dose in the baseline population
Estrogen dose Micronised Progesterone Medroxy progesterone Norethisterone LNG-IUD
 continuous sequential continuous sequential continuous sequential (52mg)
Ultra/Low 100 mg 200 mg 2.5 mg 10 mg 5 mg* 5 mg* 
One – forStandard 100 mg 200 mg 2.5-5 mg 10 mg 5 mg* 5 mg* up to 5
Moderate 100 mg 200 mg 5 mg 10 mg 5 mg 5 mg years of
High 200 mg+ 300 mg+ 10 mg^ 20 mg^ 5 mg 5 mg use
 
* 1 mg provides endometrial protection for ultra-low to standard dose estrogen but the lowest stand-alone dose currently available in the UK is 
5 mg (off-license use of three noriday POP i.e 1.05 mg, could be considered if 5 mg is not tolerated). 
^ There is limited evidence in relation to optimal MPA dose with high dose estrogen; the advised dose is based on studies reporting 10 mg 
providing protection with up to moderate dose estrogen.
+ There are limited evidence in relation to optimal micronised progesterone dose for moderate or high dose estrogen; until evidence is available 
to guide practice, the advised dose is based on studies reporting 100 mg/day providing protection with up to standard dose estrogen. 
If unscheduled bleeding occurs with ultra-low to moderate dose estrogen, and other progestogens are not acceptable, offer micronised 
progesterone at the dosage recommended for high dose estrogen.BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)43 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Appendix 2: Endometrial ultrasound reporting and referral criteria for 
unscheduled bleeding with HRT
Referral criteria for endometrial thickness (ET) on ultrasound
USCP – urgent suspicion of cancer pathway sHRT – sequential HRT ccHRT – continuous combined HRT
Continuous combined HRT (ccHRT): daily progestogen & estrogen
Preparation given to postmenopausal women i.e. ‘bleed free’ preparation
All patients should be offered a transvaginal ultrasound scan if possible, if 
transabdominal please indicate on the report.
• The upper limit for AP measurement for patients with unscheduled bleeding on 
ccHRT is 4 mm. If > 4 mm advise an urgent suspicion of cancer pathway referral, if 
not already under their care. 
 “The endometrium is thickened and measures XX mm: malignancy should be 
excluded and referral to the gynaecology urgent suspicion of cancer pathway is 
advised”
• If the measurements are ≤ 4 mm report the endometrial thickness using the 
following phrasing: 
 “The endometrium measures XX mm: This result is considered reassuring for 
patients taking ccHRT but should be interpreted by the referring clinician in 
the context of the patient’s individual risk factors for endometrial cancer and 
bleeding pattern. ” HRT preparation ≤ 4 mm > 4 to 
≤ 7 mm> 7mm Incomplete endometrial 
assessment but 
visualised ET within 
normal limits 
ccHRT 
(Postmenopausal – 
daily estrogen and 
progestogen)Result considered 
normal but 
interpreted by 
referring clinician 
in context of 
patient’s cancer 
risksUSCP USCP Endometrial assessment 
on an urgent pathway 
(within 6 weeks)
sHRT 
(Perimenopausal – 
daily estrogen and a 
progestogen for 10 to 14 
days of the month)Result considered 
normal but 
interpreted by 
referring clinician 
in context of 
patient’s cancer 
risksResult 
considered 
normal but 
interpreted 
by referring 
clinician in 
context of 
patient’s cancer 
risksUSCP Endometrial assessment 
on an urgent pathway 
(within 6 weeks)BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)44 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Sequential / cyclical HRT (sHRT): daily estrogen and progestogen for 10-14 
days of the month 
These women are perimenopausal and are still having monthly withdrawal bleeds.
All patients should be offered a transvaginal ultrasound scan if possible, 
if transabdominal please indicate on the report
• The upper limit for AP measurement for patients with unscheduled bleeding 
on sequential HRT (progestogen for 10-14 days days of the month) should be ≤ 
7 mm because of the additional progestogen from mid-cycle. If > 7 mm, advise an 
urgent suspicion of cancer pathway referral, if not already under their care. 
 “The endometrium is thickened and measures XX mm: malignancy should be 
excluded and referral to the gynaecology urgent suspicion of cancer pathway is 
advised”
• If the AP measurements are ≤ 7 mm report the endometrial thickness using the 
following: 
 “The endometrium measures XX mm. This result is considered reassuring for 
patients taking sHRT but should be interpreted by the referring clinician in 
the context of the patient’s individual risk factors for endometrial cancer and 
bleeding pattern. ” 
Endometrium appears within normal limits but not entirely visualised
If it is not possible to accurately assess the endometrium, or obtain an AP 
measurement of the endometrial thickness owing to factors such as fibroids, IUCD, 
prior ablation etc, then use: 
“The endometrium cannot be assessed in its entirety because of the presence of 
XXXXXX, therefore endometrial pathology cannot be excluded; the visualised 
portion measures XX mm. Referral to the gynaecology urgent suspicion of cancer 
pathway, for endometrial assessment, is advised if the visualised portion is 
thickened (> 4 mm for ccHRT and >7 mm if sHRT) or on an urgent pathway 
(within 6 weeks) if the visualised portion is within normal limits” BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)45 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Appendix 3: Recommendations pertaining to investigation outcomes in 
women taking HRT 
Investigation Result Pathway Management Recommendation
TVS : Endometrial thickness (ET) ≤ 4 mm if 
ccHRT and ≤ 7 mm if sHRTN/A Offer adjustments to the HRT preparation for 
6 months
TVS : ET > 4 mm if ccHRT and > 7 mm if sHRT 
(thickened endometrium)USCP Endometrial assessment 
(endometrial biopsy and / or hysteroscopy)
TVS : Incomplete assessment of the 
endometrium (e.g. fibroids/IUD 
obscuring) but visualised portion 
within normal ultrasound limitsUrgent 
(within 6 
weeks)Endometrial assessment 
(endometrial biopsy and / or hysteroscopy)
TVS : Asymptomatic (no unscheduled 
bleeding) with incidental ET ≥ 10 mm 
and no risk factors for endometrial 
cancer.Urgent Hysteroscopy + biopsy (preferable) or blind 
biopsy alone – resources dependent
TVS : Asymptomatic (no unscheduled 
bleeding) but incidental ET ≥ 10 
mm with risk factors for endometrial 
cancer (x1 major or x2 minor)USCP Hysteroscopy + biopsy (preferable) or blind 
biopsy alone – resources dependent
TVS : Normal ET (≤ 4 mm if ccHRT and ≤ 7 
mm if sHRT) but, 
• Recurrent unscheduled bleeding six 
months after HRT adjustments or,
• Heavy or Persistent (almost daily) bleeding 
or,
• Intracavity fluid and x1 major or x2 minor 
risk factors for endometrial cancerUrgent Endometrial assessment 
(endometrial biopsy and / or hysteroscopy)
Blind endometrial biopsy : 
Normal (inactive/atrophic if ccHRT use or 
inactive / proliferative for sHRT) N/A Offer adjustments in HRT preparation for 3 
months
Blind endometrial biopsy : 
Normal but bleeding ongoing 3 months 
laterUrgent Hysteroscopy + / – targeted biopsy
Blind endometrial biopsy : 
Inadequate sample and thickened ET on 
TVS.USCP Hysteroscopy + targeted biopsy
Blind endometrial biopsy : 
Proliferation in women using ccHRT who 
have x1 major or x2 minor risk factors for 
endometrial cancerUrgent Hysteroscopy + / – targeted biopsy
Hysteroscopy and biopsy: 
Normal but bleeding ongoing 6 months 
laterUrgent TVS: endometrial assessment if thickened 
endometrium
Blind or targeted endometrial biopsy : 
Hyperplasia (with or without atypia)USCP Management: RCOG endometrial 
hyperplasia guidelineBMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)46 | 47
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Appendix 4: Auditable topics
1. Women prescribed stand-alone estradiol products (oral / transdermal) with 
concurrent issue of appropriate dose and total days per month progestogen or 
progesterone (100%)
2. Women prescribed stand-alone estradiol products (oral / transdermal) in the 
presence of an ‘in-date’ 52 mg LNG–IUD (five or less years since insertion) (100%)
3. Women who started HRT ≥ 45 years of age switched to ccHRT after 5 years of 
sequential HRT or by age 54 (whichever occurs first) (100%)
4. Percentage of women presenting with unscheduled bleeding meeting criteria for 
USCP referred by a USCP (100%)
5. Percentage of women presenting with unscheduled bleeding on HRT meeting the 
criteria for referral on USCP meeting 28-day faster diagnosis target (85%)
6. Percentage of women referred for urgent (6 week) TVS seen by 6 weeks (85%)
7. Percentage of women referred on an urgent (6 week) pathway, with endometrial 
assessment by 6 weeks (85%)BMS | GUIDELINE Management of unscheduled bleeding 
 on hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
Copyright © 2024 British Menopause Society. All rights reserved.
Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying and distribution is prohibited.Appendix 5: Research Priorities
1. Assessment of endometrial cancer risk in women who have unscheduled bleeding 
on ccHRT including variables relating to moderate / high dose estrogen and/or 
micronised progesterone. 
2. Assessment of endometrial cancer risk in perimenopausal women who have 
unscheduled bleeding on sHRT including variables relating to moderate / high 
dose estrogen and/or micronised progesterone. 
3. Acquire evidence assessing endometrial cancer risk dependent upon total 
duration of HRT use. This should be stratified by progestogen type and dose (with 
priority given to micronised progesterone).
4. Assessment of endometrial protection with LNG IUD as progestogenic 
component of HRT:
 a. When lower dose (13.3 and 19.5 mg) LNG IUD is used
 b. When 52 mg LNG IUD is sited in the lower endometrial cavity (more than 2 cm 
from the fundus) 
 c. When 52 mg LNG IUD is used in conjunction with estrogen use above high dose.
5. Acquire evidence correlating endometrial thickness (ET) with endometrial disease 
(hyperplasia with / without cytological atypia and endometrial cancer) in women 
who have unscheduled bleeding on HRT. Priority should be given to women 
taking sequential HRT; assessment of ultrasonographic variation at different 
intervals in the cycle, with histological correlation, may enable higher cut-offs at 
the end of the progestogen phase which would reduce the number of women 
offered invasive testing.
6. Assessment of optimal interval for endometrial reassessment (ultrasound 
or biopsy) in women who have recurrent unscheduled bleeding, despite 
progestogen adjustments, and a normal biopsy and / or hysteroscopy.
7. Assessment of the prevalence of endometrial hyperplasia / cancer in 
hysteroscopically diagnosed focal endometrial pathology in women with 
unscheduled bleeding on HRT.
www.thebms.org.uk
Reg Charity No: 1015144
Company Reg No: 02759439www.womens-health-concern.org
Reg Charity No: 279651
Company Reg No: 1432023For further details – please visit
www.thebms.org.uk or telephone 01628 890 199
Q3P2324