# Extracted from: CG1129 Newborn Feeding.pdf
# Guideline ID: cg1129-newborn-feeding
# Content length: 73774 characters
# Processing date: 1750066899.9927835

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 1 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 
Newborn Feeding Guideline 
Summary statement: How does the document 
support patient care? By providing evidence based guidance to support and assist 
women /people in newborn feeding in accordance with UNICEF 
Baby Friendly Initiation standards . 
Staff/stake holders involved in development: 
 Midwives, Maternity Support Workers, Neonatal Nurses, Consultant 
Paediatricians, Consultant Obstetricians 
Division: Women and Child ren’s 
Department: Maternity & Paediatrics 
Responsible Person: Chief of Service 
Author: Public Health Midwife 
For use by: All medical, midwifery , nursing & support staff involved in supporting 
mothers /birthing parents with newborn feeding . 
Purpose: To provide clear guidance on supporting mothers /birthing parents 
with feeding their babies . 
This document supports: Baby Friendly Initiative (WHO/UNICEF) 
Key related documents: Maternity Guidelines: Tongue Tie (Ankyloglossia) Division 
Guideline ; Safe Sleeping of Babies and Reducing the Risk of 
Sudden Infant Death ; Neonatal Hypoglycaemia Guideli ne 
Approved by: Joint Obstetric Guideline Group 
Approval date: 16th March 2022 Date uploaded: 22/03/22 
Ratified by Board of Directors/ Committee of 
the Board of Directors N/A 
Ratification Date: N/A 
Expiry Date: March 2025 
Review date: Septembe r 2024 
If you require this document in another format such as Braille, large print, audio or 
another language please contact the Trusts Communications Team 
Reference Number: CG1129 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 2 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 
Version Date Author Status Comment 
1.0 November 2010 Infant Fee ding 
Specialists Archived New Trust wide guideline 
2.0 February 2011 CNST Midwife Archived Admin. additions 
3.0 January 2012 Infant Feeding 
Specialists Archived BFI additions added 
4.0 January 2013 CNST Midwife Archived Minor amendment 
5.0 November 201 3 Infant Feeding 
Specialists Archived BFI information updated and 3 
year update 
6.0 May 2017 Public Health Midwife Archived BFI information updated to 
include new standards and 
Neonatal standards 
7.0 October 2019 Public Health Midwife Archived Additional information re formula; 
finger feeding; volumes 
8.0 February 2022 F. Humberstone 
Infant -Feeding Lead LIVE  Aim added -An increase in the 
number of babies receiving 
breastmilk on the neonatal 
unit. 
 Staff responsibilities to the 
BFI code rew orded. 
 8.0 Supplementation section 
amended. 
 9.1 Inpatient formula milk 
provision amended. 
 Parent information on 
supplementation added. (see 
appendix 4) 
 
The interpretation and application of clinical guidelines will remain the 
responsibility of the indiv idual clinician. 
If in doubt contact a senior colleague or expert . 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 3 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Index 
 
1.0 Aim ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 4 
1.1 Outcomes ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 4 
2.0 Scope ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 4 
3.0 Abbreviations used within this guideline ................................ ................................ ..... 5 
4.0 Responsibilities ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 5 
4.1 Commitment ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 5 
5.0 In support of the guidance ................................ ................................ ......................... 6 
6.0 Baby Friendly Initiative Care Stand ard ................................ ................................ ....... 7 
6.1 Pregnancy ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 7 
6.2 Hand expressing / colostrum harvesting in pregnancy ................................ ............... 7 
6.3 Birth ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 8 
6.4 Mothers/birthing parents separated from thei r baby on the neonatal unit ................... 9 
6.5 Safety considerations ................................ ................................ ................................ . 9 
7.0 Support for breastfeeding / feeding assessments ................................ ...................... 10 
7.1 Responsive feeding ................................ ................................ ................................ ..10 
7.2 Exclusive breastfeeding ................................ ................................ ............................ 11 
7.3 Modified feeding regimes ................................ ................................ .......................... 11 
8.0 Supplementation ................................ ................................ ................................ .......11 
8.1 Finger feeding using a syringe ................................ ................................ .................. 12 
8.3 Cup feeding ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 14 
9.0 Artificial feeding ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 15 
9.1 Inpatient formula milk provision ................................ ................................ ................. 16 
10.0 Early postnatal period: support for parenting and close relationships ........................ 16 
11.0 Recommendations for health professionals on discussing bed -sharing 
 with parents ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 16 
12.0 Care Standards for babies in the Neonatal Unit ................................ ........................ 17 
12.1 Supporting parents to have a close and loving relationship with their baby ............... 17 
12.2 Enabling babies to receive breastmilk and to breastfeed ................................ ........... 18 
12.3 Valuing parents as partners in care ................................ ................................ ........... 19 
13.0 Rooming in ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 19 
14.0 Weighing newborns ................................ ................................ ................................ ..19 
15.0 Feeding problems ................................ ................................ ................................ .....20 
16.0 Training ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 21 
17.0 Monitoring / Audit ................................ ................................ ................................ ......22 
References ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 23 
Appendix 1: Baby Friendly Initiative Stages ................................ ................................ .......... 24 
Appendix 2: Staff information sheet ................................ ................................ ...................... 25 
Appendix 3: A guide for health professionals: Safe Sleeping ................................ ................ 29 
Appendix 4: Pare nt information - Supplementation ................................ ............................... 33 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 4 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Newborn Feeding Guideline 

1.0 Aim 
 
The purpose of this guideline is to ensure that all staff understands their role and 
responsibilities in supporting expectant and new mothers /birthing parents and their partners 
to feed and care for their baby in ways which support optimum health and well -being. 
 
The Baby Friendly Initiative is a worldwide programme of the Worl d Health Organi sation and 
UNICEF . It is designed to support breastfeeding an d parent infant relationships by working 
with public services to improve standards of care. It is the first ever national intervention to 
have a positive effect on breastfeeding rates in the UK and to practise in accordance with the 
Internation al Code of M arketing of Breast M ilk Substitutes (See Appendix 1 ). 
 
This guideline aims to create an environment where more women /people choose to 
breastfeed their babies by giving them information , advice and support to enable them to 
breastfeed according to the World Health Organisation recommendations of exclusive 
breastfeeding for 6 months and then as part of their infant’s diet to the end of the first year 
and beyond. However following this information, if a woman /person chooses to formula feed 
their baby, Trust staff will not discriminate against their chosen method of feeding and will 
fully support them when they have made a choice. 
 
1.1 Outcomes 
 
This guideline aims to ensure that the care provided improves outcomes for children and 
families, specifically to deliver: 
 
 An increase in breastfeeding initiation rates . 
 An increase in breastfeeding rates at 10 days . 
 Amongst mothers /birthing parents who choose to formula feed, an increase in 
those doing so as safely as possible, in li ne with nationally agreed guidance . 
 Improvements in parents’ experiences of care . 
 A reduction in the number of re -admissions for feeding problems . 
 An increase in the number of babies receiving breastmilk on the neonatal unit . 
 
2.0 Scope 
 
This guideline applies to: 
 
 All members of staff involved in the immediate care of newborn babies . 
 All newborn babies and their mothers /birthing parents . 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 5 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
It is crucial that staff adhere to the guideline to avoid conflicting advice. Any deviation must 
be justified and recorded in the mother /birthing parent’s Postnatal Care Record and baby 
record . 
 
3.0 Abbreviations used within this guideline 
 
NEC - Necrotising Enterocolitis EBM - Expressed Breast Milk 
NNU - Neonatal Unit BFI - Baby Friendly Initiative 
 
4.0 Respons ibilities 
 
Midwives, Health Care Assistan ts, Maternity C are Assistants, Maternity Support Workers, 
Obstetricians , Paediatricians, Neonatal Nurses and Nursery Nurses : 
 
 To access, read, understand and follow this guidance . 
 To use their professional judgement in application of this guidance . 
 This guidance is for staff employed by Western Sussex Hospitals Trust. The 
guidance is not rigid and should be tailored to the individual circumstances of each 
woman. If the guidance is not being followed, documentation of the reasoning 
and/or justification is essential, with clear documentation of alternative plans and 
discussions. 
 
4.1 Commitment 
 
The Women & Children’s Division is committed to: 
 
 Providing the highest standard of care to support expectant and new 
mothe rs/birthing parents and their partners to feed their baby and build strong and 
loving parent - infant relationships. This is in recognition of the profound importance 
of early relationships to future health and well -being, and the significant 
contribution t hat breastfeeding makes to good physical and emotional health 
outcomes for children and mothers /birthing parents . 
 Ensuring that all care is mother /birthing parent and family centred, non -
judgemental and those mothers ’/birthing parents’ decisions are suppor ted and 
respected. 
 Working together across disciplines and or ganisations to improve mothers’ / 
/birthing parents’ /parents’ experiences of care. 
 
As part of this commitment the service will ensure that: 
 
 All new staff are familiarised with this policy on co mmencement of employment. 
 All staff receives training to enable them to implement the policy as appropriate to 
their role. New staff receives this training within six months of commencement of 
employment. 
 All documentation fully supports the implementation of these standards. 
 Parents’ experiences of care will be listened to through: regular audit, parents’ 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 6 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
experience surveys (e.g. Care Quali ty Commission survey of women’s/birthing 
parent’s experiences of maternity services, Friends & Family, COOS Cards, 
Feedback via social network forums administrated by the Trust and the Maternity 
Voices Partnership ). 
 This guidance is to be communicated to all health care staff having any contact 
with pregnant women /people and mothers /birthing parents . 
 The International Co de of Marketing of Breast -milk Substitutes is implemented 
throughout the service. 
 
5.0 In support of the guidance 
 
The International Code of Marketing of Breast -milk Substitutes 

The International Code of Marketing of Breast -milk Substitutes (the Code) was adopted by a 
resolution of the World Health Assembly in 1981. Any facility seeking Baby Friendly 
accreditation must adhere to the requirements of the Code and any subsequent World Health 
Assembly resolutions relating to the Code. Click here for the ful l Code . 
 
The Code prohibits all promotion of milks and equipment related to bottle feeding and sets 
out requirements for labelling and information on infant feeding. Any a ctivity that undermines 
breastfeeding also violates the aim and spirit of the Code. The Code and its subsequent 
resolutions are intended as a minimum requirement in all countries, and are written into the 
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Chil d, to which the UK is a signatory. 
 
All breastmilk substitutes are covered by the Code. This means products that can be 
marketed in a way which suggests they could replace breastfeeding, even if the product is 
not suitable for that purpose. They may includ e: 
 
 Infant formula 
 Follow -on formula 
 Baby foods 
 Bottles/teats and related equipment. 
 
The companies may not: 
 
 Promote their products in hospitals, shops or to the general public . 
 Give free samples to mothers /birthing parents or free or subsidised suppli es to 
hospitals or maternity wards . 
 Give gifts to health workers or mothers . 
 Promote their products to health workers: any information provided by companies 
must contain only scientific and factual information . 
 Promote foods or drinks for babies . 
 Give m isleading information . 
 Have direct contact with mothers /birthing parents . 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 7 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Staff responsibilities in relation to the code : 
 
Appropriate and factual information on infant formula will be provided. 
 
 This should include that first milk formulas should be us ed for the first year and 
that they adhere to the same standards, despite huge variety in cost. 
 Parents will be directed towards ‘first steps nutrition’ Family assist and the baby 
postnatal notes for further information. 
 No antenatal group instruction will be given around artificial feeding. 
 Employees will never promote a particular brand of formula. 
 
6.0 Baby Friendly Initiative Care Standard 
 
This section of the guidance sets out the care that the Trust is committed to giving each and 
every expectant an d new mother /birthing par ent. It is based on the UNICEF UK Baby 
Friendly Initiative standards for maternity services and rele vant NICE guidance . 
 
6.1 Pregnancy 
 
All pregnant women /people will have the opportunity to discuss feeding and caring for their 
baby with a health professional. The value of connecting with their growing baby in utero will 
be discussed. Also the importance of skin to skin contact as well as the importance of 
responding to their babies needs for comfort, closeness and feeding after th e birth. 
 
This discussion will involve an exploration of what parents already know about breastfeeding. 
The value of breastfeeding as protection, comfort and food and getting breastfeeding off to a 
good start will be discussed. All women /people will be inv ited to the Baby Matters parent 
education session run by the Trust. 
 
6.2 Hand expre ssing / colostrum harvesting in pregnancy 
 
Research has shown that women /people who hand express in pregnancy are more confident 
and better prepared to breastfeed their bab ies. This is a useful skill to learn and it will take 
practice so encourage wome n to learn this from 36 weeks gestation onwards . 
 
Women /people should be given a colostrum harvesting pack with sterile syringes, labels and 
patient information. They can obta in this via their community midwife or via antenatal clinic. 
 
If colostrum is obtained during hand expressing then this can be stored, saved and frozen in 
the sterile syringes ready to use if required after the baby is born. Using the harvested 
colostrum w ill support breastfeeding for those occasions where mothers /birthing parents and 
their babies have a difficult start with birth and breastfeeding whilst they are supported with 
feeding in the early days. 
 
Women /people should be encouraged , whatever their f eeding intention in pregnancy, to 
consider expressing their colostrum in pregnancy, to enable them to learn this skill in 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 8 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
pregnancy, and for freezing for use if needed once the baby is born, especially if they are 
spontaneously producing breastmilk in thei r pregnancy. Why colostrum is important in the 
early days should be discussed. 
 
 Colostrum coming in naturally small volumes so as not to overload the baby’s 
system with additional water, which both mature breastmilk and formula milk 
contain. 
 Colostrum, li ke mature breastmilk, is tailored specifically for their baby. It will 
contain antibodies of viruses the mother /birthing parent has had in the past. 
 Colostrum is high in anti -infective and anti -viral properties and is important for 
priming and protecting a baby’s delicate gut. It will help protect a premature or sick 
baby’s delicate gut from developing necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) . 
 Colostrum contains the perfect balance of proteins, fats and micronutrients needed 
for babies as well as acting as a laxativ e to help the passing of the first meconium 
stools. 
 
6.3 Birth 
 
 All mothers /birthing parents will be offered the opportunity to have uninterrupted 
skin contact with their baby as close to birth as possible and at least until after the 
first feed and for as long as they want, so that the instinctive behaviour of breast 
seeking (baby) and nurturing (mother) is given an opportunity to emerge. 
 Skin-to-skin contact should never be interrupted at staff's instigation to carry out 
routine procedures (such as weighi ng baby) . This is because the baby’s innate 
reflexes during skin -to-skin will not recommence where left and the process will be 
started again. This increases the baby’s risk of becoming sleepy and reluctant to 
feed. If skin -to-skin contact is interrupted for clinical indication or maternal choice it 
should be re -instigated as soon as mother /birthing parent and baby are able . 
Evidence supports that early skin to skin contact should be normal practice for 
healthy newborns including those born by cae sarean an d babies born early at 35 
weeks or more . Consider transferring to the postnatal ward in skin to skin ensuring 
the baby is secure in the mother’s //birthing parent ’s arms. 
 All mothers /birthing parents will be encouraged to offer the first breastfeed in skin 
contact when the baby shows signs of readiness to feed. The aim is not to rush the 
baby to the breast but to be sensitive to the baby’s instinctive process towards self-
attachment . 
 When mothers /birthing parents choose to formula feed they will be encourage d to 
offer the first feed in skin contact. 
 Those mothers /birthing parents who are unable (or do not wish) to have skin 
contact immediately after birth, will be encouraged to commence skin contact as 
soon as they are able, or so wish. 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 9 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
6.4 Mothers /birthing parents separated from their baby on the neonatal unit are: 
 
 Supported to start expressing milk as soon as possible after birth ( ideally to start 
within the first hour but definitely within six hours) . Expressing will be dependent on 
maternal //birthing parent condition. If mother /birthing parent and baby have been 
separated due to maternal /birthing parent condition this may not be immediately 
possible. However regular communication should take place between the staff 
caring for the mother /birthing parent and those caring for the baby to ensure 
expressing can be commenced as soon as possible. 
 Supported to express effectively in the environment the mother /birthing parent is 
being cared for . An expressing pack should be given to the mother /birthing parent 
including sterile syringes, patient information and an expressing log. 
 Given resources to enable effective hormone release. These can include a 
comforter from baby or photos, videos etc. 
 Mothers /birthing parents with a baby on the neonatal unit will be suppor ted to 
express as effectively as possible and encouraged to express at least 8 times in 24 
hours including once during the night. They will be shown how to express by both 
hand and pump. 
 
It is the joint responsibility of midwifery and neonatal unit staff to ensure that mothers /birthing 
parents who are separated from their baby receive this information and support. 
 
6.5 Safety considerations 
 
Vigilance as to the baby’s well -being is a fundamental part of postnatal care in the first few 
hours after birth. For this reason, normal observations of the baby’s temperature, breathing, 
colour and tone should continue throughout the period of skin contact, in the same way as 
would occur if the baby were in a cot. Observations should also be made of the 
mother /birth ing parent , with prompt removal of the baby if the health of either gives rise to 
concern. 
 
It is important to ensure that mothers /birthing parents are aware of the need to keep their 
baby safe and should be aware of the protecting the baby so it cannot f all on to the floor or 
become trapped in bedding or by the mother’s /birthing parent ’s body. Particular care should 
be taken with the position of the baby, ensuring the head is supported so the infant’s airway 
does not become obstructed. 
 
Many mothers /birthing parents can continue to hold their baby in skin -to-skin contact during 
perineal suturing, but adequate pain relief must be provided. However, m others /birthing 
parents should be discouraged from holding their baby when receiving analgesia which 
causes drowsiness or alters their state of awareness (e.g. Entonox ). 
 
Where mothers /birthing parents choose to give a first feed of formula milk in skin contact, 
particular care should be taken to ensure the baby is kept warm. 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 10 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
7.0 Support for breastfeeding / feeding assessments 
 
 Mothers /birthing parents should be supported to enable them to achieve effective 
breastfeeding according to their needs (including appropriate support with 
positioning and attachment, hand expression, understand ing signs of effective 
feeding ). This will continue until the mother and baby are feeding confidently. 
 Mothers /birthing parents will have an opportunity to discuss breastfeeding in the 
first few hours after birth as appropriate to their own needs and those of their baby . 
This wil l include information on responsive feeding and feeding cues. Watch how 
the baby is attaching to the breast. 
 A formal feeding assessment will be carried out as often as required in the first 
week with a minimum of two assessments to ensure effective feedin g and the well -
being of mother /birthing parent and baby (found in the postnatal baby record) . This 
will include a dialogue with the mother /birthing parent to reinforce what is going 
well and where necessary , develop an appropriate plan of care to address a ny 
issues identified. 
 Prior to transfer home, all breastfeeding mothers /birthing parents will receive 
information, both verbally and in writing (postnatal baby record) , about how to 
recognis e effect ive feeding and where to call for additional help if they have any 
concerns. This will include the locally run MILK breastfeeding drop -ins situated in 
the West Sussex community . All breastfeeding mothers /birth ing parents will have a 
feeding assessment prior to discharge. 
 For those mothers /birthing parents who require additional support for more 
complex breastfeeding challenges please signpost to the community MILK 
breastfeeding drop -ins, or other locally run br eastfeeding support groups . If they 
are still an inpatient, discussion of the issue should take place between the midwife 
and maternity support worke r and possibly the paediatrician dependant on the 
concern. Please also see NICE Guidance on Postnatal care up to 8 weeks after 
birth (CG37) and NICE Clinical Knowledge Summaries on Breastfeeding 
Problems . Alternatively , section 13 of this guidance may offer some solutions to 
more commonly occurring issues. 
 Where there is a suspected tongue tie, a referral to the Infant Feeding Clinic 
(situated at both St Richard’s & Worthing Hospital on a weekly basis ) should be 
made. A referral of babies with a tongue tie should be made where there are 
concerns about feeding and where a feeding assessment has taken place . 
Mothers will be informed of this pathway and referral by the health care 
professi onal assessing the feeding. For more information please refer to the 
WSHT Division of Tongue Tie Guideline . 
 
7.1 Responsive feeding 
 
The term responsive feeding is used to describe a feeding relationship which is sensitive, 
reciprocal, and about more tha n nutrition. Staff should ensure that mothers /birthing parents 
have the opportunity to discuss this aspect of feeding and reassure mothers that: 
breastfeeding can be used to feed, comfort and calm babies; breastfed babies cannot be 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 11 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
overfed or ‘spoiled’ by too much feeding and breastfeeding will not, tire mothers /birthing 
parents any more than caring for a new baby without breastfeeding. 
 
Find out more in Unicef UK’s responsive feeding infosheet: http://unic ef.uk/responsivefeeding 
 
7.2 Exclusive breastfeeding 
 
 Mothers /birthing parents who breastfeed will be provided with information about 
why exclusive breastfeeding leads to the best outcomes for their baby and why it is 
particularly important during the e stablishment of breastfeeding. 
 When exclusive breastfeeding is not possible, the value of continuing partia l 
breastfeeding will be emphasis ed and moth ers will be supported to maximis e the 
amount of breastmilk their baby receives. 
 
7.3 Modified feeding reg imes 
 
There are a number of clinical indications for a short term modified /managed feeding regime 
in the early days after birth. Examples include: preterm or small for gestational age babies 
and those who are excessively sleepy after birth. Please see CG1104 Guideline for neonatal 
hypoglycaemia including the reluctant feeder for those babies at risk of hyperglycaemia and 
the assessment and treatment required for this group of babies. Frequent feeding, including 
a minimum number of feeds in 24 hours, should be offered to ensure safety. This guidance 
also offers a guide to reluctant feeders/ sleepy babi es also. 
 
8.0 Supplementation 
 
Artificial feed s should not be given to a breastfed baby except in cases of clinical indication 
or fully informed parental choice. A single supplementation can have a significant effect on 
milk supply as well as undermine th e mother’s /birthing parent’s confidence in their ability to 
breastfeed their baby. 
 
The supplementation information sheet will be provided and discussed with the 
mother /birthing parent , prior to the supplement being given. 
 
A record of all supplements give n will be made using the supplementation stickers provided 
on the ward , including the rationale for supplementation and that a discussion has taken 
place with the parent. 
 
 Mothers /birthing parents who give other feeds in conjunction with breastfeeding 
will be enabled to do so as safely as possible with the least disruption to 
breastfeeding. This will include appropriate information and a discussion regarding 
the potential impact of introducing a teat when a baby is learning to breastfeed 
(see these methods below). 
 The supplementation amount does not need to be calculated in a term, healthy 
baby. The supplement should be offered responsively, taking care to ensure the 
baby takes what it wants, rather than a specific amount. 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 12 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 Supplementation rates will be audit ed continuous ly, supported by monthly 
sampling and reviews of records. 
 
A breastfeed should always be the first method of feeding prior to supplementation to 
encourage direct breastfeeding an d with the aim of increasing breastmilk supply. 
 
The following should be encouraged to support continued breastfeeding: 
 
 Maintain prolonged skin -to-skin contact whenever possible. 
 Look out for and be ready to respond to baby’s early feeding cues, such as poking 
out their tongue, rooting, making seeking movements, fidg eting and more alert 
behaviour . Prior to supplementation help the mother /birthing parents position and 
attach the baby at the breast. 
 Express frequently (at least 8 times in 24 hours including once at night) by hand 
initially, and then in combination with a pump. This is essential to secure milk 
supply at this time. 
 
8.1 Finger feeding using a syringe 
 
No more than 2mls per feed should be given directly to the baby by syringe using this 
method . This is because of the increased risk of aspiration of milk into the lungs . If a larger 
volume is required then please consider one of the other options below. Less than 2mls can 
be given via sterile syringe or spoon . It is usually used as a short term measure. 
 
Advantages : 
 
 Finger feeding with a syringe is useful fo r giving small amounts of colostrum which 
is usually of a thicker consistency. 
 Protects breastfeeding by offering a small volume of supplementation (expressed 
breastmilk or formula) without the use of a teat. 
 Can encourage the baby to feed from breast if s leepy and not wanting to latch . The 
supplementation, especially if it is colostrum, will be highly calorific and will 
stimulate a sleepy baby and encourage it to feed from the breast. 
 Using a finger will s timulate the suckle reflex if baby is unable to lat ch and 
breastfeed. 
 It’s a suitable option for very young babies as the baby can pace the feed. 
 
Disadvantages: 
 
 The potential for some spillages which can cause waste . Mothers /birthing parents 
can feel particularly frustrated, especially if expressed breas tmilk was obtained. 
 Risk of the milk being aspirated into baby’s lungs, if used when a baby is too 
sleepy and with poor technique 
 It can be a slower way to feed so will take patience. 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 13 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
How to finger feed using syringe: 
 
 If the mother /birthing parent ’s wishes to use her finger , ensure that they wash and 
dries their hands before the start, making sure nails are not too long, and use a 
sterile syringe each time. If a staff member is using their finger please ensure 
gloves are worn. 
 Hold the baby in an uprigh t position. 
 Gently stroke down over baby’s top lip to encourage rooting and mouth opening. 
 Once baby opens their mouth place the pad of your finger to the roof of baby’s 
mouth, taking care not to make the baby gag. If this happens pull back your finger 
so it’s more comfortable for the baby. 
 Place the top part of the syringe into the baby’s cheek between your finger and 
baby’s gum. 
 Push the plunger gently so that the baby suckles your finger while drinking in the 
milk a little at a time (0.1 -2ml). 
 Continue u ntil all the milk has gone. 
 Continue to give the milk in this way until the baby feeds reliably at the breast, and 
consider cup feeding, or finger feeding with a tube, as milk volumes increase. 
Please note that this method should not be used in the communi ty. 
 
Larger volumes of expressed breastmilk or formula can be administered using this method. 
 
Advantages: 
 
 Finger feeding with a tube is used for larger amounts when the milk is more liquid. 
 Protects breastfeeding by offering a larger volume of supplement ation (expressed 
breastmilk or formula) without the use of a teat. 
 Using a finger will stimulate the suckle reflex if baby is unable to latch and 
breastfeed. 
 Taping the tube close to the breast will enable a baby to help increase maternal 
breastmilk supply whilst receiving the supplementation for those babies able to 
latch . 
 The baby will be actively pacing the feed. 
 Supplementation can be delivered in skin to skin with the mother /birthing parents 
even when using the tube & finger method. 
 
Disadvantages: 
 
 Potential for milk waste in the tube, however this is estimated to be approximately 
0.2-0.3mls. Therefore volumes 2mls and under should be given via finger and 
syringe. 
 If using the finger method a staff member should do this. This is because the 
practice is new to the department. 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 14 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
How to finger feed with tube: 
 
 Wash and dry your hands before beginning, using a fresh sterile tube and syringe 
each time. 
 Hold baby in a position ensuring the baby can have eye contact with mother and 
feeder. 
 Draw up the requir ed volume into a 10ml or 20ml syringe (this isn’t the volume of 
feed but using this size barrel is most effective). 
 Attach syringe to tube (size 5.0) and ensure milk is pushed to end of the tube. 
 Place the tip of tube near the tip of your gloved finger, a nd secure with tape. 
o If taping to breast, support the mother to attach baby in the normal way. 
However you may need to hold the tube as baby latches to ensure it is taken 
in by the baby with the breast. 
 The syringe can be placed next to the baby/mother /birthing parent in a clean 
environment (always ensure the plunger is in place) 
 Gently stroke down over baby’s top lip to encourage rooting and mouth opening. 
 Once baby opens their mouth place the pad of your finger to the roof of baby’s 
mouth, taking care no t to make the baby gag. If this happens pull back your finger 
towards the front of the mouth so it’s more comfortable for the baby. 
 Allow baby to suck your finger and the milk will gradually be drawn along the tube. 
 Allow the baby to pause so they can pace the feed at a rate that’s comfortable for 
them. 
 Please note that this method should not be used in the community. 
 
8.3 Cup feeding 
 
Larger volumes of expressed breastmilk or formula can be administered using this method. 
The baby will lap/ slurp the milk. A suitable soft curved cup should be used to avoid damage 
to lips. It is usually used as a short term measure . 
 
Please note: this method should never be used in a sleepy/lethargic baby due to risk of 
aspiration. 
 
Advantages: 
 
 Protects breastfeeding by off ering a larger volume of supplementation (expressed 
breastmilk or formula) without the use of a teat. 
 It’s a suitable option for very young babies as the baby can pace the feed. 
 
Disadvantages: 
 
 The potential for some spillages which can cause waste. 
 Risk of the milk being aspirated into baby’s lungs . 
 It can be a slower way to feed. 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 15 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
How to cup feed: 
 
 Support the baby in an upright position on your lap so t hat you are both 
comfortable. 
 Fill cup with required volume (bear in mind that the milk can only be out in the cup 
for 1 hour) . 
 Stroke your finger over baby’s top li p to encourage mouth opening. 
 Place the cup towards the corners of their mouth, with the cup res ting gently on the 
lower lip. 
 Angle the cup just enough so the milk is just touching the lower lip. 
 Wait for the baby to lap the mil k, they might smell it first. 
 It should not be poured into the baby’s mouth. 
 Gently increase the angle of the cup as the milk is swallowed, so that m ilk is 
always at the rim. 
 Allow baby to have short breaks as that way baby will pace the feed and take what 
is needed at each feed, but keep the cu p in place during the breaks. 
 The baby will stop when enough milk is taken by closing their mouth. 
 The cup can be wash ed and re -sterilise d for future use for the same baby . 
 
9.0 Artificial feeding 
 
 Mothers /birthing parents who formula feed will be enabled to do so as safely as 
possible through the offer of a discussion about how to prepare infant formula. 
 
 Mothers /birthing parents who formula feed will have a discussion about the 
importance of responsive feeding and be encouraged to: 
 
o Offer the first feed in skin -to skin contact. 
o Respond to cues that their baby is hungry . 
o Invite their baby to draw in the teat rather than forcing the teat into their 
baby’s mouth by encouraging r ooting response . 
o Pace the feed so that their baby is not forced to feed more than they want to . 
Keep the bottle horizontal. 
o Recognise cues that the baby has had enough milk. Such as splay ing of their 
hands and feet, dribbling milk from the mouth or pushi ng the the teat from 
their mouth using the tongue. 
o Be encouraged to swap sides when bottle feeding to ensure equal 
strengthen ing of the orbital muscles . 
o Limit who feeds the baby to 2 people at most with the idea lly the mother or 
main carer for at least the first few weeks. 
o Give eye contact and hold baby close . 
 
 Ensure that mothers /birthing parents are aware that all UK brought ‘First Milk’ 
formula is made to the same standard across all brands. The only variation is cost. 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 16 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
9.1 Inpatient formula milk provision 
 
 Mothers /birthing parents who have decided in pregnancy to formula feed are to 
bring ready -made formula with them to the hospital. This must be kept in their side 
cupboard and each bottle when in use, to be stored in our fridge. 
 All feeds to be d ecanted into our clear plastic bottles, in line with the international 
code for marketing of breastmilk substitutes. 
 We will always provide formula milk for babies with a medical indication for 
supplementation and where the mother is unable to express suff icient breast milk 
for the baby’s needs. 
 We recommend that if midwives are asked which formula we are stocking that they 
advise women that the milk is infant first milk formula, suitable for newborn babies, 
and that there is no evidence of difference betwe en the brands. 
 See Appendix 2 for separate guides for each of the following groups : 
A) Parents who have chosen in pregnancy to formula feed or mix feed from 
birth. 
B) Parents who have not planned to formula feed but choose to supplement 
their babies whilst inpatients . 
C) Parents whose babies have a medical indication for supplementation with 
formula milk . 
 
10.0 Early postnatal period: support for parenting and close relationships 
 
 Skin-to-skin contact will be encouraged thr oughout the postnatal period. 
 All parents will be supported to understand a newborn baby’s needs (including 
encouraging frequent touch and sensitive verbal/visual communication, keeping 
babies close, responsive feeding and safe sleeping practice). The Baby Postnatal 
Record contains within it some parent information regarding the local ‘Five to 
Thrive’ scheme. 
 Mothers /birthing parents who bottle feed will be encouraged to hold their baby 
close during feeds and offer the majority of feeds to their baby themse lves to help 
enhance the mother /birthing parents -baby relationship. 
 Parents will be given information about local parenting support that is available. 
This includes the locally run MILK breastfeeding drop -ins situated in the West 
Sussex community . 
 
11.0 Recommendations for health professionals on discussing bed -sharing 
 with parents 
 
Simplistic messages in relation to where a baby sleeps should be av oided; neither blanket 
prohibitions nor blanket permissions reflect the current research evidence. 
 
The current body of evidence overwhelmingly supports the following key messages, which 
shoul d be conveyed to all parents: 
 
 The safest place for your baby t o sleep is in a cot by your bed. 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 17 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 Sleeping with your baby on a sofa put s your baby at greatest risk. 
 Your baby should not share a bed with anyone who: 
o Is a smoker 
o Has consumed alcohol 
o Has taken drugs (legal or illegal) that make them sleepy. 
 
The incide nce of SIDS (often called “cot death”) is higher in the following groups: 
 
 Parents in low socio -economic groups . 
 Parents who c urrently abuse alcohol or drugs . 
 Young m others /birthing parents with more than one child . 
 Premature infants and those with low bi rthweight . 
 
Parents within these groups will need more face to face discussion to ensure that these key 
messages are explored and understood. They may need some practical help, possibly from 
other agencies, to enable them to put them into practice. 
 
The infographic and guidance is designed to support health professionals when discussing 
co-sleeping and SIDS with parents (see Appendix 3 ). Giving them all the facts and figures, 
this accessible guide assists health profess ionals to take a sensible, proportionate parent -
centred approach in order to find practical solutions to this complex issue. 
 
12.0 Care Standards for babies in the Neonatal Unit 
 
12.1 Supporting parents to have a close and loving relationship with their baby 
 
This service recognises the profound importance of secure parent -infant attachment for the 
future health and well -being of the infant and the challenges that the experience of having a 
sick or premature baby can present to the development of this re lationship. Therefore, this 
service is committed to care which actively supports parents to develop a close and loving 
bond with their baby. All parents will: 
 
 Have a discussion with an appropriate member of staff as soon as possible (either 
before or afte r their baby’s birth) about the importance of touch, comfort and 
communication for their baby’s health and development 
 Be actively encouraged and enabled to provide touch, comfort and emotional 
support to their baby throughout their baby’s stay on the neon atal unit 
 Be enabled to have frequent and prolonged skin contact with their baby as soon as 
possible after birth and throughout the baby’s stay on the neonatal unit . Local 
guidance from South Central Neonatal Network Quality Care Group for skin -to- 
skin on the NNU (Guideline framework for kangaroo care) can be found here. 
Additional information can also be found on the Bliss website . 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 18 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
12.2 Enabling babies to receive breastmilk and to breastfeed 
 
This service recognises the importance of breastmilk for babies’ survival and health. 
Therefore, this service will ensure that: 
 
 A mother’s /birthing parent’s own breastmilk is always the first choice of feed for 
their baby . 
 Mothers /birthing parents have a discussion regarding the importance of their 
breastmilk for their preterm or ill baby as soon as is appropriate (women /birthing 
parents will have received disc ussion regarding importance of breastmilk in the 
pregnancy but this should be reiterated in relation to their preterm or ill baby) . 
 When a baby is admitted to NNU it is the shared responsibility of the neonatal 
nurse and mother's /birthing parent’s midwife to ensure the mother /birthing parent 
is given sufficient help to express their milk by hand and by pump in order to 
establish and maintain lactation. This should ideally be commenced within 6 hours 
of birth but preferably within the first hour where possib le. 
 A suitable environment conducive to effective expression is created ideally near to 
their baby to optimise hormonal response . 
 Mothers /birthing parents have access to effective breast pumps and equipment . 
 Mothers /birthing parents are enabled to express breastmilk for their baby, including 
support to: 
o Express as early as possible after birth (ideally within six hours) . 
o Learn how to express effectively, including by hand and by pump . 
o Learn how to use pump equipment and store milk safely (BfN leaflet ). 
o Express frequently (at least eight times in 24 hours, including at least once at 
night) especially in the first two to three weeks following delivery, in order to 
optimise lo ng-term milk supply . 
o Overcome expressing difficulties where necessary, particularly where milk 
supply is inadequate, or if less than 750ml in 24 hours is expressed by day 
10. 
o Stay close to their baby when expressing milk . 
o Use their milk for mouth care, and later to tempt their baby to feed . 
 A formal review of expressing is undertaken a minimum of four times in the first 
two week s (and carried out at least once within the first 12 hours following birth) to 
support early expressing to support optimum expre ssing and milk supply . Please 
use the local expressing assessment tool and log. 
 Mothers /birthing parents receive care that supports the transition to breastfeeding, 
including support to: 
o Recognise and respond to feeding cues . 
o Use skin -to-skin contact to encourage instinctive feeding behaviour . 
o Position and attach their baby for breastfeeding . 
o Recognise effective feeding . 
o Overcome challenges when needed . 
 Mothers //birthing parents are provided with details of voluntary support for 
breastfeeding which th ey can choose to access at any time during their baby’s 
stay. 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 19 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 Mothers /birthing parents are supported through the transition to discharge home 
from hospital, including having the opportunity to stay overnight/for extended 
periods to support the development of mothers’ /birthing parents’ confidence and 
modified responsive4 feeding. 
 
12.3 Valuing parents as partners in care 
 
This service recognises that parents are vital to ensuring the best possible short and long 
term outcomes for babies and therefore, shoul d be considered as the primary partners in 
care. 
 
The service will ensure that parents: 
 
 Have unrestricted access to their baby unless individual restrictions can be justified 
in the baby’s best interest . 
 Are fully involved in their baby’s care, with all care possible entrusted to them . 
 Are listened to, including their observations, feelings and wishes regarding their 
baby’s care . 
 Have full information regarding their baby’s condition and treatment to enable 
informed decision -making . 
 Are made comfortable w hen on the unit, with the aim of enabling them to spend as 
much time as is possible with their baby. 
 
The service will ensure that parents who formula feed: 
 
 Receive information about how to clean/sterilise equipment and make up a bottle 
of formula milk . 
 Are able to feed this to their baby using a safe technique. 
 
13.0 Rooming in 
 
Mothers /birthing parents will normally assume primary responsibility for the care of the 
babies but will be supported with any questions or concerns they may have . 
 
Babies will not be routinely separated from their mothers /birthing parents at night. 
Mothers /birthing parents who are unable to care for their baby due to illness or temporary 
problem will be given appropriate care and staff will support the mother /birthing parent and/or 
partner to continue routine care of their babies . 
 
14.0 Weighing newborns 
 
Birth weight, correctly taken and recorded, and related to gestational age, is an essential first 
step in growth monitoring. Weight gain in the first few weeks of life is occ asionally a cause for 
concern but there is little evidence on optimal frequency of weighing in the neonate. 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 20 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Re-weighing a baby who has remained on the postnatal ward beyond 3 days for a feeding 
concern is recommended to minimise the potential for readmiss ion for abnormal weight loss 
on day 5. 
 
Babies should be weighed at birth, on day 5 and day 10 or prior to discharge to the health 
visitor. This must be documented in the baby postnatal record and in the Personal Child 
Health R ecord aka ‘red book’ where th is is available . 
 
Baby scales within th e Trust are calibrated annually. 
 
15.0 Feeding problems 
 
The mothers /birthing parents must be given details of local support groups and telephone 
numbers of feeding advisors. Please signpost breastfeeding mothers to their local MILK! 
Group. 
 
If a feeding problem is suspected a feeding assessment should take place (found in the 
postnatal baby record) and a plan p ut in place to support the mother /birthing parents . If the 
feeding assessment highlights any concerns then a Midwife or Maternity Support Worker 
must watch a full breastfeed, develop a care plan including revisiting positioning and 
attachment. Where weight l oss is between 8 and 10% at day 5 and there have been feeding 
problems identified, extra feeding support should be considered. 
 
For babies who lose over 10% of their birth weight on day 5, the advice of a paediatrician 
must be sought. This can be done via the neonatal unit or by bleeping the on -call 
paediatrician directly. 
 
For those mothers /birthing parents who require additional support for more complex 
breastfeeding challenges please highlight to an advanced trained maternity support worker 
or midwife o r to the community MILK breastfeeding drop -ins. Please also see NICE 
Guidance on Postnatal care up to 8 weeks after birth (CG37) and NICE Clinical Knowledg e 
Summaries on Breastfeeding Problems 
 
Where there is a suspected tongue tie, a referral to the Infant Feeding Clinic (situated at both 
St Richard’s & Worthing Hospital) should be made. A referral of babies with a tongue tie 
should be made where there are concerns about feeding and where a feeding assessment 
has taken place. Mothers /birthing parents will be informed of this pathway and referral by the 
health care professional ass essing the feeding. For more information please refer to 
CG12033 Tongue -tie guideline . 
 
The system for reporting newborns who are re -admitted with feeding problems during the 
first 28 days of life is for the health professional involved to complete the Trust web -based 
Clinical Incident Form (Datix). The incident will be allocated to the most appropriate senior 
midwife for review and feedback any lessons identified on review. 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 21 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
16.0 Training 
 
Midwives have the primary responsibility for protecting and promoting breastfeeding and 
helping women /birthing parents overcome related problems. Professional and support staff 
who have contact with pregnant wome n/people and mothers /birthing parents will receive 
training in breastfeeding support at a level appropriate to their professional group. 
 
Staff will have a mandatory infant feeding update annually. 
 
Clerical and ancillary staff will be made aware of the breast feeding policy and receive advice 
to enable them to refer breast feeding queries appropriately 
 
The responsibility for providing training lies with the Trust and details are contained within the 
Maternity Training Needs Analysis document . 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 22 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 
17.0 Monitoring / Audit 
 
The process for audit and monitoring of this guideline is completed in the following ways: 
 
a) Compliance with this guidance is audited at least annually using the UNICEF UK Baby 
Friendly Initiative audit. Audit results will be reported to t he head of service and head of 
division and an action plan will be agreed by Infant Feeding Group to address any 
areas of non -compliance that have been identified. 
b) Outcomes will be monitored by: 
 Guideline is monitored through Baby Friendly Initiative (BFI ) audit cycles 
specifically the continuous supplementation audit, as supplementation rates are 
indicative of the level of individualised care and promotion of breastfeeding. BFI 
also request staff knowledge and maternal /birthing parent satisfaction audits 
which help target training requirements fo r midwives and support workers 
 Monitor attendance of women /people & their partners to the Baby Matters 
antenatal session 
 Staff Training in relation to infant feeding - Training Needs Analysis audit 
 Monitoring brea stfeeding initiation rates & retention rates at 10 days 
c) Outcomes will be reported to: 
 Infant Feeding Group 
 Public Health Meeting 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 23 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
References 
 
ABM [Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine] Clinical Protocol #3: Hospital guidelines for the 
use of supplementary fee dings in the healthy term breastfed neonate, revised 2009. 
Breastfeed Med. 2009; 4(3):175 -82. 
 
Anderson GC, Moore E, Hepworth J, Bergman N. Early skin -to-skin contact for mothers and 
their healthy newborn infants (Cochrane Review). In: The Cochrane Library , Issue 2 2003. 
Oxford: Update Software. 
 
Baby Friendly Initiative Standards www.unicef.org.uk/babyfriendly/standards 
 
Ball, H. L. et al (2016). Bed -sharing by breastfeeding mothers: who bed -shares and what is 
the relationship with breastfeeding duration? Acta Paediatrica, DOI: 10.1111/apa.13354. 
 
Blair PS, Sidebo P, Evason -Coombe C et al (2009) Hazardous co -sleeping environments 
and risk factors amenable to change: case -control study of SIDS in south west England. 
BMJ; 339:b3666 
 
Flint, A., New, K. and Davies, M. (2016) ‘Cup -feeding versus other forms of supplemental 
enteral feeding for newborn babies unable to fully breastfeed’ Cochrane Review 31 August 
2016 . 
 
Horsley T et al. (2007) Benefits and harms associated with the practice of bed sharing. Arch 
Pediatr Adolecs Med; 161 (3): 237 -245 
 
NICE postnatal care guidance: http://www.nice.org.uk/cg37 
 
NICE guidance on maternal and child nutrition: http://www.nice.org.uk/ph11 
 
The international Cod e of Marketing of Breastmilk Substitutes 
http://www.unicef.org.uk/BabyFriendly/Health -Professionals/Going -
BabyFriendly/Maternity/The -International -Code -of-Marketing -of-Breastmilk -Substitutes -/ 
 
Unicef (January 2015) Sample infant feeding policy (maternity) 
 
Victora et al (2015). Association between breastfeeding and intelligence, educational 
attainment, and income at 30 years of age: a prospective birth cohort study from Brazil. 
Lancet Glob Health, 3: e199 –205 
 
WBTi UK Report 2016 https://ukbreastfeeding.org/wbtiuk2016/ 
 
World Health Or ganisation 2003 Global Strategy for Infant and Young Child Feeding 
World Health Organisation/UNICEF/ Baby Friendly Initiative UK. 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 24 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Appendix 1 : Baby Friendly Initiative Stages 
 
Stage 1 
Building a firm foundation 
 
1. Have written policies and guidelines to support the standards. 
2. Plan an education programme that will allow staff to implement the standards 
according to their role. 
3. Have processes for implementing, auditing and evaluating the standards. 
4. Ensure that there is no promotion of breastmilk substitutes , bottles, teats or 
dummies in any part of the facility or by any of the staff. 
 
Stage 2 
An educated workforce 
 
1. Educate staff to implement the standards according to their role and the service 
provided. 
 
Stage 3 
Parents’ experiences of maternity services - 
 
1. Support pregnant women /people to recognise the importance of breastfeeding and 
early relationships for the health and well -being of their baby. 
2. Support all mothers /birthing parents and babies to initiate a close relationship and 
feeding soon after birth. 
3. Enable mothers /birthing parents to get breastfeeding off to a good start. 
4. Support mothers /birthing parents to make informed decisions regarding the 
introduction of food or fluids other than breastmilk. 
5. Support parents to have a close and loving relationshi p with their baby. 
 
Parents’ experiences of neonatal units: 
 
1. Support parents to have a close and loving relationship with their baby. 
2. Enable babies to receive breastmilk and to breastfeed when possible. 
3. Value parents as partners in care. 
 
Re-accreditation - 
 
1. Demonstrate innovation to achieve excellent outcomes for mothers /birthing 
parents , babies and their families. 
 
Click here for a flowchart overview of BFI accreditation. For more information and guidance 
around the BFI stages please visit the UNICEF BFI website here 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 25 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Appendix 2 : Staff information sheet 
 
A. For parents who have chosen in pregnancy to formula feed or mix feed from the 
outset, they will be asked to provide formula milk for their babies whilst inpatients. 
 
They will be asked to bring in a ‘ Starter Pack’ of ‘Ready to Feed’ first infant formula, which 
are available from most supermarkets and pharmacies. Healthy Start vouchers can be used 
to purchase these packs. We are advising that women /people should expect their babies to 
need around 8 teat s and bottles per day, although the number of bottles may be reduced if 
we can decant and minimise wastage. 
 
For these women /people , midwives are asked to: 
 
 Check with the parents that the Starter Pack formula milk they have brought is a first 
milk for new born babies and the expiry date. An open bottle should be discarded 
within 1 hour from opening if the baby drinks directly from it. However if decanting this 
can be refrigerated at kept at the back of the fridge for 24 hours. 
 
 Discuss colostrum and collec ting and offer an antenatal expressing pack. 
 
 Demonstrate responsive bottle feeding and discuss feeding cues. 
 
 Demonstrate how to make up formula from powder safely and understand the 
importance of washing and sterilising the necessary equipment before dis charge. 
Reiterate the importance of using boiling water as there is a misconception that using 
cooled boiled water is ok. Boiling water is essential for killing the bacteria in the 
powder, not to sterilise the water alone. 
 
 Ensuring that they position them selves and their baby safely, in order to look into 
baby’s eyes, and to pace the feeds so as not to overload the baby. 
 
 The ‘Perfect Prep Machine’ and other mechanical bottle preparation technology is 
currently not recommended. 
 
 Use the Guide to Bottle fe eding booklet found here: 
https://www.unicef.org.uk/babyfriendly/wp -
content/uploads/sites/2/2008/02/start4life_guide_to_bottle_ -feeding.pdf 
 
 For a simple guide on which type of formula and how to feed responsively please see 
the information contained within the Baby Postnatal Record. 
 
B. Parents who have not planned to formula feed but choose to supplement their 
babies whilst in patients 
 
For these women /people , midwives are asked to: 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 26 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 Continue to maximise support and encouragement for breastfeeding and expression 
of breast milk, seeking additional support where necessary. Ensure women /people 
are fully informed about the impact o n breastmilk supply when supplementing with 
formula and the risk of nipple confusion when using a bottle teat. 
 
 Give to the baby in the least disruptive way to breastfeeding (cup/ finger feeding), 
especially if this is the eventual feeding intention. See Section 8.0 for other methods 
of feeding. 
 
 In the circumstance where parents decide that they wish to give their baby formula, 
we will provide them with formula milk for the next time their baby needs to feed, unti l 
their partner or family member is able to bring in formula milk for the baby. Formula 
milk ‘starter packs’ are available at a range of supermarkets and pharmacies close to 
the Trust hospitals. 
 
 If formula milk is requested before any ‘Ready Made’ formula can be brought in for 
the baby, please decant any formula milk provided by the ward in a non -branded 
bottle. Decant the amount required into a neutral sterile container and place the rest 
into the fridge indicating date and time of opening (use the refrig erated milk within 24 
hours). The remaining milk can be used for this or other babies within 24 hours of 
opening so long as it remains refrigerated. 
 
 Inform the parents that the decanted formula should be used within 1 hour 
 
 If using a bottle demonstrate responsive bottle feeding technique 
 
 Ensuring that they position themselves and their baby safely, in order to look into 
baby’s eyes, and to pace the feeds so as not to overload the baby. 
 
 The ‘Perfect Prep Machine’ and other mechanical bottle preparation technology is 
currently not recommended. 
 
 Use the Guide to Bottle feeding booklet found 
here: https://www.unicef.org.uk/babyfrie ndly/wp -
content/uploads/sites/2/2008/02/start4life_guide_to_bottle_ -feeding.pdf 
 
 For a simple guide on which type of formula and how to feed responsively please see 
the information contained within the Baby Postnatal Record. 
 
 If parents will continue to give infant formula on discharge from hospital, they should 
be shown how to make up infant formula from powder safely, and understand the 
importance of washing and sterilising the necessary equipment prior to discharge. 
Reiterate the importance of using bo iling water as there is a misconception that using 
cooled boiled water is ok. Boiling water is essential for killing the bacteria in the 
powder, not to sterilise the water alone. 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 27 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
C. For parents whose baby needs formula milk as a supplementation for a medi cal 
reason 
 
We will always provide formula milk for babies with a medical indication for supplementation 
and where the mother /birthing parent is unable to express sufficient breast milk for the baby’s 
needs. 
 
For these women /people midwives are asked to: 
 
 Discuss the medical reason for supplementing, on the basis of a documented 
paediatric recommendation. 
 
 Support mother /birthing parents to keep on breastfeeding and/or expressing. Where 
possible babies should breastfeed or receive expressed breast milk prior to a formula 
supplementation. This will help the mother /birthing parents maintain or increase milk 
supply. 
 
 Each ward will have a supply of a single brand of formula milk. Check the expiry date 
on the individual bottle. 
 
 Decant the amount required in to a non -branded sterile container and place the rest 
into the fridge indicating date and time of opening (use the refrigerated milk within 24 
hours). The remaining milk can be used for this or other babies within 24 hours of 
opening so long as it remains refrigerated. 
 
 Inform the parents that the decanted formula should be used within 1 hour 
 
 Give to the baby in the least disruptive way to breastfeeding (cup/ finger feeding). 
See Section 8.0 for other methods of feeding. 
 
 If using a bottle demonstrate responsive bottle feeding technique 
 
 Ensuring that they position themselves and their baby safely, in order to look into 
baby’s eyes, and to pace the feeds so as not to overload the baby. 
 
 Use the Guide to Bottle fee ding booklet found 
here: https://www.unicef.org.uk/babyfriendly/wp -
content/uploads/sites/2/2008/02/start4life_guide_to_bottle_ -feeding.pdf 
 
 For a simple guide on which type of formula and how to feed responsively please see 
the information contained within the Baby Postnatal Record. 
 
 If parents decide to switch to formula but no longer with a medical indication, then ask 
them to b ring a Starter Pack of ‘Ready to Use’ formula into hospital. These are 
available from supermarkets and pharmacies. 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 28 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 If parents will continue to give infant formula on discharge from hospital, they should 
be shown how to make up infant formula from powder safely, and understand the 
importance of washing and sterilising the necessary equipment prior to discharge. 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 29 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Appendix 3 : A guide for health professionals: Safe Sleeping 

CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 30 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 31 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 32 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 33 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Appendix 4: Parent information - Supplementation 
 
Possible effects of offering a formula supplementation to a 
breastfeeding baby 

Breastfeeding is generally recognised to be the most beneficial feeding method for both 
mother and baby in terms of health outcomes (NICE 2006). Breastfeeding provides a 
complete food, and is act ively protective for both mother and baby, whilst formula, although 
meeting with European nutritional standards (Commission Directive 2006), does not provide 
immunity or contain any of the other ingredients that breastmilk does. 
 
Some mothers worry that t heir colostrum is not enough for their baby. This milk is very 
special and full of factors that protect your baby and colostrum is naturally produced in 
smaller quantities in the first two days after birth. 
 
New babies can be unsettled, fussy or sleepy a nd sometimes mothers ask for formula 
supplements without realising the possible problems of giving formula to their breastfed 
newborn. Staff can suggest ways of soothing your baby, support you to recognise effective 
feeding, and help you hand express your breastmilk in the first instance. 
 
 If you are thinking of giving your breastfed baby formula milk, here is some important 
information to consider to help you make an informed decision. 
Helpful Hints… 
 
 Skin to skin is wonderful at calming your baby; encourages their instinctive re sponse to 
breastfeed and will increase your breastmilk supply. They are happiest being held. 
 Breastfed babies will normally feed 8 -12 times in twenty four hours. Feed your baby at 
the earliest feeding cues. Ring your call -bell so we can help guide you w ith optimal 
positioning and attachment of your baby to your breast to get the most out of the 
breastfeed. 
 Try a laid back (baby driven) position which will encourage your baby’s instinctive 
behaviour to self -attach. 
 If your baby seems to be sleepy wh ilst breastfeeding, compress the breast your baby is 
feeding from, with your hand, which will increase milk flow and encourage your baby to 
actively feed. Alongside this switch your baby to the other breast when they are no 
longer actively feeding which wi ll bring a new ‘let down’ of milk and will encourage baby 
to actively feed. Switch over 3 -4 times until your baby is done. 
 Express small but frequent amounts and give this to your baby regularly on a finger or 
syringe which will stimulate a sleepy baby. 
CG1129 Newborn Feeding Guideline v8.0 March 2022 Page 34 of 34 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this docume nt. 
Some things to consider… 
 
 Effects on breastmilk supply: Offering formula milk may affect your breastmilk supply 
as breastfeeding works best if you repeatedly put your baby to your breast again and 
again. This extra stimulation will improve your supply and help settle your baby. By 
replacing a breastfeed with formula, your breasts can become over -full (engorged), 
which can be painful and can cause some difficulty in attaching your baby to the breast. 
If this is not re solved quickly (by getting your baby to feed from your breasts or by 
expressing your breastmilk) it can lead to reduced milk supply. It could also lead to 
mastitis. 
 Increased chance of gut infections: breastfed babies have a lower gut pH level (this 
means that their gut is more acidic) during the first six weeks of life. This is beneficial as 
it reduces harmful germs in the gut. If formula supplements are given in the first seven 
days, the development of the lower pH in the gut is slowed. 
 Increased chance of cow’s milk allergy: Giving formula milk to a breastfed baby can 
increase their chance of developing Cow’s Milk Protein Allergy (CMPA). 
 Nipple confusion: Sucking on a bottle teat may make it more difficult for the baby to 
latch to the breast e ffectively as the action the baby makes with its mouth when feeding 
from a teat is very different. 
 Over -feed: Babies given larger volumes of formula milk can take more than required 
during a feed and can be less satisfied on subsequent breastfeeds. Bre astfeeds are 
naturally smaller in volume while delivering the exact nutritional needs to your baby. 
Medical reasons: Occasionally, there are medical reasons to offer a breastfed baby 
supplements of formula milk. The health professionals working with you will advise you if 
your baby has a medical need for supplemental milk. The healthiest supplement is the 
mother’s expressed breast milk followed by formula milk. 
 
Supporting breastfeeding while giving a formula supplement... 
 Offer the formula milk in sm all amounts to mimic how breastfeeding works. 
 Staff will help you to use a cup or tube (supplementary nursing system) to avoid possible 
teat confusion. 
 Express your breastmilk so that your supply is maintained. As babies grow, latching 
issues can i mprove and you may wish to remove the added formula supplement. Decisions… 
If you do decide to give formula milk after reading this information and considering your 
options, staff will be sensitive to your informed decision, and will support you to keep your 
options open to continue breastfeeding.