# Extracted from: CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Programme SOP.pdf
# Guideline ID: cg17004-newborn-hearing-screening-programme-sop
# Content length: 76269 characters
# Processing date: 1750066900.4381962

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 1 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure 
Summary statement: How does the 
document support patient care? This pathway provides information for staff with regard 
to the process for offering, undertaking and providing 
results for newborn hearing screening 
Staff/stakeholders involved in 
development: Jacqueline Gregory 
Division: Women & Children’s 
Department: Maternity 
Responsible Person: Chief of Service 
Author: Newborn Hearing Screening co -ordinator 
For use by: Maternity Support Workers, Health care assistants, 
midwives, NICU Nursery Nurses, NICU staff nurses 
Purpose: To provide accurate information for staff on the 
processes to follow with regard to newborn hearing 
screening 
This document supports: NHS Newborn Hearing Screening Programme Service 
specifications 2019 -20 
Key related documents: UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) Maternity Guidelines: 
Antenatal Care and Patient Information, Postnatal 
Care 
UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) Trust Policies: An 
organisation -wide policy for screening procedures, An 
organisation -wide policy for diagnostic testing 
Approved by: Joint Obstetric Gu ideline Group (JOGG) 
Approval date: 18th May 2022 Uploaded : 24th May 2022 
Ratified by Board of Directors/ 
Committee of the Board of Directors Not Applicable – Divisional ratification only required 
Ratification Date: Not Applicable – Divisional ratification only required 
Expiry Date: November 2024 
Review date: May 2024 
If you require this document in another format such as Braille, large print, 
audio or another language please contact the Trusts Communications Team 
Reference Number: CG17004 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 2 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 

The interpretation and application of clinical guidelines will remain the 
responsibility of the individual clinician. 
If in doubt contact a senior colleague or expert . 
 
 Version Date Author Status Comment 
1.0 March 2017 Newborn Hearing 
Screening Co -ordinator Archived New WSHFT Pathway 
2.0 April 2018 Newborn Hearing 
Screening Co -ordinator Archived New title and updated 
SOP 
3.0 Dec 2018 Newborn Hearing 
Screening Co -ordinator Archived New model of screening 
adopted 
4.0 July 2020 Newborn Hearing 
Screening Co -ordinator Archived See page 37 for 
amendments 
5.0 November 
2021 J. Gregory, Newborn 
Hearing Screening Co -
ordinator Archived Amendments to - 
Point 4.2: Screening 
Pathway Well Baby 
WSH NHSP Site. 
Appendix 3: 
Management of record 
for NICU baby in S4H. 
Appendix 5: Screening 
on NICU if baby has 
already been screened. 
Appendix 14: Baby 
confirmed as screened 
but no imported data or 
results saved to same 
ear. 
Formatting and new 
Trust logo inserted. 
5.1 May 2022 J. Gregory, Newborn 
Hearing Screening Co -
ordinator LIVE Links updated 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 3 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Contents 
 
1.0 Background ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 4 
2.0 Identifying eligible population ................................ ................................ ...................... 4 
3.0 National Screening Pathways from Service Specifications ................................ ......... 5 
4.0 UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) Screening pathway ................................ ...................... 7 
4.1 Screening Pathway NICU Baby WSH NHSP site ................................ ....................... 8 
4.2 Screening Pathway Well Baby WSH NHSP Site ................................ ........................ 9 
4.3 Screening Pathways Out Of Area Babies/Babies Going Into Foster Care OOA ....... 10 
4.4 DNA - WELL BABY NHSP SITE ................................ ................................ .............. 11 
5.0 Performing a Hearing Screen ................................ ................................ ................... 12 
6.0 Referrals Following the Hearing Screen ................................ ................................ ... 13 
7.0 Governance Structure, Reporting and Incidents ................................ ....................... 15 
8.0 Training and Ongoing Assessments ................................ ................................ ......... 17 
9.0 Equipment and QA Tests ................................ ................................ ......................... 18 
Appendix1: Daily Checks ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 20 
Appendix 2 : NICU - Process Map ................................ ................................ ........................ 21 
Appendix 3: Management of record for NICU baby in S4H ................................ ................. 22 
Appendix 4: NICU - Paperwork ................................ ................................ ........................... 23 
Appendix 5: Screening on NICU if baby has already been screened ................................ ... 25 
Appendix 8: Stickers for Postnatal Notes ................................ ................................ ............ 28 
Appendix 9: Letters for parents ................................ ................................ ........................... 29 
Appendix 10: NHSP Ward Books/logs ................................ ................................ ................ 30 
Appendix 11: Babies in Foster Care ................................ ................................ ................. 31 
Appendix 12: Child Death Notifications ................................ ................................ ............... 32 
Appendix 13: Decline/Withdrew from Screen ................................ ................................ ...... 33 
Appendix 14: Baby confirmed as screened but no imported data or results saved 
to same ear ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 34 
Appendix 15: Babies born out of area but WHS site responsible for screening ................... 35 
Appendix 16: S4H/NIPESMaRT has not been populated ................................ .................... 36 
Appendix 17: SYSTMONE Failsafe (CHIS) ................................ ................................ ......... 37 
Appendix 18: Outcome codes in S4H ................................ ................................ .................. 39 
Appendix 19: Bloodspot/NIPE/NHSP List Failsafe ................................ .............................. 40 
Appendix 20: NICU Failsafes ................................ ................................ .............................. 41 
Appendix 22: High risk of hearing loss notification from antenatal booking .......................... 45 
Appendix 23: GP’S in West Coastal CCG 09G ................................ ................................ .... 46 
Appendix 24: Home births ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 47 
Appendix 25: Checking that all Newborn Screening has been completed ........................... 48 
Appendix 26: Border Agreements ................................ ................................ ....................... 49 
Appendix 27: Contact List ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 50 
Abbreviations used in this document ................................ ................................ ................... 51 
References ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 52 
Main additions/Changes ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 53 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 4 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure 
 
1.0 Background 
 
The newborn hearing screening test helps to identify babies who have permanent hearing 
loss as early as possible. This means parents can get the support and advice they need right 
from the start. 
 
One to two babies in every 1,000 are born with a permanent hearing loss in one or both 
ears. This increases to about 1 in every 100 babies who have spent more than 48 hours in 
intensive care. Most of these babies are born into families with no history of permanent 
hearing los s. Permanent hearing loss can significantly affect a baby's development. Early 
identification can provide these babies with a better chance of developing language, speech, 
and communication skills. 
 
2.0 Identifying eligible population 
 
UH Sussex West (SRH& WH) are responsible for screening all babies who are registered 
with an NHS Coastal West Sussex CCG and all babies who have spent more than 48hrs on 
any neonatal unit in the country, finishing their stay on a neonatal unit at UH Sussex West 
(SRH&WH) . 
 
Smart4Hearing is population electronically via PDS (Patient demographic service). 
Capture of full cohort and movement of population is based on the following, and 
incorporates layers of fail safes to ensure no babies are missed. 

COHORT 
NICU residents including: 
Monthly Badgernet report 
Weekly notification of transfer’s in and out 
from Senior BadgerNet Data Co -ordinator 
 
Transfers out to other NHSP 
sites 
Health Visitors includi ng movers in under 
3mths of age (Failsafe) 
Transfers in from other 
NHSP sites 
Systmone report (CHIS) 
(Failsafe) 
Daily MIS discharge list 
S4H 
UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) 
Movers: in notified from other 
postnatal screening programmes 
(failsafe) 
Movers in for postnatal care (Failsafe) 
Daily Sema birth list 
Nursing Ward list on SEMA 
Babies delivered by an independent 
midwife whose GP is mapped to 
WSH NHSP site 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 5 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
3.0 National Screening Pathways from Service Specifications 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 6 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 

S4H web address – which can only be accessed via a secure N1 link 
SMSNHSP Manual Login 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 7 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
4.0 UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) Screening pathway 
 
The model of screening adopted by UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) – WSH site - is a hospital 
service for parents and b abies. The national NHS newborn hearing screening programme 
standards are always followed and reported against . 
 
Information regarding the screening programmes is provided to all parents: 
 ‘Screening for you and your baby’ booklet is provided via a QR card to all parents by 
community midwives at booking . 
 
 Information can also be found at: 
Screening Tests for you and your baby: Description in brief 
 Parents of babies who are resident on NICU are also given the booklet ‘Screening for you 
and your baby – babies in special care unit’s 
Screening Tests for you and your baby: Babies in special care units 
 An easy read version is availa ble: 
Screening Tests for you and your baby: Easy guides 
 Written information is available in different languages : 
Screening Tests for you and your baby: Description in brief 
 Information is available to watch on animations, these are subtitled for sign language nad 
different languages : 
Screening Tests for you and your baby 
Screening test for you and your baby - different languages, subtitled and British Sign 
Language 
 A specific NHSP animation can be found using the following link: 
Newborn hearing screening (English) - YouTube 
Babies can only be screened up to 12 weeks of age as per the national protocol. 
 
All parents of well babies are offered screening on the postnatal ward prior to discharge , as 
close to discharge as possible . If a baby is on antibiotics they should not be screened until 
either: antibiotics have stopped and baby is deemed as being well or at the point of 
discharge if baby is going home on antibiotics . Home births, discharges from delivery 
suites/birth centre and repeat screens are offered an appointment in community clinics or at 
their NIPE appointment . This NHSP service is provided by a team of maternity support 
workers who have undertaken their newborn hearing screening training, who are proved to 
be competent by passing the necessary national NHSP qualification s, who maintain their 
skills by carrying out regular screening and who are assessed annually. 
All parent s of NICU protocol babies (i.e. babies who have spent >48hrs on a NICU/SCBU) 
are offered hearing screening prior to discharge, once baby is well and off all medication. 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 8 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
This service is provided by staff nurses and nursery nurses on the neonatal units who h ave 
undertaken their newborn hearing screening training, proved to be competent by passing the 
necessary national NHSP qualification s, who maintain their s kills and are assessed annually. 
 
4.1 Screening Pathway NICU Baby WSH NHSP site 

Screen offered to all babies who are resident in neonatal unit > 48hrs 
Ensure parents have a copy of ‘Screening tests for you and your baby: babies in special care units’ in their preferred 
language where possible . 
Ensure parents are fully informed about the screening proc ess and possible results and referrals which may be 
required . 
AOAE 
& 
AABR 
Bilateral Clear 
Responses for AABR 
No risk 
factors. 
Discharge 
to routine 
surveillance. 
Risk factors 
present; 
including 
screen results 
of bilateral 
NCR for AOAE 
with bilateral 
CR’s for AABR 
No Clear responses 
on 1 or both ears for 
AABR 
Arrange clinic 
appointment for 
screening 
Refer to Audiology for 
Diagnostic ABR 
Screen and data 
capture declined 
Screen and data capture 
consented to 
Set record as Declined in 
SMART4Hearing. 
Send letter to GP/HV/Parent offering 
screening up to 3 months of age. 
Refer to Audiology to be seen at 8 -10 
months old . 
Discharged with 
no screen 
Refer to 
Audiology 
for targeted 
follow up 
. 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 9 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
4.2 Screening Pathway Well Baby WSH NHSP S ite 

AOAE1 only 
 
COMMUNITY CLINIC 
AOAE1 
Risk 
factors 
present 
Refer to 
Audiology for 
Diagnostic ABR 
OTOPORTS SHOULD BE DOWNLOADED WHEN 
NEXT IN THE HOSPITAL UNLESS GOING ON 
ANNUAL LEAVE/NOT WORKING FOR > 3DAYS. IN 
WHICH CASE THEY SHOULD BE DOWNLOADED 
THAT DAY. 
 
*Appoint
ment 
detai ls to 
be added 
to S4H 
Book into 
AOAE2/AABR clinic 
with appropriately 
trained MSW/HCA* 
Baby on Bramber / Tangmere Ward 
 
Appointment requested 
Complete screening appointment book and excel clinic 
diary sheet * 
Bilateral 
Clear 
Responses 
Complete 
paperwork 
and add 
screening 
complete 
sticker to 
front of 
notes. 
CR letter to 
parents 
No risk 
factors. 
Discharge 
to routine 
surveillance
. 
No Clear responses 
1 or both ears 
Complete paperwork 
and add new 
screening 
appointment sticker 
to front of notes. 
Provide parents with 
NCR letter with 
appointment details 
on 
Risk 
factors 
present 
Refer to 
Audiology 
for targeted 
follow up 
Screen and/or data 
capture declined 
Baby over 24 hrs old 
Set record as 
Declined in 
SMART4 
Hearing. 
 
Send letter to 
GP/HV/Parent 
offering 
screening up to 
3 months of 
age. 
 
Explain screen to parents. If parent’s consent to screen, to decide with parents if this is to be carried 
out on the ward or at an outpatient appointment. Only AOAE1 to be offered on the w ard unless baby 
is in 24hours later in which case AOAE2 may be offered. 
If parents wish to have an appointment, provide parents with details. 
(avoid d ay 5 & 10 due to midwife visit) Appointment sticker to be stuck onto purple notes. 
No Clear 
responses 1 or 
both ears 
Baby discharged under 
24hrs old 
Bilateral Clear 
Responses 
Complete paperwork 
including PCHR form, 
add screening complete 
sticker to front of notes. 
Give out reaction to 
sounds leaflet if no red 
book. 
No risk 
factors. 
Discharge 
to routine 
surveillance 
 
NHSP admin to refer 
to Audiology for 
targeted follow up 
DNA 
- See 
DNA 
path
way 
DNA - 
See 
DNA 
path
way 
Parents 
decide would 
like screening 
– book into 
AOAE2/AABR 
clinic 
BABIES DISCHARGED FROM NICU WITH NO 
SCREEN. 
BABIES MOVED INTO AREA WITH NO 
COMPLETED SCREEN. 
 NHSP ADMIN /MSW TO CONT ACT PARENTS 
WITH AN APPOINTMENT. 
Baby re -admitted/in for 
jaundice or NIPE check 
No Clear 
responses 
1 or both 
ears. If 
able to 
carry out 
an AABR 
 
AOAE1 undertaken 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 10 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
4.3 Screening Pathways Out Of Area Babies /Babies Going Into Foster Care OOA 

 Download result. 
 
Screen on the ward for AOAE1 as close to discharge as possible. 
Baby is Out of Area if they do not have a Coastal West GP. See GP list below. 
Bilateral Clear 
Responses 
Complete 
paperwork and 
add screening 
complete sticker 
to front of notes 
Download result. 
NHSP Admin to 
record details and 
results on OOA 
Spreadsheet b reak 
share on record. 
No Clear responses 
1 or both ears 
Complete 
paperwork. 
 
Advise parents they 
will be invited into 
clinic nearer to their 
home .Provide 
parents with letter 
 
Coastal West Sussex GP’s CCG 09G 
Adur: The Ball Tree Surgery , Harbour View Healthcare, The Manor Practice , New Pond Row Surgery , Northbourne 
Medical Centre , The Orchard Surgery 
Arun: The Coppice & Angmering Medical Centre , Fitzalan Medical Group , The Lawns Surgery , The Park Surgery , 
Westcourt Medical Centre , Willow Green Surgery 
Chanctonbury: Billingshurst Surgery , The Glebe Surgery , Henfield Medical Centre , Steyning Health Centre 
Chichester: Cathedral Medical Group , Langley House Surgery , Lavant Road Surgery , Loxwood Medical Practice, 
Parklands Surgery , Petworth Surgery , Pulborough Medical Group , Riverbank Medical Centre , Selsey Medical Practice , 
Southbourne Surgery , Tangmere Medical Centre , Witterings Health Centre 
Regis: The Arundel Surgery , Avisford Medical Group , Bersted Green Surgery, Bognor Medical Practice , The Croft 
Practice , Flansham Park Health Centre , Grove House Surgery , Maywood Healthcare Centre , West Meads Surgery 
Worthing (Cissbury): The Barn Surgery , Broadwater Medical Centre , Cornerways Surgery , The Lime Tree Surgery , 
The Phoenix Surgery , Selden Medical Centre , St Lawrence Surgery , Strand Medical Group , Victoria Road Surgery , 
Worthing Medical Group 
NHSP admin to Admin to 
record details and results on 
OOA Spreadsheet to break 
share and contact correct 
NHSP site to advise further 
screening is required. 
 
Neighbouring NHSP sites: 
BRI – Brighton, Hove and Mid Sussex SAS – Sussex and Surrey (Horsham/Crawley) 
WSY – West Surrey PIW – Portsmouth and Isle of Wight (Peters field) 
HHA – Hampshire EAH – Eastbourne and Hastings 
Exceptions: 
Babies living in 
Hampshire, who UH 
Sussex West 
(SRH&WH) provide 
Postnatal care to. 
 
These babies need 
an appointment in 
an AOAE2/AABR 
clinic at the hospital. 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 11 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
4.4 DNA - WELL BABY NHSP SITE 

P16007 Safeguarding children policy 
 
Any questions or queries regarding NHSP can be emailed directly t o the NHSP Co -ordinator 
or the NHSP admin. 
 
Safeguarding concern. 
 
Raise with Team Lead 
1st DNA 
2nd DNA 
Unable to gain access 
AOAE1 or AOAE2/AABR CLINIC 
APPOINTMENT 
Contact parents and arrange another 
clinic appointment. 
Advise NHSP admin so appointment 
can be added to S4H 
AABR screener to arrange visit for all 
screening to be completed with KPI of 
>4wekks 
Advise NHSP admin of date, add to S4H 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 12 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
5.0 Performing a Hearing Screen 
 
The first screening test is called an automated otoacoustic emission (AOAE). 
 
A small soft -tipped earpiece is placed in baby's ear and gentle clicking sounds are played. 
When the ear receives this sound, the outer hair cells in the cochlea produce a tiny 
response , this is known as an otoacoustic emission. This tiny response can be picked up by 
the screening equipment. This screen takes a couple of minutes. 
 
It's not always possible to get clear responses from the first screen. T he reasons for this can 
be: 
 
 Baby has a permanent hearing loss 
 Baby was unsettled when the screen was carried out 
 Too much background noise was present 
 Baby has fluid or a temporary blockage in their ear 
If a no clear response is obtained then baby will be offered a second screen. This is normally 
the same as the first screen. If again a no clear response is obtained from either ear then a 
different screen is then offered, an automated auditory brainstem r esponse (AABR). 
 
The AABR screen involves placing three small sensors on baby's head, neck and shoulder. 
Soft headphones are placed over baby's ears and gentle clicking sounds are played. The 
response from cochlea to the sound is picked up via the auditor y nerve at the brainstem by 
the sensors. This screen can take up to 20 -30minutes to complete . 
 
The results are provided to parents as soon as the screen is complete. 
 
The newborn hearing screen will not pick up extremely mild hearing losses, a progressive 
loss or a late onset loss. In all cases parents are signposted to the checklists in the PCHR 
book. These checklists are to provide information on developmental milestones for ‘reaction 
to sounds’ and ‘making sounds’. 
 
Consent must be obtained for the scree ns to be carried out and for the data to be kept on 
the national database (S4H). Only those with parental responsibility can give consent. 
If a social worker or foster carer gives consent then this must be documented in S4H. 
 
For babies born as part of a surrogacy agreement the trust’ s surro gacy policy will be 
adhered to rega rding gaining consent for any screening . 
Surrogacy guideline 
 
If screening results are save d to the incorrect ear/or to the same ear : 
 If the screener notices at point of screen – the screen should be repeated and saved 
to the correct ear. Screener to email NHSP team to confirm re sults. This email will be 
saved, S4H will be case noted. 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 13 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 If the NHSP team notice at point of assigning results – screener will be email ed for 
confirmation of error, PCHR form should be checked. Only a fter written confirmation 
is received from the screener the results will be amended and manually entered 
(manual entry log w ill be completed) or baby will be offered a rescreen. If the results 
are a lso incorrect on the PCHR form the parents will be contacted and a rescreen will 
be offered . If the screener is unsure of the correct results a rescreen should be 
offered. S4H will be case noted. 
 If at an appointment there is some uncertainty about which ear require rescreening, 
both ears should be rescreened . S4H will be case noted. 
The m anual entry log is completed for any results which require entering found here and is 
cross matched with monthly discrepant data reports from NHSEI 
 
Twins /Multiple births 
When screening twins as an inpatient, the hosp ital number/NHS number of baby from 
stickers should be checked against baby’s ID tag to ensure the correct baby is being 
screened. 
Twin 1/ Twin 2 etc or 1st name (if known) should be entered into the Otoport to help to 
ensure correct data is used when scr eening. 
 
6.0 Referrals Following the Hearing Screen 
 
Referrals are made to Audiology following the hearing screen based on the screen result 
and if risk factors are present. 
The following babies are referred to Audiology for a diagnostic ABR , so that the level of 
hearing can be determined. This appointment should be within 4 weeks of screen completion 
or by 44 weeks GA to meet KPI2. 
 Babies who have results of no clear response at AABR. 
 Babies who meet the n ational exclusion criteria - Programmable ventr iculo-
peritoneal (PVP) shunts, atresia or micr otia (no patent canal in one or both ears), 
meningitis (confirmed or strongly suspected bacterial meningitis or meningococcal 
septicaemia ), confirmed congenital cytomegalovirus. 
Babies are ref erred, dependent on residential address, to either: 
 
 Worthing Audiology , Worthing Hospital, Lyndhurst road, Worthing, West 
Sussex BN11 2DH by email referral uhsussex.audiologyworthing@nhs.net – to be 
seen in the Audiology Department at Worthing Hospital. 
 
 Portsmouth Audiology , The Elizabeth Foundation, Southwick Hill Road, 
Cosham, Portsmouth, PO6 3LL by telephone referral (023 92 322 174) – to be 
seen at Chapel Street clinic, Chichester or at The E lizabeth Foundation, 
Portsmouth. 
Referral forms can be found here 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 14 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
All ABR referrals will be given a booklet/QR code to scan for ‘ Your bab y’s visit to the 
Audiology Clinic ’. 
 
This information is also available in different languages. 
Newborn Hearing Screening: First visi t to the audiology clinic 

The following babies are referred to Audiology for a targeted follow up and will be seen in 
Audiology at 8 -10 months corrected age as they are deemed to have an increased chance of 
a late on set or progressive loss. 
Risk factors identifying this population and are: 
 
Babies are referred by email dependent on residential address, to either: 
 
 Worthing Audiology, Worthing Hospital, Lyndhurst road, Worthing, West Sussex 
BN11 2DH – to be seen in the CDC at Worthing Hospital. 

 Portsmouth Audiology, The Elizabeth Foundation, Southwick Hill Road, Cosham, 
Portsmouth, PO6 3LL – to be seen at Chapel Street cli nic, Chichester. Email the 
Confidential ID to NHSP lead at PIW site. 
 
Referral forms can be found here 
 
A referral is created on S4H as a means of audit tracking for all Audiology referrals. 
This will create a share with the Audiology department so results can be added. 
Phone numbers and baby’s name (if known) should be added to the record at this point . 
 
A letter should be sent to the GP and HV advising of this referral. Template can be found 
here 
 
Confirmed Congenital 
Infection e.g. Toxoplasmosis, Rubella, Herpes 
Cranio -facial anomalies A (noticeable) craniofacial anomaly (excluding minor pits & 
ear tags) at any age e.g. cleft palate 
Syndrome Confirmed s yndrome related to hearing loss 
NICU protocol babies 
only with results of: BILAT ERAL NCR FOR AOAE BUT BILATERAL CR FOR 
AABR * 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 15 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
7.0 Governance Structure, Reporting and Inci dents 
 
KPI’s and National reports are published by NHSEI monthly and quarterly , NHSEI provide a 
window of 2 weeks for signing off the KPI reports prior to them being published for the public 
to view. These reports are a vailable for NHSP managers and Team L eads to download from 
S4H. 
The NHSP team will provide quarterly and annual KPI report to the regional QA team local 
SIT team, commissioners, Head of Midwifery, Public Health Lead – Maternity, Audiology. 
This will include information on all 5 NHSP programme standards along with the following: 
 
KPI’s for the 5 Programmes Standards from the ‘report by current site’ report : 
 
 Information on each baby for NH1 not achieved 
 Information on each baby for NH2 not achieved 
 Permanent Childhood Hearing Impairment’s diagn osed for that quarter /year 
 Any incidents raised that quarter/year 
 Any challenges for the NHSP team 
 
 Programme Standards and KPIs Acceptable Achievable 
1 The proportion of babies eligible for newborn hearing screening for whom the 
screening process is complete by 4 weeks corrected age (hospital programmes -
well babies, NICU babies) or by 5 weeks corrected age (community programmes -
well babies). (NH1) ≥ 98% ≥ 99.5% 
2 Well baby referrals from OAE 1 hospital ≤ 27% ≤ 20% 
3 Total Referrals - Hospital >2.0% to ≤2.8% ≥0.5% to ≤2.0% 
4 The proportion of babies with a no clear response result in one or both ears or 
other result that require an immediate onward referral for audiological assessment 
who are offered audiological assessment within the required timescale. ≥ 97% ≥ 99% 
5 The proportion of babies with a no clear response result in one or both ears or 
other result that require an immediate onward referral for audiological assessment 
who receive audiological assessment within the required timescale. (NH2) ≥ 90% ≥ 95% 
 
The reporting template can be found here 
 
All other reports downloaded from S4H will be reviewed and actioned monthly. 
These report s and the report log are then s aved here 
Following a review of all reports: 
 Audiology departments will be contacted regarding any missing data (Yield 
report and Audiology Data reports ). 
 Screener activity will be monitored for training needs and action taken for thos e 
who obtaining recurrent NCR’s . 
 The number of screens per CCG will be collated and logged (extended activity 
report). 
 Data quality reports, all will be saved per month even if there is nothing to 
action so that audits can be undertaken to show reports have been looked at . 
 The report log will be completed once each NHSEI report and each failsafe 
report has been undertaken / actioned 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 16 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Screening Incidents 
Any incidents will be reported via the trusts internal system (DATIX) and escalated to 
the regional QA team via the Screening incident assessment form (SIAF) emailed to 
the regional SIT and QA teams: 
 PHE.Screening -ImmsSSAT@nhs.net ; phe.southQA@nhs.net 

Managing safety incidents in NHS screening programmes document will be adhered 
to and will the tru st’s incident policy. 
 
Root cause analysis will be undertaken when required including a timeline of events 
and learning, these will be signed off at trust level by the clinical governance lead 
(maternity). 
 
The postnatal screening log should be completed, all incidents should be saved in 
the Newborn screening incident folder (NBS) under the SIAF reference. 
 
The SIAF, root cause analysis forms, screening incident log and screening 
programme folders can be found by clicking the link here 

Performance and incidents are standing items on the UHS West ANNB S teering group 
quarterly meeting. 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 17 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) Governance Map for NHSP : 

Means no direct line management of staff 

8.0 Training and Ongoing Assessments 
 
UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) WSH site will follow national guidance from NHSEI for training 
of new NHSP staff. 
 
This is in the form of completion of a national ECA and the Level 3 Care Diploma for Health 
Screeners with the NHSP units. 
 
Screeners can only screen under supervision until they have completed and successfully 
passed an ECA. Screeners may then screen unsupervised providing they are working 
towards or have completed the Level 3 Care Diploma for Health Screeners. If a screener 
choses to stop their Diploma or has not completed this in the required timeframe they will no 
longer be able to screen and may have their banding changed. 
NHSP 
CO-ORDINATOR 
HEAD OF COMMUNITY 
MIDWIFERY 
HEAD OF MIDWIFERY 
MSW SCREENING 
TEAM 
NEONATAL HEARING 
SCREENERS 
WOMEN AND CHILDRENS 
DIRECTORATE 
SCREENING 
ADMIN 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 18 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Any staff member wh o underta kes screening and is registered with their national body e.g. 
staff nurses, midwives, audiologist s are exempt from the Level 3 Car e Diploma for Health 
Screeners, they still however have to pass the ECA 
 
Following completion of the Level 3 Care Diploma for Health Screeners screener ’s will have 
their competency re -assessed annually. 
 
This will comprise of : 
 
 Nationally approved e -learning 
 Direct observation of screening skills. Either in a simulated or live environment or by 
peer review and a professional disc ussion with the NHSP lead 
National and local assessment sheets will be used for ECA preparation, diploma evidence 
and annual reviews. 
Assessment sheets can be found here 

9.0 Equipment and QA T ests 
 
UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) WSH site will make provision for the calibration and 
maintenance of all current scr eening equipment as per the manufacturers guideline. 
 
UH Sussex West (SRH& WH) WSH site will purchase consumables and any new equipment 
required, to ensure a safe NHSP programme, only from nationally approved providers. 
 
MSW ’s and each NICU ward will be provided with screening equipment and will be expected 
to keep this equipment safe and secure. Each piece of equipment wi ll be password 
protected for individual screener s. 
 
Each MSW and each NICU ward will be responsible for com pleting the daily checks on the 
equipment they use for screening , on days when screening occurs, to ensur e the equipment 
is working correctly prior to screening. These should be saved and documented on the log 
sheets provided. 
 
OTOPORT QA T ests results : 
 
QA1 – Cavity check. A No Clear Response (NCR) should be obtained . 
QA2 – Occlusion check. A No Clear Respon se (NCR) should be obtained . 
QA3 – Real ear check. A Clear Re sponse (CR) should be obtained. Ideally 5 dots should be 
obtained once a week. 
QA4 – AABR impedance and listening check 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 19 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
For staff with a hearing loss it may not be possible to obtain a QA3 real ear check CR on a 
regular basis. The check should be attempted and saved and documented that a NCR 
response was obtained. Ideally a CR should be obtained from someone else’s ear week ly. 

QA checks will be checked in S4H on a daily basis (by ticking ‘tests requiring action’ on the 
QA page) for all screens carried out a week prior to ensure that any late downloads are not 
missed, they are also checked during assigning to ensure QA chec ks are present. Any ‘Fails’ 
will be investigated via the QA page, a note written in S4H and ‘override fail result’ should be 
ticked 
 
Any failed and missed QA tests will be investigated. A log sheet is kept by the NHSP team of 
incorrect QA checks and offere d rescreens. 
See National Guidance Document for QA checks date Nov 2017. 
 
Should it be found that a baby has been screened by the WSH site without the QA checks 
being carried out or with incorrect outcomes on that day then the member of staff will be 
advised and undergo re training. 
 
To summarise for UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) WSH site: 
 
If QA checks are present and the QA checks gave expected results in this period then 
babies screen result will stand. 
 
If QA1 or 2 gave a result of a CR on the day of screening (and the QA check was not 
repeated to give a correct result before screening) then babies screen result will not stand 
and baby will require a re -screen . The MSW/ NHSP team will contact parents directly and 
the MSW will arrange a ti me to visit for a rescreen to take place . A dati x and SIAF will be 
raised. 
If a rescreen is declined/phone not answered/ text/letter not responded to then a referral will 
be made for a follow up in Audiology at 8 -10 months old. The record will be set to ta rgeted 
f/up required to enable baby to be tracked 
 
If an incomplete QA check is obtained (after or instead of a correct result ) a rescreen is not 
required but the result will be discussed with the screener and retraining given . 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 20 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendi x1: Daily Checks 

 Transfer in any OOA births from eSP. 
Note if have been screened or if screen required 
Check NICU babies and case note in S4H with date 
and time of admission, change to NICU protocol and to 
in patient, update case notes for those still in 
Case note all discharges: 
For those with no screen completed: check S4H & 
EXCEL diary spreadsheet for appointments. 
Add appointment to S4H 
Change demographic to ‘outpatient’’ 
Check record is in correct facility based on which 
clinic baby is booked into. 
Move record as necessary. 
No appointment on S4H or on 
EXCEL diary 
Contact pare nts to offer appointment for screening. 
Book into AOAE2/AABR clinic if AOAE1 already completed at birth hospital 
Check stillbirth’s not populated S4H 
OOA Babies 
Add contact 
number 
Break share on 
Contact local 
NHSP team if 
screen not 
complete. 
 
NOTE – WSH 
site will not be 
break any 
shares until 
baby is 
discharged so 
parents are not 
contacted 
whilst still in 
Hospital . 
 
See appendix 
6 
Add a list of babies requiring 
an appointment to MSW 
EXCEL diary sheets for 
Worthing and SRH found 
here 
under the heading ‘NHSP 
appointments needing to be 
made ’. 
Include name, nhs number, 
date of birth, location , phone 
number and Mum’s name. 
Transfer in any OOA births from S4H 
Note if have been screened or if screen required. 
Add to BLOODSPOT/NIPE/NHSP failsafe spreadsheet on each tab 
Check for babies who have NOT gone home with Mum. 
 Are they on NICU, have they gone into foster care, is 
MIS incorrect? 
Chase any outstanding results with MSW teams and 
NICU’s older than 3 days for missing downloads. 
On all babies demographics page: Set Translator to ‘Not Required’. 
Change to ‘Required – adding what language’ following informati on provided by MSW/NICU staff 
from information on the PCHR form. 
Tick consent giver. 
Discharge list from MIS emailed to NHSP TEAM 
The paediatric wards (Howard - 
SRH, Bluefin Worthing) will be 
checked daily for re -admissions 
and cross checked with S4H for 
babies who require screening. 
Screening will attempt to be 
organised prior to discharge 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 21 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 2: NICU - Process Map 

If a baby is transferred to an OOA NICU and screening is not complete, NHSP admin will 
case not record and email correct NHSP site for them to share into the record 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 22 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 3: Management of record for NICU baby in S4H 

Yes 
No 
Baby is on SEMA NICU list 
but not on S4H NICU list 
Baby is on S4H NICU list but not on 
SEMA NICU list 
 
Baby recently 
admitted to 
NICU ward, 
check date 
and time of 
admission on 
SEMA. 
Locate baby in 
S4H, change 
to ‘NICU’ 
protocol and 
case note 
date and time 
of admission 
Search 
S4H using 
NHS 
number. 
Has baby 
been 
screened? 
Check 
badgernet 
-Has baby 
has been 
screened? 
Ring NICU 
to double 
check 
 Yes 
No 
SEMA list 
says baby 
discharged 
No 
further 
action 
required 
Organise 
for MSW 
to screen 
baby in 
an out 
patients 
clinic 
 
Does baby 
already have 
an 
appointment 
for 
screening? 
Case note 
S4H. 
 Email CI to 
site baby 
now resides 
in and ask 
them to 
‘share in’ 
record to 
track baby 
until 
screening is 
complete or 
baby 
transferred 
back to 
WSHT 
NICU 
No 
Yes 
Ask NICU 
to 
download 
Has baby been 
discharged to 
another NICU? 
Yes 
Add 
appointment to 
S4H record 
 
Has baby been in for >48hrs? 
 
Yes 
No 
Change to 
well baby 
and add to 
outstanding 
screens for 
MSW’s 
No 
NOTE: If a baby has been on another NICU and discharged without a screen. Check with the site 
who broke the share that baby is well before offering an appointment. 
Baby may have been transferred to another NICU 
 
Compare NICU list on SEMA with pending NI CU list on S4H 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 23 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 4: NICU - Paperwork 
 
Beeding Ward and NNU will document that a hearing screen has been offered, consent 
to and performed on the following documentation: 
 
 Neonatal Observation Chart 
 On Badgernet 
 On the Discharge to Postnatal Ward Form 
 On the discharge sticker if baby is discharged home at less than 10 days old from 
the unit, which is stuck in the discharge book. (need to check they do this on NNU) 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 24 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 25 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 5 : Screening on NICU if baby has already been screened 
 
The following scenarios apply for baby’ s who have either : Gone home prior to being 
admitted to NNU and screening has/hasn’t been carried out or has been screened on the 
postnatal ward prior to admission onto NNU but did not go home. 
 
1. Well baby, goes home, screen has been completed with CR’s either prior to 
discharge or at home/in a clinic. Baby is then admitted to SCBU (not meningitis) 
from home. 
Screen is complete prior to admission so baby does not require rescreening. 
If any treatment/intervention given that could have impact on hearing then baby to 
be referred directly to Audiology by the paediatricians. 
 
2. Well baby, g oes home but hasn’t been screen ed either on the ward or at 
home/clinic . Baby is admitted to SCBU (not meningitis) from home and stays in 
>48hrs. 
Screen baby under NICU protocol following treatment/intervention. 
 
3. Well baby, screened on the postnatal ward by MSW prior to being discharged, 
admitted to SCBU (not meningitis) before going h ome and stays in >48hrs. 
Ignore previous screening , set results to not required in S4H, rescreen baby 
under NICU protocol with both AOAE and AABR following treatment/intervention . 
 
Screening on NICU flow charts can be found here 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 26 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 6: Discharges from NICU with no hearing screen 

Provide Mum with a ‘missed NICU screen’ letter and advise parents the MSW’s will 
be in touch to arrange screening 
 
Complete hearing book to say screening referred to 
Community. On handover ensure midwives on 
Postnatal are aware that baby 
needs a NICU protocol screen . 
It may be that an MSW can complete 
this on the ward but an appointment 
may be arranged with parents Yes 
No 
Note: There is never any pressure to complete hearing screens if the unit is busy or if 
the baby has been discharged back to the postnatal ward. 
It is not always appropriate for NICU hearin g screeners to be screening on the postnatal 
ward due to w orkload unless this is deemed necessary by the lead nurse on NICU . Has baby been on NICU > 48hours and no one was able to perform a hearing 
screen? 
Email Christine.thair@nhs.net and jacqueline.gregory1@nhs.net to advise that 
screening was not completed on the unit Yes 
Is baby going back to Postnatal ward ? 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 27 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 7: Breaking shares in S4H 

Baby has been discharged with no screen and has a ‘shared in’ 
status on S4H 
Are WSHT providing postnatal care? 
 
Yes 
No 
Case note ‘baby home, 
WSH to screen’ 
Weekly check the shared out list and break all shares which say ‘ Inactive - No 
Confirmed Hearing Loss’ , ensure outcome is on birth list. 
Add appo intment to 
S4H/add to outstanding 
screen list for MSW to 
arrange an appointment 
Screen complete , add 
outcome to birth list, 
break share 
Casenote ‘baby 
home’. 
Add phone number 
Email CI number to 
responsible site 
explaining that a 
screen appointment 
is required. 
Break share 
Has MSW booked an 
appointment to 
screen baby? 
Yes 
No 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 28 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 8: Stickers for Postnatal Notes 
 
Stickers can be requested from the print room by sending the following documents . 
These can be found here 

HEARING SCREEN 
APPOINTMENT……..…………… ……. 
 
VENUE…………………………………… …. 
 
Contact Chrissie on 07808 099826 if you need to rearran ge 
 
 HEARING SCREEN 
COMPLETE

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 29 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 9 : Letters for parents 
 
All letters being posted to parents should be written in office automation, emailed to the GP, 
copied to the HV and saved to the evolve record under Maternity . 

a. Clear Responses 
b. No Clear Responses , further screening needed 
c. Screening Contraindicated 
d. Missed Screen On N ICU 
e. ABR Referral form/letters 
f. Targeted follow up referral form/letters 
g. OOA – No Clear Response On Ward 
h. Moved Into Area – No Screen On S4H 
i. DNA 
j. Unable To Contact – Appointment Letter 
k. Decline Screen 
l. Incorrect QA Checks – Rescreen Required 
 
All letter templates can be found here 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 30 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 10 : NHSP Ward Books /logs 
 
A new NHSP screening book for postnatal ward can be found here or NICU found here and 
can be ordered from the print room via email. 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 31 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 11 : Babies in Foster Care 

 Transfer in any OOA births from eSP. 
Note if have been screened or if screen required 
NHSP -check column on discharge list 
for babies not discharged with Mum. 
Check if screened whilst on the ward. 
Daily discharge 
list 
No further action required. Baby 
to be screened prior to discharge 
BABY IN FOSTER 
CARE 
Check SEMA for matching 
addresses for mum and baby 
YES 
Check mum’s and babies MIS 
record for comments 
Ensure S4H record set as NICU 
Update S4H with correct details. 
Transfer to relevant NHSP site if 
required and email local manager 
Is baby on NICU? 
NO 
YES 
 
Advise Maternity Information 
Analyst/Clerical Manager of 
MIS error 
NO 
Check with 
Safeguarding Midwife 
Notification email or text from 
Safeguarding Midwife or 
safeguarding discharge document 
completed regarding baby in foster 
care and who can give consent to 
NHSP manager and NHSP admin. 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 32 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 12 : Child Death Notifications 
 
NHSP are advised of neonatal and child deaths from the following departments: 
 
 UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) Neonatal 
 UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) maternity (Bereavement multidisciplinary team – 
uhsussexbereavemnet.office@nhs.net 
 SCT CHIS 
NHSP are also advised of all still births. 
 
In all neonatal and child deaths , the following is carried out: 

NHSP team advised of death. 
Information shared with MSW teams as required. 
 
SEMA and M IS checked for deceased notification. 
Search S4H for baby. 
This may involve a national record search. 
Mark record as deceased. 
Case note date of death and who advised. 
 
OUTSTANDING APPOINTMENTS OR PCHI 
 
Advise all relevant Audiology departments 
RECORD SHARED WITH ANOTHER SITE 
 
Advise relevant Local NHSP M anager by email 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 33 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 13 : Decline/Withdrew from Screen 

NHSP team advised of decline by screener. 
Decline form to be signed by parents, scanned and saved 
to babies evolve record under Maternity . 
Decline documented in MIS 
Screener to document decline of screen in purple maternity 
hand held notes and PCHR book if available 
 
Attends for screening within 3 months 
of date of babies birth 
Unset decline in S4H so results can be 
uploaded. 
Advise Health Visitor and CHIS of results 
 
Parents will be written to explaining importance of : 
 
 Why we offer a hearing screen 
How we perform a hearing screen. 
(See letters section) . 
Copy sent to GP and HV. 
Letter saved to baby’s evolve record under Maternity 
S4H case noted and record set to decline. 
 
Complete decline log sheet: 
Found here 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 34 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 14: Baby confirmed as s creened but no imported data or results 
saved to same ear 

Create list in S4H for babies with no screen result: 
In process screens for babies older than 1 week. 
Contact MSW teams/NICU teams to see if baby has been screened. 
 
Q. Are the results saved to 
the same ear? 
Search imported files for that 
screener post screening date 
Has baby been screened? 
Q. Are results stuck in dataviewer 
on the PC? 
Q. Has the screen been assigned 
to another baby? 
Baby to be 
rescreened 
Case note S4H that 
results have been 
chased. Contact MSW 
team and ask for date 
when baby will be seen 
Case note S4H date 
of screen and 
screener name. 
Request Otoport be 
downloaded 
Check with screener 
which resu lts are for 
which baby by email 
advise NHSP lead . 
 datix to be raised. 
Results assigned to 
correct baby once 
screener replied. 
Save email and 
save copy of PCHR 
form. Advise NHSP 
Lead 
Plug in an otoport to 
try and push results 
through. 
Export any results 
which will not go 
through onto an 
excel spreadsheet 
and manually enter 
results. Delete 
babies from the 
dataviewer 
Check QA results to see 
if ma chine has been 
downloaded since date 
of screen. 
If no – ask for O toport to 
be downloaded 
YES 
 NO 
INVESTIGATE 
Email screener, copy in NHSP Lead, for confirmation that both ears were screened, 
save email response. Locate PCHR form and scan and save a copy. 
AOAE1 
 AOAE2 
If screener confirms that both were screened then save the email reply. 
 Incorrect result i n S4H should be set to ‘not required’ 
Manual entry of the correct results made. 
Manual entry incident log found here should be completed. 
NHSP lead to cross matched with monthly discrepant data reports. 
 
Datix to be raised 
YES 
 NO 
YES 
NO 
NO 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 35 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Appendix 15 : Babies born out of area but WHS site responsible for screening 

Baby born out of WSH area, transfer 
& shared into WSH site at point of 
record being created by S4H 
Share broken by birth NHSP site. 
Has baby been screened? 
Organise to offer baby a 
hearing screen 
Does baby need any refe rral 
to Audiology ? 
YES 
 NO 
Make referral to 
relevant 
Audiology 
service 
No further 
action 
required 
YES 
 
NO 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 36 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 16 : S4H/NIPESM aRT has not been populated 

National Spine has 
gone down – records 
not populating S4H and 
S4N 
 
Create a local list of all births from SEMA and discharge list for each day of the incident. 
Found here 
Complete all columns for all births unt il all babies have populated 
S4H and S4N 
Ensure no screening has been missed 
S4H has gone down - 
records not populating 
S4H 
 
Serious incident 
Report to NHSP/NIPE helpdesks unless already been notified 
S4N has gone down - 
records not populating 
S4N 

If duplicate records have been made then merge records. 
Save a screen shot of the demographics page of each record prior 
to merging 
NOTE: 
If records need merging due to incorrect NHS numbers then screen shots of the demographic 
pages should be sa ved prior to merging. 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 37 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendi x 17: SYSTMONE Failsafe (CHIS) 
 
CHIS have read only access to WSH NHSP S4H site. 
 
On a monthly basis: 
I. CHIS are responsible for running a report with in NHSP of all sc reen results and 
uploading the outcome codes and date/time of screen into the Child Health System 
(Systmone). 
 
II. CHIS are responsible for then running a report in Systmone to look for babies without 
screen results. This includes babies born in area , babies born out o f area but with 
a GP in area and babies who have moved in. Any babies without a screen result in 
Systmone are then manually searched for in S4H using the National record search 
facility. The outcome code and date/time of screen are uploaded into Systmone . 
 
III. Any babies whose screen results could not be located are emailed in a report to the 
NHSP lead to ensure either they are aware of baby or if not aware of baby a screen 
can be offered. 
 
IV. CHIS run a report on movers out of area . Any baby without a screen result or with 
an outcome code of C2, N1, N2, I9 (see outcome codes appendix 18) are emailed in 
the report to NHSP lead so the S4H record can be transferred to the correct site . 
 
The dates for searches/reports are as follows: 
During the 1st week of the month ‘ D’ CHIS search for all results in S4H from month 
‘B’ and upload to Systmone. 
Following the upload of results CHIS search systmone for babies with no screen 
result based on the following parameters and S4H is manually searched . Any record 
with no screen resul t will be emailed in a report to the NHSP Lead : 
 
Born in area Babies born month C and 2 preceding months 
(month B and A) with no screen result 
Born out of area with a GP in area Babies born month C, B and A with no screen 
result 
Moved in Babies born month C, B and A with no screen 
result 
Moved out Babies up to 1 year old with no screen result 
or outcome code of C2, N1, N2, I9 
 
V. NHSP team receive the report and check that: 
 
a. Babies NHSP record is in WSH S4H site and screening is pending. WSH site 
is already aware of baby and is tracking. 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 38 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
b. Babies NHSP record is not in WSH S4H site and screening is pending. WSH 
site is not aware of baby. S4H record is transferred in and baby is offered 
screening . 
c. Babies NHSP record is not on S4H site and was born out of the country . 
NHSP lead makes a request to CHIS to check the Health Visitors movers in 
visit notes to see if a screen was undertaken in country of birth. If no case 
note in Systmone the NHSP lead wil l contact parents by phone or a movers 
into are – no screen on S4H letter offering screening will be sent . 
If screening is accepted a manual entry of babies birth an d demographic 
details will be added to S4H to create a record. The manual entry incident log 
should be completed and the NIPE lead informed of the record being created. 
This can be found here. 
d. If any screening results are found for babies on the report these are emailed 
back to CHIs for manual entry onto Systmone. 
e. baby is now older than 3 months a letter a moved into area - too old to screen 
letter will be sent to parents. 
f. For movers out who have a screen pending result, outstanding Audiology 
referral / PCHI the demographic and GP details will be updated, a case note 
written and the record will be transferred to the responsible NHSP site. The 
NHSP Lead for this s ite will be emailed to advise them of the record transfer. 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 39 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 18 : Outcome codes in S4H 

 Incomplete 
C1: No 
follow -up 
required N1: 
Unilateral 
referr al I1: Declined 
screen I4: 
Deceased I7: Late entry I11: 
Equipment 
malfunction 
C2: Targeted 
f/u required N2: Bilateral 
referral I2: 
Appointment s 
missed I5: Out of 
coverage I9: 
Contraindicated I12: 
Equipment 
not available 
 I3: Lost 
Contact I6: 
Withdrew 
consent I10: Baby 
unsettled I13: Lack of 
capacity 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 40 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 19: Bloodspot/NIPE/NHSP List Failsafe 

Locate the birth list here 

Search S4H for all screens on that birth date. 
In the overview site, search with the date you require, put birth in both date of 
birth boxes, tick all babies for protocol (wellbaby and NICU) and tick ‘in process 
and complete’ for newborn screen to generate all babies records . 
If a baby is on the 
S4H hearing 
screening list but 
not on the 
bloodspot list 
highlight this with 
the Community 
Midwifery Team 
Leads so as to 
check if US 
Sussex 
(SRH&WH) are 
giving postnatal 
care 
If a baby is on the 
bloodspot list but not 
on S4H, car ry out a 
‘national record 
‘search to find 
screening results. 
 
Check all OOA 
babies, put ‘complete’ 
for babies who have 
had their screen 
completed or 
‘transferred to correct 
site’ for those in the 
correct site but not 
yet screened. 
Put the outcome code i n 
the NHSP column for 
babies who have had their 
screen completed. 
 
A screen not completed will 
say 
Active – screening. 
 
Comp lete the monthly 
sheets saved here 
Email to 
kevin.knig ht@wsht.nhs.uk 
ONCE ALL COMPLETED 
 
If not complete highlight the 
cell red, contact screening 
teams to investigate why baby 
not yet screened 
Advise NHSP lead. 
Make a note of date of ‘in 
process screens’ and recheck 
each day until complete 
Note. 
 
All transfers into any of the 3 screening 
programmes will be added to all 3 tabs of this 
spreadsheet to complete full population for babies 
in the area under 10 days old. All babies will be 
tracked and checked that postnatal screening has 
been offered. 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 41 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 20 : NICU Failsafe s 
 
1. Badger report 

The badgernet reports are saved here 

Admission and discharge date/time report from 
badgernet sent to NHSP lead and NHSP admin on 
a rolling 4 week period 
NHSP team to add 3 columns to report 
1.Duration over 48hrs yes/no i.e. is baby NICU protocol (document if in 
transitional care as this = well baby protocol) 
2.What protocol baby should be 
3.What protocol is set in S4H 
 
Complete columns 1 & 2 
Search all babies in S4H to check the protocol for screening, complete column 3. 
Check co lumn 2 & 3 match save in failsafe folder, badger report. 
Check on SEMA for any discrepancy ’s; 
advise NHSP lead and badgernet lead 
if there are any. 
 
Check on SEMA times of 
admission/discharge of all babies 
screened as well baby to ensure on 
changes in admission times 
 
Advise NHSP co-ordinator of any 
babies screened to incorrect 
protocol 
NHSP lead to investigate, raise 
datix, arrange for baby to be 
screened 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 42 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
2. SMART4HEARING 

 NHSP lead to 
investigate, raise datix & 
SIAF arrange for baby to 
be screened 
Filter out all NICU baby 
protocol, leaving just 
well/community baby protocols 
Filter out GA>37 weeks 
Advise NHSP lead of 
any babies who have 
been set to wrong 
protocol and missed a 
hearing screen 
 
NHSP lead to 
investigate, raise a datix 
& SIAF arrange for baby 
to be screened 
Check on SEMA that 
baby was not on 
neonatal unit. 
Complete comments 
column 
Monthly search S4H for the previous month well/community baby and NICU protocol babies 
Saved here 
Export results: 
NHS number 
Protocol name 
GA 
Date of birth 
Screening outcome 
Total right ear test for AOAE1 
Total left ear test for AOAE1 
Total right ear test for AABR 
Total left ear test for AABR 
Filter out all well baby/community 
baby protocol, leaving just NICU 
protocol babies 
Filter out all babies in process 
Advise nhsp lead of any 
babies who have missed 
a hearing screen 
 
Ensure all babies have 
had both AOAE & AABR 
screens 
If born OOA , check on 
badgernet that baby 
was not on our NICU 
and email birth site 
NHSP Lead to check 
baby was not in their 
NICU (see standard 
email) 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 43 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Standard email wording for NICU check to other sites 
 
Dear Local Manager 
 
As part of our monthly GA/NICU failsafe we recheck our hospital system to ensu re any well 
baby, whose GA is 37 weeks or below where only on the postnatal ward or their NICU stay 
was <48hrs. 
 
I would be grateful if you check your system for this baby: who was born at GA: 
And confirm that they were not a NICU protocol baby. 
 
Many Thanks 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 44 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 21: Manual Entry of record into SMaRT4Hearing 

NO 
Unable to locate record in S4H 
Re-search using nhs number only 
Re-search using surname only 
Re-search using date of birth only 
Has record been located? 
Determine where error lies. 
Contact NHSP lead and NIPE 
lead 
Contact Maternity Information 
Analyst/Clerical Manager and 
CHIS, SCT if issue with wrong 
NHS number 
Wait 6hrs for late population of NHS 
number 
Has baby populated S4H ? 
No further 
action 
required 
Advise NHSP & NIPE lead. 
Contact Maternity Information 
Analyst/Clerical Manager and 
CHIS, SCT if issue with issuing 
the NHS number. 
Keep a spreadsheet of missing 
babies* 
Check with N orthgate helpdesk 
if there is a national issue 
Await S4H 
notification that issue 
has been fixed 
 Has baby 
populated 
S4H 
Manually enter record, 
complete manual entry log. 
Email NHSP and NIPE lead 
to advise of manual entry. 
Case note on S4H 
Mover into country, new nhs 
number so did not populate S4H 
at birth 
YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
NO 
YES 
Match records populated against 
spreadsheet* to ensure non missed 
YES 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 45 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 22 : High risk of hearing loss notification from antenatal booking 

High risk of hearing loss identified at booking 
Community Midwife advises antenatal screening team 
Antenatal & Newborn Screening Co -ordinator contacts parents to 
discuss. Offers a call from the NHSP Lead 
Antenatal & Newborn Screening Co -ordinator advises NHSP Lead 
NHSP Lead contact parents if req uested, diaries when baby due 
Baby has been born. 
Appropriate screening, including AABR offered based on risk 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 46 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 23 : GP’S in West Coastal CCG 09G /S4H WSH site 
 
Adur: The Ball Tree Surgery , Harbour View Healthcare, The Manor Practice , New Pond 
Row Surgery , Northbourne Medical Centre , The Orchard Surgery 
 
Arun: The Coppice & Angmering Medical Centre , Fitzalan Medical Group , The Lawns 
Surgery , The Park Surgery , Westcourt Medical Centre , Willow Green Surgery 
 
Chanctonbury: Billingshurst Surgery , The Glebe Surgery , Henfield Medical Centre , 
Steyning Health Centre 
 
Chichester: Cathedral Medical Group , Langley House Surgery , Lavant Road Surgery , 
Loxwood Medical Practice, Parklands Surgery , Petworth Surgery , Pulborough Medical 
Group , Riverbank Medical Centre , Selsey Medical Practice , Southbourne Surgery , 
Tangmere Medical Centre , Witterings Health Centre 
 
Regis: The Arundel Surgery , Avisford Medical Group , Bersted Green Surgery, Bognor 
Medical Practice , The Croft Practice , Flansham Park Health Centre , Grove House 
Surgery , Maywood Healthcare Centre , West Meads Surgery 
 
Worthing (Cissbury): The Barn Surgery , Broadwater Medical Centre , Cornerways 
Surgery , The Lime Tree Surgery , The Phoenix Surgery , Selden Medical Centre , St 
Lawrence Surgery , Strand Medical Group , Victoria Road Surgery , 
 
If a baby lives in WSH site screening area based on postcode but has not populated due to 
no or incorrect GP. The record will be transferred inot site. 
A dummy GP WSH -Site Western Sussex Hospital FT will be added to the record. 
Monthly advanced searches will be carried regarding missing or dummy GP’s 
 All babies born in the past year with a dummy GP WSH -Site Western Sussex 
Hospital FT 
 All babies born in the past year, results exported with nhs number and patients GP 
practise name. Results filtered in excel for babies with no GP 
Those babies on either of the above 2 lists will be looked up on SCR and the GP added to 
S4H. 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 47 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 24 : Home births 
 
Home births for UH Sussex East (BRI & PRH) populate UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) WSH 
NHSP site. 
 
If a baby has populated S4H as a home birth or other birth location but is not on the birth list 
then this needs investigating. 
 
This should include: 
a) Undertake a patient search and ward search (APC search) on SEMA to ensure 
baby is not resident on a UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) ward. 
b) Check SCR for birth hospital 
 
If baby is not resident on UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) wards or UH Sussex West 
(SRH&WH) is not providing postnatal care, break the share on the reco rd/transfer the record 
to the responsible site. A case note can be added ‘not a UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) birth . 
 
Home births from other borders may, at times, populate WSH site, i n which case the above 
still applies. 
 
If a home birth is on the discharge lis t but baby is not in WSH site they will be shared in for 
WSH to complete screening. A case note will be added so that the responsible site are 
aware. 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 48 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Appendix 25: Checking that all Newborn Screening has been completed 

 MIDWIFE DAY 10 VISIT 
 
MIDWIFE DAY 1 VISIT 
 
CHECK 
NHSP 
COMPLETE 
 
MIDWIFE DAY 5 VISIT 
 
CHECK NIPE 
COMPLETED, 
CHECK NHSP 
COMPLETED, 
UNDERTAKE 
BLOODSPOT 
 
CHECK NIPE 
COMPLETED, 
CHECK NHSP 
COMPLETED, 
CHECK 
BLOODSPOT 
COMPLETED. 
CHECK FOR ANY 
OUTSTANDING 
REFERRALS FOR 
MUM AND BABY 
 
ALL 
COMPLETED 
- DISCHARGE 
FROM 
MIDWIFERY 
CARE 
 
NIPE 
NOT 
COMPLETE 
 
NIPE OR 
NHSP NOT 
COMPLETED 
 
CONTACT 
NIPE/NHSP 
ADMIN 
CLERK ASAP 
 
CONTACT 
NIPE ADMIN 
CLERK AND 
 
SRH - 
CONTACT 
COMMUNITY 
TEAM LEAD. 
 
WH - 
ENSURE 
THERE IS AN 
APT TO 
ATTEND 
BRAMBER 
WARD. 
ADVISE MUM 
OF 
DATE/TIME 
 
NIPE OR 
NHSP NOT 
COMPLETED 
 
CONTACT 
NIPE/NHSP 
ADMIN 
CLERK ASAP 
CONTACT NIPE 
LEAD 
 
 CONTACT 
NHSP LEAD 
 
DATIX RAISED 
IF NOT DUE TO 
DNA 
 
BLOOD SPOT 
NOT 
COMPLETED 
 
Take Blood 
spot with 
consent 
 
CONTACT 
NBS LEAD 
 
DATIX 
RAISED 
 
GAIN CONSENT FOR 
NBS 
ENSURE CONSENT 
WAS OBTAINED FOR 
NBS 
 
CHECK 
NIPE 
COMPLETE 
 
NHSP 
NOT 
COMPLETE 
 
CHECK FRONT 
OF POSTNATAL 
NOTES FOR 
CLINIC 
APPOINTMENT 
 
CONTACT 
NHSP ADMIN 
CLERK/MSW IF 
NO 
APPOINTMENT 
SO 
APPOINTMNET 
CAN BE 
BOOKED 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 49 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Appendix 26 : Border Agreements 
 
All border agreements are agreed and signed off by the NHSP manag ers of affected sites annually. 
They can be found here 
 
a) Babies Born in Princess Royal Hospital BRI site, living in Partridge Green or Cowfold, 
with SAS or WSH GP Practice 
 
b) Babies born UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) living in BRI site but GP in UH Sussex West 
(SRH&WH) site 
 
c) Babies born at WSHT but have East Sussex GP 
 
d) Babies Born at Sussex and Surrey Hospital, but with WSH site mapped GP Practice 
 
e) Babies Born at West Surrey Hospital, but with WSH GP Practice 
 
f) Babies Born in West Sussex, but with PIW GP Practice 
 
g) Homebirth Babies Born in West Sussex, but with PIW GP Practice 
 
h) OOA Regional Document 
 
i) Other NHSP site contact details can be found here 
 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 50 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Appendix 2 7: Contact List 

Newborn Hearing Screening Co -ordinator 
Jacqueline Gregory 
Jacqueline.gregory1@nhs.net 
07808 099816 
 
Newborn Hearing Screening Team Lead 
Gail Addison 
g.addison@nhs.net 
 
Newborn Hearing Screening admin clerk 
Chrissie Thair 
Christine.thair@nhs.net 
07808099826 
 
Antenatal & Newborn Screening Co -ordinator 
Karen Lundie 
karen.lundie@nhs.net 
Mobile: 07785 996864 
SRH tel: 01243 788122 ext. 32829 
WH tel: 01903 205111 ext. 86077 

Maternity Support Workers 
Worthing 
Community Midwives Office 01903 285194 
St Richards 
Birth centre 01243 788122 ext 32811 
 
Neonatal Unit, St Richards Hospital 
01243 788122 ext 32985/32986 
Beeding Ward (SCBU), Worthing Hospital 
01903 285184 
 
NEC SWS (Formerly Northgate) 
s4h.helpdesk@nhs.net 
08450130183 
 
Child Health Records 
Tel: 01243 812510 
Fax: 01243 812590 
Michelle Wright Manager 
Child Health Record Bureau, 
Michellewr ight2@nhs.net 
CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 51 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 Abbreviations used in this document 
 
ABR Auditory Brainstem Response 
AOAE Automated Otoacoustic Emission 
AABR Automated Auditory Brainstem Response 
CHIS Child Health Information Services 
CI Confidential ID 
HV Health Visitor 
MIS Maternity Information System eg Medway 
MSW Maternity Support Worker 
NHS National Health Service 
NHSEI NHS England and NHSP Improvement 
NHSP Newborn Hearing Screening Programme 
NICU Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
NNU Neonatal Unit 
OOA Out of Area 
PCHR Personal Child Health Record 
QA Quality Assurance 
S4H Smart4Hearing 
S4N Smart4NIPE 
SCBU Special Care Baby Unit 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 52 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
References 

NHS Choices website 
 
NHS Newborn Hearing Screening Programme : Standards 
Newborn Hearing Screening Programme Quality Standards 
 
NHS Newborn Hearing Screening Service Specification no 20 2019/20 
Public Health National Service Specifications 
 
NHS Newborn Hearing Screening Operational Guidance 
Newborn Hearing Screening Programme NHSP Operational Guidance 
 
Managing safety incidents in NHS screening programmes : Ref: PHE publications gateway 
number 2017284. 
Managing Safety Incidents in NHS Screening Programmes 
 
Screening of individuals with uncertain or incomplete screening status in England 
Screening of individuals with uncertain or incomplete screening status 
 
Link for UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) Surrogacy Guideline 
Surrogacy Guideline 
 
This document can be found on the trust website 
nww.westernsussexhospitals.nhs.uk/?s=newborn+screening&resource_type=&post_type=re
source 
 
Resources tile on S4H. 
All user guides, forms and tools, release notes and training video’s can be located on the 
resource tiles 

CG17004 Newborn Hearing Screening Standard Operating Procedure v5.1 May 2022 Page 53 of 53 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
Main a dditions /Changes 
 
Date Page Addition 
01/07 /20 4 Weekly Badgernet notification re transfers in and out of NICU’s 
01/07 /20 11 Link to surrogacy guideline regarding consent 
01/07 /20 12 Worthing Audiology email address 
01/07 /20 12 New exclusion’s for screening 
01/07 /20 20 Screening on NICU if screening has already occurred 
01/07 /20 21 Letters for parents 
01/07 /20 24 Results saved to same ear 
01/07 /20 27 CHIS read only access to S4H and running of reports from S4H 
01/07 /20 34 PIW – border homebirth pathway 
01/07 /20 34 OOA Regional document 
 
08/11/21 8 Screening information in different languages and animations 
08/11/21 14 Updated guidance on screens saved to wrong ears 
08/11/21 15 Updated guidance on screening twins 
08/11/21 16 QR code for Audiology visit leaflet 
08/11/21 17 UHS West NHSP report template 
08/11/21 18 Screening incident section 
08/11/21 20 New assessment sheets 
08/11/21 21 Updated guidance on incomplete QA checks 
08/11/21 24 Management of record for NICU baby in S4H 
08/11/21 28 Updated guidance on d ischarges from NICU with no hearing 
screen 
08/11/21 40/41 New Systmone failsafe 
08/11/21 46 Standard email wordin g for NICU check to other sites 
08/11/21 50 Home births