# Extracted from: CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation guideline.pdf
# Guideline ID: cg18005-newborn-bcg-immunisation-guideline
# Content length: 55218 characters
# Processing date: 1750066900.4538696

CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 1 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 
Summary statement: How does the 
document support patient care? Providing clear evidence based guidance for staff involved in 
identifying and delivering the BCG Immunisation Programme 
Staff/stakeholders involved in 
development: 
TB Nurse Specialist; Maternity, Joint Obstetric Guidelines 
Group, Paediatrics, Public Health England 
Division: Women and Children’s 
Department: Maternity 
Responsible Person: Chief of Service 
Author: Public Health Midwife & TB Nurse Specialist 
 
For use by: All paediatric and maternity staff involved in the care of 
newborn babies 
 
Purpose: To provide clear evidence based guidance on the BCG 
Immunisation Programme 
This document supports: Public Health England Service Specifications. 
 
Key related documents: UH Sussex West (SRH&WH) Maternity Guidelines: 
CG17003 NIPE guideline 
Approved by: Joint Obstetric Guideline Group and Pharmacy 
Approval date: 24th Nov 2021 Uploaded: 29th Nov 2021 
Ratified by Board of Directors/ 
Committee of the Board of Directors 
Not Applicable – Divisional Ratification only required 
Ratification Date: Not Applicable – Divisional Ratification only required 
Expiry Date: November 2024 
Review date: May 2024 
If you require this document in another format such as Braille, large print, audio or 
another language please contact the Trusts Communications Team 
Reference Number: CG1130 CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 2 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 

Version date Author Status Comment 
1.0 March 2018 TB Nurse 
Specialist and 
Public Health 
Midwife Archive New Guideline 
2.0 August 2019 Public Health 
Midwife & TB 
Nurse Specialist Archived Amendments to reflect PGD, 
HIV guidance & inclusion of 
SOPs 
3.0 November 2021 C. Thomas, 
Public Health 
Midwife LIVE PHE Immunisation 
Programme: Changes from 
September 2021. 
 
The interpretation and application of clinical guidelines will remain the 
responsibility of the individual clinician. 
 
If in doubt contact a senior colleague or expert . CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 3 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 Index 
1.0 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 4 
2.0 Scope ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 4 
3.0 Abbreviations used in this guideline ................................ ................................ .............. 4 
4.0 Responsibilities ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 4 
5.0 Aim of the immunisation programme ................................ ................................ ............ 5 
6.0 BCG immunisation programme ................................ ................................ .................... 5 
6.1 Direct health outcomes ................................ ................................ ................................ . 5 
7.0 Antenatal booking visit................................ ................................ ................................ .. 5 
7.1 Definition of at risk infants ................................ ................................ ............................ 6 
8.0 Newborn infant physical examination (NIPE) screening ................................ ................ 6 
9.0 Responsibilities of staff following BCG referral ................................ .............................. 7 
9.1 Responsibilities of the discharging community midwife ................................ ................. 7 
9.2 Administrative staff ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 7 
9.3 The paediatric nurse/midwife in clinic ................................ ................................ ........... 8 
9.4 Responsibilities of Public Health midwife ................................ ................................ ...... 8 
10.0 Exclusions ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 9 
10.1 Maternal HIV ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 9 
10.2 SCID - Severe Combined Immunodeficiency ................................ ............................... 9 
11.0 BCG vaccine dose and administration ................................ ................................ ........ 10 
11.1 Dose ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 10 
11.2 Method of administration ................................ ................................ ........................... 10 
11.3 Advice ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 10 
11.4 Interactions ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 11 
11.5 Surrey and Sussex Partnership ................................ ................................ ................. 11 
12.0 Audit / Monitoring ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 12 
13.0 References ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 12 
Appendix 1: Countries at high risk of TB ................................ ................................ ............... 14 
Appendix 2: A guide for parents about the BCG vaccination and after care ........................... 15 
Appendix 3: BCG referral booking process ................................ ................................ ........... 17 
Appendix 4: BCG referral process (NIPE practitioner) ................................ ........................... 18 
Appendix 5: BCG referral process (discharging midwife) ................................ ....................... 19 
Appendix 6: BCG referral process (administration of failsafes) ................................ .............. 22 
Appendix 7: How to run the NIPE BCG report ................................ ................................ ....... 25 
Appendix 8: How to print a BCG referral from NIPE ................................ .............................. 27 
Appendix 9: How to book a BCG appointment (administrators) ................................ ............. 29 
Appendix 10: BCG referral process (Public Health Midwife) ................................ .................. 31 CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 4 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 
1.0 Introduction 
 
This guideline has been developed to standardise the procedure for identification of those 
neonates at risk of human tuberculosis (TB), the procedure for the referral and 
documentation, and the vaccination programme for those neonates deemed to be at risk of 
developing TB. 
 
This guideline applies to neonates/infants under the care of practitioners working within UH 
Sussex West (SRH & WH). 
 
Human tuberculosis is caused by infection with the mycobacterium tuberculosis, and may 
affect any part of the body. Rates of TB have stabilised in the UK over the past seven years, 
following an increase in incidence from 1990 to 2005. However, despite considerable efforts 
to improve TB prevention, treatment and control, the incidence of TB in the UK remains high 
compared to most other Western European countries, with 5,758 cases reported in 2015, an 
incidence of 9.0 per 100,000 of the population. 
 
2.0 Scope 
 
This guideline applies to: 
• Midwives 
• Paediatric nurses 
• Paediatricians 
. 
3.0 Abbreviations used in this guideline 
 
TB - Tuberculosis SCID - Severe Combined Immunodeficiency 
BCG - Bacillus Calmette -Guerin CHRD - Child Health Records Department 
NIPE - Newborn Infant Physical 
Examination PGD - Patient Group Directive 
PCHR - Personal Child Health Record book NBBS - Newborn Blood Spot 
CHIS - Child Health Information System MTCT - Mother to Child Transmission 
PHE - Public Health England MMR - Mumps Measles Rubella 
 
4.0 Responsibilities 
 
Midwives, paediatric nurses and paediatricians: 
• To access, read, understand and follow this guidance. 
 
Management: 
• To ensure the guideline is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National 
recommendations. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 5 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 • To ensure the guideline is accessible to all relevant staff. 
 
5.0 Aim of the immunisation programme 
 
The aim of the selective neonatal BCG immunisation programme is to protect those infants 
(0 - 12 months of age), identified in ‘at risk’ groups as being at an increased risk from or 
exposure to TB infection. 
 
The aim will be achieved by delivering an evidence -based, population -wide immunisation 
programme that: 
 
• Identifies the eligible population and ensures effective timely delivery with optimal 
coverage based on the target population. 
• Is safe, effective, equitable and of a high quality and is independently monitored via 
the Screening and Immunisation Teams based within NHS England. 
• Is delivered and supported by appropriately trained, competent healthcare 
professionals who participate in ongoing training and development in line with 
national standards. 
• delivers, manages and stores vaccine in accordance with national guidance 
• Is supported by regular and accurate data collection using the appropriate returns as 
required nationally and/or locally. 
 
6.0 BCG immunisation programme 
 
The BCG immunisation programme is delivered as a risk -based programme. A key part of 
this risk based approach is the selective neonatal programme targeted at those infants most 
at risk of exposure to TB. 
 
Analysis shows the vaccine to be 70 - 80% effective against the most severe forms of the 
disease that includes TB meningitis in children. 
 
6.1 Direct health outcomes 
 
In the context of health outcomes the selective neonatal BCG vaccine programme aims to: 
 
• Reduce the number of new-borns at risk from or exposure to TB infection. 
• Reduce the number of preventable infections and their onward transmission. 
• Achieve high coverage across the groups identified. 
 
7.0 Antenatal booking visit 
 
At booking the midwife should identify the exact country of origin of both parents and ensure 
that this is documented onto the Medway Maternity system. The midwife should complete the 
BCG section of the woman’s handheld notes. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 6 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 7.1 Definition of at risk infants 
 
Neonatal BCG vaccine is routinely offered to infants in the following high-risk groups: 
 
• All infants (0 – 12 months) living in areas of the UK where annual incidence of TB 
is 40/100,000 or greater. 
• All infants (0 – 12 months) where one or more parent or grandparent was born in a 
country where the annual incidence of TB is 40/100,000 or greater. 
 
Countries listed in appendix 1 have high rates of TB. If the answer to any of the following 
questions is ‘ yes’ then the baby should have a BCG vaccination: 
 
• Are you, your family or your baby’s father or his family from one of these 
countries? 
• Will you and your baby be going to live for more than one month or travel 
frequently in one of these countries in the near future? 
• Is there anyone in your house, or anyone else who is likely to have long-term close 
contact with your baby, who either has TB, or has had it in the past, or comes from 
one of these countries? 
 
The above is not exclusive and any baby who is considered at risk but does not fit any of the 
above categories should be discussed with a paediatrician. 
 
If the parents answer ‘yes’ to any of the high risk categories, the midwife should discuss BCG 
vaccination and give the National Patient Information leaflet regarding BCG Vaccine to the 
parent. This can be accessed and / or printed from Family Assist via a computer or Smart 
phone. 
 
8.0 Newborn infant physical examination (NIPE) screening 
 
Using the definition of at risk infants, the NIPE practitioner will identify if the baby requires a 
BCG vaccination. 
 
Eligibility for BCG is a mandatory field on NIPE S4N systems. Screening will be completed 
identifying risk of TB and if BCG vaccination is indicated. Free text should be added to 
identify the concerns e.g. country of origin; active TB in house etc. 
 
If BCG referral is indicated, the referral form ‘BCG Neonatal Immunisation Referral Form’ can 
be selected from the ‘letters’ tab. All fields must be completed in the NIPE Practitioner 
section only. Any missing information can cause a delay in immunisation of the infant. The 
NIPE practitioner is responsible for the BCG referral. 
 
• The referral form should be emailed to: 
uhsussex.bcgimmunisationprogram@nhs.net CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 7 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 • The referral procedure should be explained to the parents with the aim of 
vaccination within 28 days of birth. 
 
9.0 Responsibilities of staff following BCG referral 
 
9.1 Responsibilities of the discharging community midwife 
 
• At discharge to the health visitor, if BCG vaccination is required, this should be 
documented on the carbonated page on the back of the Maternal Postnatal Care 
Record. 
• If a referral has been made this can be identified by looking at the S4N NIPE print 
out in the Personal Child Health Record book (PCHR). 
• If it is not clear from this documentation whether a referral has been made, a paper 
copy referral using the form ‘BCG Neonatal Immunisation Referral Form’ should be 
completed. This is then scanned and emailed to: 
uhsussex.bcgimmunisationprogram@nhs.net 
 
9.2 Administrative staff 
 
• Staff should check the referral form is fully completed by the NIPE practitioner. 
• An appointment is made for vaccination in the BCG neonatal immunisation clinic 
as soon as possible. This should be within 2 weeks of age. 
• Inform CHIS weekly of all our eligible babies. 
• Staff to check NBBS result received and that the SCID result is recorded. Any 
results which show a detected result to be highlighted to Public Health Midwife. 
• If repeat sample is a positive result. Cancel BCG appointment. 
• When the baby has attended for immunisation the carbon copies of PCHR will be 
sent to the GP and child health records department ( CHRD) . The completed 
referral and administration form will be filed in maternal notes. The completed 
referral should also be scanned into EVOLVE as part of the neonatal record. 
• If a parent fails to bring their child to the appointment (DNA) contact the midwife / 
heath visitor or GP to check address correct and send new appointment. 
• If 2nd DNA the standard hospital DNA letter will be sent to health visitor / GP / 
CHRD. 
• If the vaccine is declined this should be documented on the referral form and filed 
on Evolve. 
• All referrals and outcomes will be recorded on the failsafe spreadsheet maintained 
by the administrative BCG team within the Maternity Shared Drive. This will include 
reports obtained from Medway and NIPE S4N to ensure that all referrals are made 
and actioned. 
• If no referral has been received within 3 days of birth, check NIPE for BCG referral 
history. 
• Run a report from NIPE S4N per site of all BCG referrals for the month. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 8 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 9.3 The paediatric nurse/midwife in clinic 
 
BCG Vaccination is to be given to infants only by a nurse/midwife trained and competent in 
the administration of BCG immunisation. BCG is delivered via a Patient Group Directive 
(PGD). Training will be facilitated by an appropriately identified trainer overseen by the TB 
Nurse Specialist 
 
• The baby must be identified by name, date of birth and NHS number checked with 
the parent/carer and against PCHR red book and referral form. 
• The nurse/midwife must ensure that the baby has been correctly identified as 
needing BCG vaccination using the definitions above. 
• The nurse/midwife must check the result of SCID screening has been received. As 
BCG is a live vaccine it cannot be given to a baby with SCID, due to 
immunosuppression, so the SCID result (not tested/detected/not detected) must be 
known before the BCG vaccine can be given. 
o SCID Not tested=Give vaccine. 
o SCID Not detected=Give Vaccine. 
o SCID detected=Contradicted DO NOT GIVE. 
• Check the exclusions below and document consent from the parent/carer on the 
referral form. 
• Post vaccination the nurse/midwife must complete EPMA including batch no, 
product name, expiry, site & route of vaccine. 
• The nurse/midwife must complete the referral form, the appropriate PCHR pages 
(including the batch number and date given) and return them to the administrator. 
• Post vaccine advice leaflet should be discussed with the parent and given for 
reference (see Appendix 2 ). 
 
9.4 Responsibilities of Public Health midwife 
 
If there is no referral made present reprint and complete relevant sections. Feedback is given 
to NIPE practitioner to avoid reoccurrence. 
 
If there is no history of referral then check maternal notes and check country of origin against 
Medway entry and complete referral as appropriate. Feedback to NIPE practitioner. 
 
• Failsafe: This should occur monthly. 
• Check each baby against Medway spreadsheet to ensure all referral and babies 
are accounted for. 
• If no NBBS result received or baby is SCID detected ensure appointment for BCG 
is cancelled. BCG not to be given if no SCID result available. 
• Use Northgate/CHIS to confirm result. 
• All SCID suspected/SCID detected results will be seen by immunologist within 24 
hrs in specialist centre for confirmatory testing -flow cytometry. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 9 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 • Contact babies GP to establish outcome of immunologist appointment. If letter 
confirms BCG eligibility ask admin team to book baby appointment in BCG clinic. 
Ensure copy of immunologist letter is received and attached to referral form. 
• Report data to PHE monthly report any delays and mitigations. 
 
10.0 Exclusions 
 
The injection should not be given or should be delayed if the baby: 
 
• Has a high fever. 
• Is having treatment for cancer or other serious conditions that weaken the immune 
system. 
• Is HIV positive. 
• Is suffering from a generalised skin condition e.g. eczema. 
• Is in receipt of passive antibodies e.g. immunoglobulin within the last 3 months. 
• Is currently receiving a course of steroids. 
• NO NBBS result received. 
• SCID Detected. Until letter received from Immunologist to clarify SCID result. 
• Exposure to immunosuppression treatment in pregnancy or mother is 
breastfeeding, BCG not to be given until six months of age. 
 
10.1 Maternal HIV 
 
Infants considered at VERY LOW or LOW RISK of HIV transmission (i.e. maternal viral load 
<50 HIV RNA copies/mL at or after 36 weeks’ gestation) may be given BCG following birth if 
indicated according to UK guidelines for HIV -unexposed infants. 
 
Where maternal HIV is present and BCG is required the referral form for BCG should be sent 
to the paediatric consultant (Dr Anne -Marie Buckley for St Richard’s and Dr Jonathan Rabbs 
for Worthing). The consultant will confirm that the mother -to-child-transmission (MTCT) is 
considered low risk and they will date and sign the referral form stating the baby can receive 
its BCG immunisation. 
 
10.2 SCID - Severe Combined Immunodeficiency 
 
• Rare treatable genetic disorder that affects the development of functional T cells 
and B cells in the infants. 
• If left untreated results in repeated severe infections and death within the first few 
years of life. 
• Current estimate of incidence in the UK is 1in 48,933. 
• BCG vaccine is contradicted in infants affected by SCID. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 10 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 11.0 BCG vaccine dose and administration 
 
11.1 Dose 

Infants under 12 months of age: 0.05ml of the reconstituted vaccine strictly by 
intradermal injection. 
Infants and children over 12 months 
of age: 0.1ml of the reconstituted vaccine strictly by 
intradermal injection. 
 
11.2 Method of administration 
 
When drawn up into the syringe the vaccine suspension should appear homogenous, slightly 
opaque and colourless. BCG Vaccine (AJ Vaccine) should be administered with a syringe 
fitted with a short bevel needle (gauge 26 G). 
 
The baby should be held by the nurse/carer and the left arm exposed. The injection site 
should be clean and dry and not contaminated with antiseptics. If alcohol is used to swab 
the skin, it must be allowed to evaporate before the vaccine is injected. 
 
The vaccine should be injected strictly intradermal normally into the lateral aspect of the left 
upper arm at the level of the insertion of the deltoid muscle. Sites higher on the arm should 
be avoided as more likely to lead to keloid formation. 
 
• The skin is stretched between thumb and forefinger. 
• The needle should be almost parallel with the skin surface and slowly inserted with 
the bevel upwards , approximately 2mm into the superficial layers of the dermis; the 
needle should be visible through the epidermis during insertion. 
• The injection should be given slowly. 
• A raised, blanched bleb is a sign of correct injection. 
• The injection site is best left uncovered to facilitate healing. 
 
Check the comfort of the baby and reassure the parents/carers. 
 
11.3 Advice 
 
The parents/carers should be advised that a sore area may form, it may burst and leak 
fluid/blood; this is an expected reaction and should not cause alarm. The sore area should 
be kept dry and a dressing should not be applied, it will heal slowly (it may take 6-8 months 
or longer). 
 
Advise the parents/carers to see the GP if they are concerned about the baby’s well -being or 
the area of soreness. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 11 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
11.4 Interactions 
 
BCG vaccine may be given concurrently with inactivated or live vaccines. Live vaccines, 
such as rotavirus, live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV), oral typhoid vaccine, yellow fever, 
varicella, zoster and MMR can be administered at any time before or after BCG vaccination. 
 
Other vaccines to be given at the same time as BCG vaccine should not be given into the 
same arm. No other vaccination should be given for at least three months in the arm used for 
BCG vaccination (the left arm at UHSussex NHS Trust) because of the risk of regional 
lymphadenitis. 
 
11.5 Surrey and Sussex Partnership 
 
Surrey and Sussex 
BCG SCID pathway v CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 12 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 12.0 Audit / Monitoring 
 
The number of babies vaccinated by 28 days and after 28 days will be monitored by key 
performance indicator (KPI) statistics sent to Public Health England. 
 
This will include the number who decline and the number who fail to attend the appointment. 
 
13.0 References 
 
British HIV Association Guidelines for the management of HIV in pregnancy and postpartum 
2018 
 
Public Health England: Tuberculosis in the UK: 2016 report 
 
Immunisation against infectious disease: Green Book Chapter 32Tuberculosis July August 
2018 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_dat 
a/file/731848/_Greenbook_chapter_32_Tuberculosis_.pdf 
 
Public Health England: WHO estimates of tuberculosis incidence by country 2012 
 
Sedaghatian M.R. Kardouni K. Tuberculin response in preterm infants after BCG vaccination 
at birth. Archives of Disease in Childhood (1993); 69:309 -311 
 
NICE Guidelines for Tuberculosis 2016 
Collaborative Tuberculosis Stratergy for England 2015 to 2020 
Immunisation against infectious disease – ‘The Green Book’: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/immunisation -against -infectious -disease -the- 
green -book 
 
For country information on prevalence see: 
www.who.int/tb/country/data/profiles/en/index.html 
 
Immunisation training: national minimum standards 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immunisation -training -national -minimum - 
standards 
 
NPSA Vaccine cold storage, supporting information January 2010: 
http://www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/EasySiteWeb/getresource.axd?AssetID=66112&type=full&servic 
etype=Attachment 
 
Protocol for ordering, storing and handling vaccines (DH Sept 2010) 
www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH 
_120010 CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 13 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Health Protection Agency, Vaccine Incident Guidance, March 2012: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/vaccine -incident -guidance -responding -to- 
vaccine -errors 
 
National Reporting and Learning System (NRLS): https://report.nrls.nhs.uk/nrlsreporting/ 
 
NHS England, Serious Incident Framework March 2015. An update to the 2010 National 
Framework for Reporting and Learning from Serious Incidents Requiring Investigation 
https://www.england.nhs.uk/patientsafety/serious -incident/ 
 
NMC Standards for medicine management 2010: 
http://www.nmc.org.uk/standards/additional -standards/standards -for-medicines - 
management/ 
 
Who pays for what: Aspects of the maternity pathway payment for the screening and 
immunisation programmes June 2015 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/maternity -pathway -payment -system -guidance - 
for-nhs-providers -and-commissioners 
 
British National Formulary www.bnf.org/bnf/index.htm 
 
JCVI (Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation) 
https://www.gov.uk/government/policy -advisory -groups/joint -committee -on-vaccination -and- 
immunisation 
 
Resuscitation Council – UK guidelines www.resus.org.uk/pages/guide.htm 
 
World Health Organization – Immunisations www.who.int/topics/immunization/en/ 
 
NICE – Shared learning resources 
www.nice.org.uk/usingguidance/sharedlearningimplementingniceguidance/examplesofimple 
mentation/eximpresults.jsp?o=575 
 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/bcg -immunisation -programme -changes - 
from-september -2021 -letter/bcg -immunisation -programme -changes -from-september - 
2021 -letter CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 14 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 Appendix 1: Countries at high risk of TB 
 
Afghanistan Guinea Palau 
Algeria Guinea -Bissau Panama 
Angola Guyana Papua New Guinea 
Armenia Haiti Paraguay 
Azerbaijan Honduras Peru 
Bangladesh Hong Kong (SAR) Philippines 
Belarus India Rep. Korea 
Benin Indonesia Republic of Moldova 
Bhutan Iraq Romania 
Bolivia (Plurinational State Of) Kazakhstan Russian Federation 
Botswana Kenya Rwanda 
Brazil Kiribati Sao Tome & Principe 
Brunei Darussalam Kyrgyzstan Senegal 
Burkina Faso Lao PDR Sierra Leone 
Burundi Lesotho Singapore 
Cabo (Cape) Verde Liberia Solomon Islands 
Cambodia Libya Somalia 
Cameroon Lithuania South Africa 
Central African Republic Macao (SAR) South Sudan 
Chad Madagascar Sri Lanka 
China Malawi Sudan 
Congo Malaysia Swaziland 
Côte d'Ivoire Maldives Tajikistan 
DPR Korea Mali Thailand 
DR Congo Marshall Islands Timor -Leste 
Djibouti Mauritania Togo 
Dominican Republic Micronesia (FSO) Turkmenistan 
Ecuador Mongolia Tuvalu 
El Salvador Morocco Uganda 
Equatorial Guinea Mozambique Ukraine 
Eritrea Myanmar UR Tanzania 
Ethiopia Namibia Uzbekistan 
Fiji Nauru Vanuatu 
Gabon Nepal Viet Nam 
Gambia Nicaragua Yemen 
Georgia Niger Zambia 
Ghana Nigeria Zimbabwe 
Greenland Northern Mariana Islands 
Guam Pakistan CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 15 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Appendix 2: A guide for parents about the BCG vaccination and after care 

Patient name: Hospital Number: 
 
Date of vaccine: Date of birth: 
 
Limb/Side Vaccine Given: 

The BCG vaccination 
 
The Bacillus Calmette -Guérin (BCG) vaccination has been administered to help give 
protection against Tuberculosis (TB). The BCG vaccine is currently provided by the company 
Intervax and has been approved by the World Health Organisation (WHO). 
 
You should have received the patient information leaflet regarding BCG vaccine for the 
newborn with your appointment letter. The nurse/midwife should have also explained the 
points below before, the BCG vaccination was given. 
 
• The BCG is a live vaccine containing a weakened form of the bacteria that causes 
TB. Because it is weakened it doesn't actually cause TB but helps people develop 
immunity against it. 
 
• The vaccination is given under the skin and the body slowly absorbs it. 
 
• The BCG vaccine should not make your baby feel unwell. 
 
• Following changes in advice from Public Health England regarding live vaccines, 
the BCG vaccine can now be given at any time. This means it can be given before 
or after rotavirus, live attenuated influenza vaccine, oral typhoid vaccine, yellow 
fever, varicella, zoster, MMR and tuberculin skin testing. A four week interval does 
not need to be observed. 
 
• If further vaccinations are given, they should not be given in the same arm for a 
period of three months. 
 
• The BCG vaccination is only given once. Even if no scar develops, we do not re- 
vaccinate. 
 
The injection 
 
The injection is given just under the skin of the left upper arm (Deltoid). The vaccination 
usually leaves a white mark under the skin. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 16 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
This mark will disappear a few hours after it has been given. Between two and six weeks 
later a small lump where the injection was given will appear. It can be up to the size of a five 
pence piece. It may ooze and form a scab. This is quite normal but may take several months 
to heal. 

After care 
 
• Keep the area clean. 
 
• No creams, lotions or plasters should be used on the area. Only use a plaster if 
you are going swimming. 
 
• If it oozes on to clothing a small dry woven dressing may be used (gauze). 
 
• The sore should gradually heal over to leave a scar on the arm. 

If you are worried about the vaccination reaction please contact the Tuberculosis (TB) 
Nursing Team on the details below. 
 
BCG/Tuberculosis (TB) Nursing Team 
Emma Gluba 
TB Nurse Specialist 
Respiratory Department, Loxwood Centre 
St Richard’s Hospital 
Spitalfield Lane, Chichester 
West Sussex PO19 6SE 
 
Telephone: 01243 788122 Ext: 32397 CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 17 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
On receiving a referral (self -referral or GP referral) please ensure that the 
information given on the form regarding nationality is entered to Sema Helix. 
At booking please ask the parent the follow questions: 
•Are you, your family or your baby’s father or his family from one of these 
countries? 
•Will you and your baby be going to live for more than one month or travel 
frequently in one of these countries in the near future? 
•Is there anyone in your house, or anyone else who is likely to have long-term 
close contact with your baby, who either has TB, or has had it in the past, or 
comes from one of these countries? Appendix 3: BCG referral booking process 
Maternity oversee BCG Immunisation Clinics for all babies born in our Trust. 
Please see flow chart below on the expectations of the Antenatal Clinic and Booking Midwife 
with this process. 

• At booking the midwife should identify the exact country of origin of both parents 
and ensure that this is documented onto the Medway Maternity system. 
• Also indicate if the baby will need BCG if any of the answers to above questions 
are ‘yes’. The midwife should complete the BCG section of the woman’s 
handheld notes. 

• Save NIPE SMaRT report with comments in the relevant month of the BCG 
administration folder 
• If the baby requires BCG immunisation once born, discuss this with the 
woman and ensure that you give her the patient information on BCG 
vaccination. 
• Please ensure that you give the parent the Patient Information on TB and 
BCG Vaccine. This can be printed out via Family Assist using the Family 
Assist Icon in WSHT Applications or searching Family Assist on the parent’s 
Smart phone. 
• Search: BCG; Open Screening Tests for you & your baby; Press on more 
information on the BCG vaccination to open leaflet which can be printed or 
downloaded to read. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 18 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
On completing a NIPE screen please ask the parent the follow questions: 
• Are you, your family or your baby’s father or his family from one of these 
countries? 
• Will you and your baby be going to live for more than one month or travel 
frequently in one of these countries in the near future? 
• Is there anyone in your house, or anyone else who is likely to have long - 
term close contact with your baby, who either has TB, or has had it in the past, 
or comes from one of these countries? (See appendix 1 ) 

Press ‘Print Selected Letter’ & wait for this to build in the print list. Once built please 
open the word documented and ensure all fields are completed in the NIPE 
Practitioner section only. Any missing information can cause a delay in 
immunisation of the infant Appendix 4: BCG referral process (NIPE practitioner) 
Please see flow chart below on the expectations of you as NIPE Practitioners with this 
process. 

If a baby has been identified as requiring 
BCG vaccination please ensure ‘yes’ is 
selected on the S4N form 
(Risk Factors tab). In the free text box enter the country 
or other information which 
determines this baby to be of risk 
to TB. 

Following completion of the 
screening on S4N the 
referral form ‘BCG Neonatal 
Immunisation Referral Form’ 
can be found in the 
‘Letters’ tab. 
 
Continued on next page 
CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 19 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
The above fields can be completed on computer which will then make it easier for you to 
send as an attachment to: uhsussex.bcgimmunisationprogram@nhs.net 
Please ensure that you give the parent the Patient Information on TB and BCG 
Vaccine. This can be printed out via Family Assist using the Family Assist Icon in 
WSHT Applications or searching Family Assist on the parent’s Smart phone 
Search: BCG; Open Screening Tests for you & your baby; Press on more information 
on the BCG vaccination to open leaflet which can be printed or downloaded to read. 

CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 20 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Prior to discharge 
please check the 
NIPE Print Out to 
identify if the baby 
has had a BCG 
immunisation referral. 
NIPE Paperwork (found in PN notes and/or PCHR ‘Red Book’) 
•If highlights ‘Yes’ - assume referral sent and the administration failsafe will follow this up 
•If highlights ‘No’- assume referral not sent 
 
If you suspect a BCG vaccine is required and you assume one hasn’t been completed 
as the NIPE paper states ‘No’ please ask the parent the follow questions: 
 
•Are you, your family or your baby’s father or his family from one of these countries? 
•Will you and your baby be going to live for more than one month or travel frequently 
in one of these countries in the near future? 
•Is there anyone in your house, or anyone else who is likely to have long-term close 
contact with your baby, who either has TB, or has had it in the past, or comes from 
one of these countries? (See appendix 1 ). Appendix 5: BCG referral process (discharging midwife) 
 
Please see flow chart below on the expectations of you as the discharging Midwife 
with this process. 

Continued on next page CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 21 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 

Please ensure that once completed you scan and send the copy to the address 
below. A Ward Clerk can assist you with this. 
Uhsussex.bcgimmunisationprogram@nhs.net 

Please ensure that you give the parent the Patient Information 
on TB and BCG Vaccine. This can be printed out via Family 
Assist using the Family Assist Icon in WSHT Applications or 
searching Family Assist on the parent’s Smart phone. 
Search: BCG; Open Screening Tests for you & your baby; 
Press on more information on the BCG vaccination to open 
leaflet which can be printed or downloaded to read. 
Once confirmed that a BCG immunisation referral is required please completed a 
paper copy of the BCG Newborn Immunisation Referral From 2019 CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 22 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 Appendix 6: BCG referral process (administration of failsafes) 
 
Please see flow chart below on the expectations of you as Administrators of the BCG 
Failsafe with this process. Any concerns with any aspect of the process please contact the 
Public Health Midwife. 
 
Pre appointment: 
• A weekly report is run from Medway & NIPE, which will produce a list of babies born who 
were identified at booking requiring BCG immunisation. For details on how to run the 
reports please see the how to guide. 
• This will be found on the server in the Maternity Shared Drive; Public Health; BCG 
Immunisation Programme Folder - BCG Clinic Set Up; Flow Chart SOP (Please save 
reports in the specific named folder in the BCG administration folder) 
• Please action those for your site specifically and start with the oldest babies first. 
• DO NOT DELETE the spreadsheet as this will need to be saved for use by others. The 
purpose of the spreadsheet is to detail all actions made with regards to BCG 
immunisation. 
• Add the additional template columns to the spreadsheet. This is to log all your actions. 
• BCG referrals will be received via email: uhsussex.bcgimmunisationprogram@nhs.net 
• Please check that you have received a referral form for each baby. If you have not 
received a form once the NIPE examination has been complete, please generate a BCG 
referral from NIPE S4N and email to the NIPE practitioner to confirm. Please do not wait 
for the NIPE practitioner to respond. Proceed with making the appointment and cancel 
later if needed. 
• If the referral does not match any of the babies on the Medway spreadsheet please 
ensure baby’s family origin is on the high risk list for TB or there is a family history. Add 
baby to the spreadsheet and proceed with making the appointment. 
• Inform CHIS weekly of babies identified at NIPE eligible for BCG. 
Once the referral has been received please check the following: 
1. Has all of the NIPE Practitioner section been completed? 
o Yes: Proceed 
o No: Please email referrer to complete. Ensure baby has a family origin on the high 
risk list for TB or family history of TB and proceed with making the appointment. 
2. Do the countries stated on the referral form match those on the country list below? 
o Yes: Proceed 
o No: Check Medway for both Mother and Father’s family origin or if there is a family 
history of TB. If country stated is not on the list, highlight blue on the spreadsheet. If 
no specific country is listed, contact mum to check and proceed with making 
appointment if applicable. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 23 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
• Check Sema Helix for available appointment and book. 
• Appointment should be given within 2 weeks of birth (over 28 days is reportable to Public 
Health England so this should ‘allow’ for a potential DNA). 
• Send appointment letter with BCG Leaflet. 
• This can be found under Maternity Shared Drive; Public Health; BCG Immunisation 
Programme Folder - BCG Administration. 
• Enter all actions to the relevant baby on the spreadsheet 
• Text reminders to each parent prior to appointment 
• One week prior to appointment crosscheck that NBBS result received. CHIS will notify 
us of any screen positive results from SCID screening taken on day 5 NBBS. 
• Use Northgate to check NBBS back and result for SCID is known: 
SCID Negative -proceed 
SCID not screened -proceed 
SCID positive -Cancel Appointment with parents. Inform Public Health Midwife. 
• Cancel upcoming BCG appointment. Inform parents. 
Pre Clinic: 
Prior to day of clinic ensure that ‘BCG Pack’ is made for those babies due to attend clinic 
BCG Pack (plastic wallet per baby) to include: 
• Referral Form 
• Nurse Checklist 
• BCG Immunisation Leaflet 
• After Care Leaflet 
The nurse will come and collect the packs on the day of the clinic. 
Has the patient declined? 
• Cancel the appt and send cancelation letter to patient; Send a decline letter to GP and 
email appropriate Health Visitor team; Record on spreadsheet; Upload scan copy of this 
form to EVOLVE and file this and a copy of the decline letter in maternal notes. 
Post Clinic: 
Once you have received the referrals back check the following: 
Has the Paediatric Nurse section of form been fully completed? 
• Yes: Proceed. 
• No: Email nurse that the form requires completed cc TB Nurse Specialist to email. 
Has the patient DNA’d? 
• No: Proceed 
• Yes: Rebook the appointment and contact mother to confirm address. Record second CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 24 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
appt on spreadsheet. 
2nd DNA? 
• No: Proceed 
• Yes: Send DNA letter to GP and patient, and email the appropriate Health Visiting Team 
on NHS.net. Record on the spreadsheet, upload referral to EVOLVE and file in Mum’s 
Maternity notes. 
Patient Attended Clinic? 
• Vaccinated: Send the pink carbon copies of PCHR to GP, keep the yellow one; 
Upload scan copy of the referral form and Paediatric Nurse Checklist to EVOLVE and 
file in maternal notes. Record on the BCG and CHIS spreadsheet. 
• Not Vaccinated: Find out whether they declined or appt need to be rebooked. Action 
as appropriate. 
Enter all actions to the relevant baby on the spreadsheet. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 25 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 

Once you have selected a site, 
select the box that says ‘Search’ Appendix 7: How to run the NIPE BCG report 
 
As well as the weekly BCG report from Medway, a report from NIPE is also run every 
Monday to ensure no babies are missed. 
Log in to NIPE. You will need to select which site you wish to run the report for. Please select 
either Worthing or St Richards as the report will not work if you select ‘Western Sussex 
Hospitals’. 

You will need to 
select a ‘from’ and 
‘to’ date. The report 
is run weekly so this 
will need to be for 
the previous week. 
For example if it is 
Monday 31st 
December, you will 
need to run the 
report from Monday 
24th to Sunday 30th 
December. Then 
click ‘search’ . 
CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 26 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 

Another box will appear with a list of babies born within that date period. Click on arrow next 
to ‘Advanced Search’ , followed by the ‘Risk Factors’ tab. From the drop down menu tick 
the box next to ‘Risk of TB, BCG indicated’ and hit enter on the keyboard. This will adjust 
the list of babies to only those who have been identified by the NIPE practitioner as being 
eligible for a BCG vaccine. 

Remember you will need to run this report twice – once for St Richards and once for 
Worthing. 
 
Please screenshot both NIPE reports and save under: 
S:\WomenChildrenMgmt \MATERNITY \PUBLIC HEALTH \BCG Immunisation 
Programme \BCG Administration \BCG NIPE Report 
 
If you have not received a referral , check Medway for a country of origin or family history of 
TB. If they are eligible and were not also generated form the Medway report, please add 
baby to the BCG spreadsheet and proceed with generating a referral and making an 
appointment. If no eligibility for BCG is indicated on Medway, contact the parents to check for 
family origin or family history of TB. 
 
Official flowcharts and guides on the BCG clinic process can be found under: 
S:\WomenChildrenMgmt \MATERNITY \PUBLIC HEALTH \BCG Immunisation 
Programme \BCG Clinic Set Up \Flow Chart SOP CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 27 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
Appendix 8: How to print a BCG referral from NIPE 

1. Log in to NIPE. 
2. Select the site. Please select either St Richards or Worthing as selecting Western 
Sussex will not work. 
 
3. Click on the ‘Search’ box. 
 
4. Search for the baby using name or NHS number and click ‘Search’ . 
5. Click on babies name to open the record. 
6. Click on the ‘Screening’ tab. If the NIPE has been completed it will look like the 
image below with green/red outcomes. If it has not been complete, the boxes will be 
grey. 
 
CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 28 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 

1. Click on the ‘Letters’ tab. 
2. Click on the ‘Print’ tab to bring up a list of documents. 
3. Go to page 6 and tick the box text to ‘BCG Referral Form 2018’ . The click ‘Print’. 
 
4. Click on the word icon to open the word document. 

5. Once you have opened it in a word document you will be able to save/print it and fill 
in the relevant details. CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 29 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 Appendix 9: How to book a BCG appointment (administrators) 
 
Official flowcharts and guides on the BCG clinic process can be found under MATERNITY > 
PUBLIC HEALTH > BCG Immunisation Programme > BCG Clinic Set Up 
Throughout the week emails will come in to the BCG inbox (wsht and nhs.net) with BCG 
referrals. With these you will need to check the stated country on the referral against the high 
risk list on the back of the referral (WHO list). If it matches you can make the appointment. 
 
Please note : Syria is not on the list but we are currently offering babies with a Syrian family 
origin the BCG vaccine. 
 
If there is no country that matches but there is a family history of TB, the BCG vaccine can 
also be offered. If this is the case it will be stated on the BCG referral. 
 
Now you can put the referral on sema… 
 
Open sema and go to Outpatients > Manage Outpatient Referrals. Type in baby’s NHS 
number. Check that the correct baby has been entered and click on New Referral at the 
bottom of the box. You will need to answer any underlined questions. 
• Referral Type will be ‘Consultant, other than A&E ’ for paediatricians, ‘Allied Health 
Professional ’ for Midwives or ‘ Health Visitor ’ for Health Visitors. 
• In Referrers ID or Source write the name of the person who referred the baby (found 
on the referral). 
• Date Referral Received . 
• Intended Case Type is Outpatient. 
• In the small box next to Health Prof type NMB and click the arrows. Then select Nick 
M Brennan from the drop down menu. In the drop down menu next to speciality 
select Paediatrics . Please note: this is for St Richards BCG clinic ONLY. If you are 
booking an appointment for Worthing clinic please see list of codes on the next page. 
• Under Administrative details the Service Type is Advice/Consultation , the Priority is 
Routine and the Overseas Visitor is Not Applicable. 
 
Now you can book the appointment... 
 
• Under Outpatients > Manage Outpatient Referrals , select the referral you just put 
on and click Book Appt at the bottom right. 
• Next to Clinic write PABCGC (for St Richards, if you are booking an appointment for 
Worthing please see list of codes on the next page) and select the arrows. Select 
BCG Newborn Immunisation SRH should from the drop down list. The from and to 
dates should be filled out automatically (this is the range date you will be searching 
available clinics. (If there aren’t any appointments available in this range you can 
change it). Click Search . 
• Then select a clinic date and time and click next. In the Booking System drop down 
menu select Partial Booking System and click finish . Another box should appear 
for an appointment letter to be sent to the patient. In the box next to code type CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 30 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 OPTEPI (code for the BCG Clinic letter – St Richards ONLY, if you are booking for 
Worthing clinic, check the codes below). In the list you should see ‘Contact – Paed 
Immunisation’ , click on it and click the ‘ >’ so that it moves to the box on the right. 
Then click ok. 
 
The appointment letter will need to be sent with the blue ‘TB, BCG vaccine and your baby’ 
leaflet in the envelope. 
 
Make a note of what babies you receive throughout the week to make filling out the 
spreadsheet easier. Do not add babies to the spreadsheet that are born in the current week 
as this will confuse things when the BCG report is run every Monday. 
 
Filling out the referral form 
 
Once the appointment is made you will need to fill out the referral form. Fill out the 
Date/Time of appt and tick when you have sent an appointment letter and when the BCG 
vaccine has been prescribed on JAC . 
 
Useful Codes 
 
BCKY – Dr Anne -Marie Buckey is the health professional for St Richards BCG Clinic 
Vam – Dr Vamvakiti is the health professional for Worthing BCG Clinic 
PABCGC – St Richard’s clinic code 
OPTEPI – St Richard’s clinic letter code 
PABCGW – Worthing clinic code. If Sally is away and you are covering for Worthing this is 
the code to book babies in the Worthing clinics. When putting the referral on sema it’s the 
same process but instead of Nick Brennan as the Health Professional it’s E Vamvakiti. 
WOPTPZ – Worthing clinic letter code CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 31 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
The administrators will contact if a referral has not been received within at least 
3 days of birth of any baby from the Medway spreadsheet. 
 
•Please check NIPE for a BCG referral history. If there is one present reprint and 
complete relevant sections. Feedback to NIPE practitioner that a referral was not 
sent by email to avoid reoccurrence. 
•If no history of referral printed then request maternal notes and check country of 
origin against Medway entry and complete referral if appropriate. Feedback to 
NIPE practitioner that a referral was not completed to avoid reoccurrence. 
The administrators will contact if a referral has been received but does not appear on 
Medway spreadsheet or the countries of origin do not match the high risk list. 
 
•Please request maternal notes and check country of origin written. Check against 
Medway entry. If not clear why a referral was sent and nothing written in NIPE 
SMaRT please contact NIPE practitioner to understand why a referral was 
required. 
The administrators will contact you if the BCG referral has not been fully completed 
and no response has been gleaned from email sent. 
 
•Please request maternal notes and check country of origin against Medway entry 
and complete referral if appropriate. Feedback to NIPE practitioner that the referral 
was not completed fully to avoid reoccurrence. 
 
Failsafe 
 
Monthly (may need adjusting to fortnightly if regular referrals missing) Requirement: 
 
•Pull report on excel spreadsheet from NIPE SMaRT per site facility (cannot use 
Trust oversite for this) of all BCG referrals for the month. 
•Check each baby against the Medway spreadsheet to ensure all referrals and 
babies accounted for. 
•If there are additional babies on the NIPE SMaRT report that do not appear on 
the Medway spreadsheet please review comments in NIPE SMaRT to determine 
if BCG referral should have been sent. This will also require checking against 
maternal notes and Medway entry to ensure it was not a manual entry error by 
NIPE Practitioner. Appendix 10: BCG referral process (Public Health Midwife) 
Obligations of the Public Health Midwife: 

 CG18005 Newborn BCG Immunisation Guideline 3.0 November 2021 Page 32 of 32 
Please check against Staffnet that this printout is the most recent version of this document. 
 
•Use Northgate/CHIS to double check result. 
•Ensure appointment for BCG has been cancelled and parents aware. 
Contact babies GP via email to establish outcome of immunologist appointment. 
 
•If false positive result confirmed by GP or immunologist has confirmed vaccine 
can be given. 
•Rebook BCG appointment. 
•Report delay /mitigations to PHE in monthly returns. 

Failsafe for public health midwife if no NBBS result received/ SCID positive.