# Extracted from: ESHRE RPL Guideline_27112017_FINAL_v2.pdf
# Guideline ID: eshre-rpl-guideline-27112017-final-v2
# Content length: 438289 characters
# Processing date: 1749960278.8610759

0 

Recurrent 
Pregnancy Loss 
November 2017 
Version 2 
 
ESHRE Early Pregnancy Guideline Development Group [1] 

Version 2 was published 1 April 2019 and includes a correction in the numbers mentioned in section 4. 2 
on page 39 (changes were marked in green) . No further changes were made as compared to version 1 
(published November 2017) 

DISCLAIMER 
The European Society of Human Reproduction a nd Embryology (hereinafter referred to as 'ESHRE') 
developed the current clinical practice guideline, to provide clinical recommendations to improve the 
quality of healthcare delivery within the European field of human reproduction and embryology. This 
guideline represents the views of ESHRE, which were achieved after careful consideration of the scientific 
evidence available at the time of preparation. In the absence of scientific evidence on certain aspects, a 
consensus between the relevant ESHRE stakehol ders has been obtained. 
The aim of clinical practice guidelines is to aid healthcare professionals in everyday clinical decisions 
about appropriate and effective care of their patients. 
However, adherence to these clinical practice guidelines does not gua rantee a successful or specific 
outcome, nor does it establish a standard of care. Clinical practice guidelines do not override the 
healthcare professional's clinical judgment in diagnosis and treatment of particular patients. Ultimately, 
healthcare professionals must make their own clinical decisions on a case -by-case basis, using their 
clinical judgment, knowledge, and expertise, and taking into account the condition, circumstances, and 
wishes of the individual patient, in consultation with that patient and/or the guardian or carer. 
ESHRE makes no warranty, express or implied, regarding the clinical practice guidelines and specifically 
excludes any warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular use or purpose. ESHRE shall not 
be liable for dir ect, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages related to the use of the 
information contained herein. While ESHRE makes every effort to compile accurate information and to 
keep it up -to-date, it cannot, however, guarantee the correctness, co mpleteness, and accuracy of the 
guideline in every respect. In any event, these clinical practice guidelines do not necessarily represent 
the views of all clinicians that are member of ESHRE. 
The information provided in this document does not constitute bu siness, medical or other professional 
advice, and is subject to change. [2] 
 
Contents 
Disclaimer 1 
CONTENTS 2 
INTRODUCTION TO THE GUIDELINE 5 
Guideline scope 5 
Target users of the guideline 5 
LIST OF ALL RECOMMEN DATIONS 6 
PART A: RECURRENT PR EGNANCY LOSS 15 
Definition of RP L 15 
Terminology 16 
Prevalence of RPL 17 
Psychological impact of RP L 17 
PART B: ORGANIZATION OF CARE 20 
Access to care 20 
The RPL clin ic 20 
Treatment plan, supportive care and psychological care 21 
PART C: RISK FACTORS AND HEALTH BEHAVIOR 23 
1. Risk factors for recurrent pregnancy loss 23 
1.1 Age 23 
1.2 Stress 24 
1.3 Occupational or environmental exposure 25 
1.4 Chronic endometritis 26 
1.5 Endom etrial decidualization 26 
2. Health behavior modifications 28 
2.1 Smoking cessation 28 
2.2 Striving for a healthy, normal range body mass index 29 
2.3 Reducing caffeine intake 30 
2.4 Exercise 31 
2.5 Avoiding alcohol 32 
2.6 Other lifestyle changes 33 
PART D: INVEST IGATIONS IN RPL 35 
3. Medical and family history 35 
4. Screening for genetic factors 37 [3] 
 
4.1 Genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue 37 
4.2 Parental genetic analysis 39 
5. Thrombophilia screening 42 
5.1 Hereditary thrombophilia 42 
5.2 Acquired thrombophilia 44 
6. Immu nological screening 48 
6.1 Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 48 
6.2 Anti -HY antibodies 50 
6.3 Cytokines 51 
6.4 Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) 52 
6.5 Natural killer cells (NK cells) 53 
6.6 Other immunological tests 55 
7. Metabolic and endocrinologic factors 60 
7.1 Thyroi d dysfunction 60 
7.2 PCOS and disturbances of the insulin metabolism 62 
7.3 Prolactin Deficiency 64 
7.4 Ovarian reserve testing 65 
7.5 Luteal phase insufficiency 67 
7.6 Androgens 68 
7.7 Vitamin D 69 
7.8 Luteinizing hormone (LH) 70 
7.9 Hyperhomocysteinemia 71 
8. Anatomical investigations 76 
8.1 Congenital uterine malformations 76 
8.2 Acquired uterine malformations 77 
9. Male factors 81 
PART E: PROGNOSIS AN D TREATMENT 85 
10. Assessing prognosis of a couple with RPL 85 
10.1 Factors affecting prognosis 85 
10.2 Prognostic tools 86 
11. Treatment for RPL with genetic background 90 
11.1 Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) for unexplained RPL 90 
11.2 Preimplantation genetic testing for RPL with genetic background 90 
12. Treatment for RPL and Thrombophilia 93 
12.1 Treatment for women with RPL and hereditary thrombophilia 93 
12.2 Treatment for women with RPL and antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) 94 
13. Treatment for RPL with immunological background 98 
14. Treatment of RPL with metabolic or endocrinologic abnormalities 100 
14.1 Treatment for thyroid abnormalities associated with RPL 100 [4] 
 
14.2 Progesterone or human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) (for luteal phase insufficie ncy) 102 
14.3 Metformin / insulin 103 
14.4 Ovulation induction 104 
14.5 Bromocriptine for RPL associated with hyperprolactinemia 105 
14.6 Vitamin D 106 
14.7 Treatment for hyperhomocysteinemia 107 
15. Treatment for uterine abnormalities in RPL 110 
15.1 Congenital Uterine Malformations 110 
15.2 Acquired Intrauterine Malformations 112 
15.3 Cervical insufficiency 114 
16. Treatment for RPL with M ale factor 118 
17. Treatment for unexplained RPL 121 
17.1 Lymphocyte immunization therapy 121 
17.2 Intravenous immunoglobulin (IvIg) 122 
17.3 Prednisolone 122 
17.4 Anticoagulants 123 
17.5 Folic acid 124 
17.6 Progesterone 125 
17.7 Intralipid therapy 126 
17.8 Granulocyte colony -stimulating factor (G -CSF) 127 
17.9 Endometrial scratching 128 
18. Non -conventional treatments for RPL 130 
ANNEXES 132 
Annex 1: Guideline development group 133 
Declarations of interest 134 
Annex 2: Summary of findings tables 135 
Annex 3: Recommendatio ns for research 145 
Annex 4: Abbreviations 147 
Annex 5: Methodology 149 
Annex 6: Stakeholder consultation 152 
Annex 7: Literature study: flowcharts, list of excluded studies Separate document 
Annex 8: Evidence tables Separate document 
 
 [5] 
 
Introduction to the Guideline 
 
Previ ous evidence- based guidelines for the investigation and medical treatment of recurrent 
miscarriage have been published in 2006 on behalf of the ESHRE Special Interest Group (SIG) Early 
Pregnancy (Jauniaux et al. , 2006 ). However, the ESHRE S IG Implantation and Early Pregnancy believed 
that these guidelines were outdated and initiated the current guideline. 
The guideline was developed according to a well -document ed methodology, universal to ESHRE 
guidelines and described in the Manual for ESHRE guide line development (www.eshre.eu). Details on 
the methodology of the current guideline are outlined in Annex 5. 
The guideline development group (GDG) was composed of (p revious) members of the coordination of 
the SIG, with addition of experts in the field that replied on a call for experts to the ESHRE audience. 
The members of the guideline development group are listed in A nnex 1. 
GUIDELINE SCOPE 
The overall aim of this g uideline is to supply healthcare providers with the best available evidence for 
investigation and treatment of women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL) 
is defined as the loss of two or more pregnanc ies. It excludes ectopic pregna ncy and molar pregnancy. 
How to handle the definition is further elaborated in part A . 
The guideline provides an overview of suggested treatments for RPL, and which of those are recommended. Furthermore, recommendations are made on the investigations that could be helpful 
to identify the origin of the pregnancy losses and possible therapeutic targets. In addition, 
recommendations are written regarding organization of care for couples faced with RPL. 
TARGET USERS OF THE G UIDELINE 
The guideline covers the ca re provided by secondary and tertiary healthcare professionals who have 
direct contact with, and make decisions concerning the care of , couples with recurrent pregnancy loss. 
This guideline is of relevance to European healthcare providers and couples with recurrent pregnancy 
loss. For the benefit of patient education and shared- decision making, a patient version of this guideline 
will be developed. 
References 
Jauniaux E, Farquharson RG, Christiansen OB, Exalto N. Evidence -based guidelines for the investigation and 
medical treatment of recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2006; 21: 2216- 2222. 
 [6] 
 
List of all recommendations 
 
Chapte
r 
Nr 
Recommendation Strength Quality of 
evidence Justification Remarks 
Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 
 A dia gnosis of Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL) could be 
considered after the loss of two or more pregnancies. / / / Conclusion 
 The guideline development group ( GDG ) concludes to use the 
term Recurrent Pregnancy Loss . / / / Conclusion 
 Pregnancy loss is a si gnificant negative life event and the 
repetitive nature of RPL may intensify the grief experienced. 
Studies have mostly focused on women, and there is a need 
for studies on the emotional impact of RPL on men. Clinicians 
and clinics should take the psychos ocial needs of couples 
faced with RPL into account when offering and organizing care 
for these couples. / / / Conclusion 
RISK FACTOR AND HEALTH BEHAVIOR MODIFICATIONS 
1 1 Women should be sensitively informed that the risk of 
pregnancy loss is lowest in w omen aged 20 to 35 years. Strong ⊕⊕ Although the evidence is of low quality (based on small 
but consistent observational studies), the GDG decided 
to strongly recommend information provision on the 
topic. 
1 2 Women should be informed that the risk of p regnancy loss 
rapidly increases after the age of 40. Strong ⊕⊕ 
1 3 Stress is associated with RPL, but couples should be informed 
that there is no evidence that stress is a direct cause of 
pregnancy loss. Strong ⊕ This recommendation is based on a s ignificant concern 
of couples, with only very low quality evidence on an 
association and no evidence for a causal relation [7] 
 
2 4 Couples with RPL should be informed that smoking could have 
a negative impact on their chances of a live birth, and 
therefore c essation of smoking is recommended. GPP Smoking is a moderate risk factor for RPL , and associated 
with poor obstetric outcomes. C essation of smoking 
could be recommended in couples with RPL even in the 
absence of studies on the effect of smoking cessation . 
2 5 Couples with RPL should be informed that maternal obesity or 
being significantly underweight is associated with obstetric 
complications and could have a negative impact on their 
chances of a live birth and on their general health. Strong ⊕⊕ Maternal obesity is a strong risk factor in RPL, and weight 
loss in overweight women has a positive impact on 
fertility outcomes and reduced weight is associated with reduced complicat ions during pregnancy and birth . 
Striving for a normal BMI is recommended, ev en in the 
absence of studies on the impact of weight loss on a 
subsequent pregnancy loss. 
2 6 Striving for a healthy normal range body mass index ( BMI) is 
recommended. GPP 
2 7 Couples with RPL should be informed that excessive alcohol 
consumption is a possible risk factor for pregnancy loss and 
proven risk factor for fetal problems (Fetal alcohol syndrome). Strong ⊕⊕ Alcohol consumption is a weak risk factor for pregnancy 
loss. Clinicians should provide information on alcohol, 
and advice to limit co nsumption based on the absence 
of harms. Women suggesting that alcohol use has 
caused a previous pregnancy loss can be reassured that 
there is no evidence for a causal association. 
2 8 Couples with RPL should be advised to limit alcohol 
consumption. GPP 
INVESTIGATIONS IN RPL 
 
3 9 Medical and family history could be used to tailor diagnostic 
investigations in RPL. GPP The GDG concludes that a thorough reproductive history 
should be taken in couples presenting with RPL and 
stresses that number of pr eceding pregnancy losses and 
female age provide the best available prognostic 
information 
3 10 The guideline development group ( GDG ) recommends to base 
prognosis on the number of preceding pregnancy losses and 
female age. Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
4 11 Genetic anal ysis of pregnancy tissue is not routinely 
recommended but it could be performed for explanatory 
purposes. Conditional ⊕⊕ As the impact of further clinical decision -making and the 
exact influence on prognosis for an individual patient is 
unclear, the GDG decided to formulate a conditional 
recommendation on genetic testing of the pregnancy 
tissue. 
4 12 For genetic analysis of the pregnancy tissue, Array -based 
Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array -CGH ) is 
recommended based on a reduced maternal contamin ation 
effect. Strong ⊕⊕ 
4 13 Parental karyotyping is not routinely recommended in couples 
with RPL. It could be carried out after individual assessment of 
risk. Conditional ⊕⊕ Couples should primarily be informed that, even if a 
parental abnormality is found, the cumulative live birth 
rates are good. Furthermore, they should be informed of the limitations of karyotyping and the impact of the test 
result. 
5 14 For women with RPL, we suggest not to screen for hereditary Conditional ⊕⊕⊕ There is no, or at best a weak , association between RPL [8] 
 
thrombophilia unless in the co ntext of research , or in women 
with additional risk factors for thrombophilia and hereditary thrombophilia. 
5 15 For women with RPL, we recommend screening for 
antiphospholipid anti bodies ( Lupus Anticoagulant [LA], and 
Anticardiolipin antibodies [ACA IgG and IgM]), after two 
pregnancy losses. Strong ⊕⊕ Testing for aPL antibodies can provide a possible cause 
of the PL, and treatment in the next pregnancy can 
prevent antiphospholipid syndrome ( APS)-associated 
pregnancy complications. 
5 16 For women with RPL, screening for β2 glycoprotein I 
antibodies ( aβ2GPI ) can be considered after two pregnancy 
losses. GPP Based on a study showing treatment can improve LBR in women with RPL and aβ2GPI, screening can be 
considered. 
6 17 Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) determination in wo men 
with RPL is not recommended in clinical practice. Only HLA 
class II determination (HLA -DRB1*15:01 and HLA -
DQB1*05:01/05:2) could be considered in Scandinavian 
women with secondary RPL after the birth of a boy , for 
prognostic purposes. Conditional ⊕⊕ Investigation of HLA genes in all women with RPL is not 
recommended in clinical practice but possible in a 
research setting. An exception could be investigation of 
class II HLA in women with secondary RPL after the birth 
of a boy. 
6 19 Measurement of ant i-HY antibodies in women with RPL is not 
recommended in clinical practice. Conditional ⊕⊕ Clinicians could consider offering HLA -DRB1 typing to 
selected women with RPL but the testing will provide no 
change in treatment offers. 
6 18 Cytokine testing sh ould not be used in women with RPL in 
clinical practice. Strong ⊕⊕ Cytokine testing, is not recommended, as it is not shown 
to be causative, and associated with technical 
challenges. For genetic testing there is good evidence 
that cytokine polymorphism a re not associated with RPL 
6 20 Cytokine polymorphisms should not be tested in women with 
RPL. Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
6 21 Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) testing could be considered for 
explanatory purposes. Conditional ⊕⊕ Measurement of ANA in women with RPL can be 
considered as the majority of case -control studies 
document an association to RPL and there is some 
evidence that ANA presence affects the prognosis 
negatively. 
6 22 There is insufficient evidence to recommend Natural Killer 
(NK) cell testing of eit her peripheral blood or endometrial 
tissue in women with RPL. Strong ⊕ There seems to be a weak association between NK cells 
in peripheral blood and RPL, but NK cell testing cannot 
be used to select women with RPL for immunological 
treatments. Furthermo re, there are significant technical 
challenges 
6 23 Testing anti -Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) antibodies in 
women with RPL is not recommended . Strong ⊕⊕⊕ There is no significant effect of anti -HLA antibodies on 
first trimester complications /RPL. [9] 
 
7 24 Thyroid screening ( Thyroid stimulating hormone [TSH] and 
Thyroid peroxidase [TPO]-antibodies) is recommended in 
women with RPL. Strong ⊕⊕⊕ Based on a high prevalence of subclinical hypothyroidism 
and thyroid auto immunity in women with RPL and 
potentia l of treatment options testing for thyroid 
function is recommended. 
7 25 Abnormal Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and Thyroid 
peroxidase [TPO]-antibody levels should be followed up by 
Thyroxine (T4) testing in women with RPL. Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
7 26 Assess ment of Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS ), fasting 
insulin and fasting glucose is not recommended in women 
with RPL to improve next pregnancy prognosis . Strong ⊕⊕ The mechanism of how insulin resistance can result in 
pregnancy loss is unknown, and to our knowledge has 
not been described. In addition, we did not find any 
studies on the prognostic potential. 
7 27 Prolactin testing is not recommended in women with RPL in 
the absence of clinical symptoms of hyperprolactinemia 
(oligo/amenorrhea) . Conditional ⊕⊕ In the absence of consistent evidence on an association 
between prolactin and RPL, prolactin testing is not 
routinely recommended 
7 28 Ovarian reserve testing is not routinely recommended in 
women with RPL. Strong ⊕⊕ There is insufficient evidence to claim an association 
between low ovarian reserve and RPL. 
7 29 Luteal phase insufficiency testing is not recommended in 
women with RPL. Strong ⊕⊕ Based on inconsistent evid ence of an association, and no 
value for prognosis and treatment, the GDG de cided not 
to recommend luteal phase insufficiency testing. 
7 30 Androgen testing is not recommended in women with RPL . Strong ⊕⊕ Based on inconsistent evidence of an association, and no 
potential effect on prognosis or treatment, androgen 
testing is no t recommended. 
7 31 Luteinizing Hormone (LH) testing is not routinely 
recommended in women with RPL Strong ⊕ Based on inconsistent evidence 
7 32 Measurement of homocysteine plasma levels is not routinely 
recommended in women with RPL. Strong ⊕ Based on inconsistent evidence of an association. 
8 33 All women with RPL should have a n assessment of the uterine 
anatomy Strong ⊕⊕ 
Based on the association and impact on treatment 
decisions, the GDG recommends US in all women with 
RPL. Recommendations on preferred methods are also 
provided. 
8 34 The preferred technique to evaluate the uterus is transvaginal 
3D ultrasound ( US), which has a high sensitivity and specificity, 
and can distinguish between septate uterus and bicorporeal 
uterus with normal ce rvix (former AFS bicornuate uterus). Conditional ⊕⊕ [10] 
 
8 35 Sonohysterography (SHG) is more accurate than 
hysterosalpingography (HSG) in diagnosing uterine 
malformations. It can be used to evaluate uterine morphology 
when 3D ultrasound ( US) is not availa ble, or when tubal 
patency has to be investigated. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
8 36 If a Müllerian uterine malformation is diagnosed, further 
investigation (including investigation of the kidneys and 
urinary tract ) should be considered. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
8 37 MRI is not recommended as first line option for the 
assessment of uterine malformations in women with RPL, but 
can be used where 3D US is not available. Conditional ⊕⊕ Based on the higher costs and the absence of a 
diagnostic benefit compared to 3D US . How ever, if 3D US 
is not available, MRI is a good alternative. 
9 38 In the male partner, it is suggested to assess life style factors 
(smoking, alcohol consumption, exercise pattern, and body 
weight). GPP Based on suggested association between life style and 
sperm quality. 
9 39 Assessing sperm DNA fragmentation in couples with RPL can 
be considered for explanatory purposes, based on indirect 
evidence. Conditional ⊕⊕ There is a moderate body of evidence indicating 
associations bet ween RPL and poor quali ty sperm, 
particularly sperm with elevated DNA fragmentation. 
TREATMENT TO INCREASE LIVE BIRTH RATE IN RPL 
10 10 The guideline development group ( GDG ) recommends to base 
prognosis on the number of preceding pregnancy losses and 
female age. Strong ⊕⊕⊕ There is consistent evidence for an impact of the number 
of preceding pregnancy losses and female age on the 
prognosis in couples with RPL, while evidence for other 
factors is less clear. 
10 40 Prognostic tools (Lund, Brigham) can be used to provide an 
estimate of subsequent chance of live birth in couples with 
unexplained RPL. GPP 
11 41 All couples with results of an abnormal fetal or parental 
karyotype should receive genetic counselling. GPP The limited evidence for preimplantation genetic testing 
in couples with RPL shows no clear benefit of treatment 
(very low quality). Therefore, the GDG strongly 
recommends that all couples with RPL with abnormal 
genetic results from pregnancy tissue testing or parental 
karyotypes should be offered genetic counselling and 
information on the treatment options so couples can 
make an informed decision on treatment. SOF table 1 
11 42 All couples with results of an abnormal fetal or parental 
karyotype may be informed about the possible treatment 
options available inclu ding their advantages and 
disadvantages. GPP [11] 
 
12 43 For women with hereditary thrombophilia and a history of 
RPL, we suggest not to use antithrombotic prophylaxis unless 
in the context of research , or if indicated for venous 
thromboembolism (VTE) preven tion Conditional ⊕⊕ We found no evidence of a beneficial effect of 
anticoagulant treatment in women with RPL and 
hereditary thrombophilia . SOF table 2 
12 44 For women who fulfill the laboratory criteria of APS and a 
history of three or more pregnancy lo sses, we suggest 
administration with low -dose aspirin (75 to 100 mg/day) 
starting before conception , and a prophylactic dose heparin 
(Unfractionated heparin [ UFH] or Low molecular weight 
heparin [LMWH ]) starting at date of a positive pregnancy test, 
over n o treatment. Conditional ⊕ 
Based on evidence suggesting that a combination of 
heparin and aspirin improves LBR in women with APS 
and RPL SOF table 3 
12 45 The GDG suggests offering anticoagulant treatment for 
women with two pregnancy losses and APS, on ly in the 
context of clinical research. GPP 
14 46 Overt hypothyroidism arising before conception or during 
early gestation should be treated with levothyroxine in 
women with RPL . Strong ⊕⊕ Treatment with levothyroxine is recommended based on 
existing guidelines and possible maternal and fetal 
complications associated with untreated 
hypothyroidism SOF table 6 
14 47 There is conflicting evidence regarding treatment effect of 
levothyroxine for women with subclinical hypothyroidism 
(SCH) and RPL. Treatme nt of women with SCH may reduce the 
risk of miscarriage, but the potential benefit of treatment 
should be balanced against the risks. Conditional ⊕⊕ Treatment with levothyroxine is insufficiently evidence -
based and the efficacy and safety should be furth er 
investigated. 
14 48 If women with subclinical hypothyroidism and RPL are 
pregnant again, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level 
should be checked in early gestation (7 -9 weeks AD), and 
hypothyroidism should be treated with levothyroxine. GPP 
14 49 If women with thyroid autoimmunity and RPL are pregnant 
again, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level should be 
checked in early gestation (7 -9 weeks AD), and 
hypothyroidism should be treated with levothyroxine GPP 
14 50 There is insufficient eviden ce to support treatment with 
levothyroxine in euthyroid women with thyroid antibodies 
and RPL outside a clinical trial. Conditional ⊕⊕ There is no convincing evidence on the efficacy of 
levothyroxine treatment for increasing the chance of a live birth in women with a history of RPL and thyroid 
autoimmunity (normal TSH and TPO Ab+). [12] 
 
14 51 There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of 
progesterone to improve live birth rate in women with RPL 
and luteal phase insufficiency. Conditional ⊕⊕⊕ The GD G recommends against progesterone in women 
with RPL, consistent with the recommendation in 
women with unexplained RPL , based on insufficient 
evidence of benefit. 
14 52 There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of 
human chorionic gonadotrophin ( hCG) to improve live birth 
rate in women with RPL and luteal phase insufficiency. Conditional ⊕⊕ Studies are considered too limited to recommend the 
use of hCG in women with RPL and luteal phase 
insufficiency. 
14 53 There is insufficient evidence to re commend metformin 
supplementation in pregnancy to prevent PL in women with 
RPL and glucose metabolism defects. Conditional ⊕ Indirect evidence could support the use of metformin 
treatment to increase the live birth rate in women with 
PCOS, but in the ab sence of any substantial studies in 
women with RPL and PCOS, the GDG decided metformin 
could not be recommended. 
14 54 Bromocriptine treatment can be considered in women with 
RPL and hyperprolactinemia to increase live birth rate. Conditional ⊕ In wom en with hyperprolactinemia, bromocriptine 
treatment normalizes serum prolactin levels and could 
improve the chance of a live birth. 
14 55 Preconception counseling in women with RPL could include 
the general advice to consider prophylactic vitamin D 
suppl ementation GPP Based on the significant prevalence of vitamin D 
deficiency in women with RPL and the possibly 
associated obstetrical / fetal complications, prescribing 
vitamin D supplementation can be considered, even 
though evidence for the effectiveness is absent. Vitamin 
D supplementation can be considered safe. 
15 56 Whether hysteroscopic septum resection has beneficial 
effects (improving live birth rates, and decreasing miscarriage 
rates, without doing harm), should be evaluated in the 
context of su rgical trials in women with RPL and septate 
uterus. Conditional ⊕ Observational studies suggest a benefit of treatment in reducing the miscarriage rate, but at least one study 
showed that women were less likely to get pregnant 
after surgery. Therefore, the GDG decided to formulate 
a recommendation for more research on the topic. 
15 57 Metroplasty is not recommended for bicorporeal uterus with 
normal cervix (former AFS bicornuate uterus) and RPL. Strong ⊕ 
There are currently no high quality studies to support 
surgery for improving the live birth rate or decreasing 
the miscarriage rate. 
15 58 Uterine reconstruction is not recommended for hemi -uterus 
(former AFS unicornuate uterus) and RPL. Strong ⊕ 
15 59 There is insufficient evidence in favor of metroplasty in 
women with bicorporeal uterus and double cervix (former AFS 
didelphic uterus) and RPL. Conditional ⊕ 
15 60 There is insufficient evidence supporting hysteroscopic 
removal of submucosal fibroids or endometrial polyps in 
women with R PL. Conditional ⊕ There is no evidence that fibroids or polyps are 
associated with RPL, n or that surgery increases the 
chance of a live birth in women with RPL. [13] 
 
15 61 Surgical removal of intramural fibroids is not recommended in 
women with RPL. There is insufficient evidence to recommend 
removing fibroids that distor t the uterine cavity. Conditional ⊕ 
15 62 There is insufficient evidence of benefit for surgical removal 
of intrauterine adhesions for pregnancy outcome. After 
hysteroscopic remov al of intrauterine adhesions in women 
with RPL, precautions have to be taken to prevent recurrence 
of adhesions. Conditional ⊕ Small observational studies have shown that surgery 
may decrease miscarriage rates in women with RPL. 
However, uterine surgery is a known cause for 
adhesions, and treatment should attempt to prevent 
recurrence of adhesions. 
15 63 Women with a history of second -trimester pregnancy losses 
and suspected cervical weakness should be offered serial 
cervical sonographic surveillance. Strong ⊕⊕ 
Based on inconclusive evidence on the benefit, and the possible harms associated with any surgery, the GDG is 
cautious in the recommendations on cerclage for RPL, 
but strong in recommending ultrasound surveillance. 
15 64 In women with a singleto n pregnancy and a history of 
recurrent second -trimester pregnancy loss attributable to 
cervical weakness, a cerclage could be considered. There is no 
evidence that this treatment increases perinatal survival. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
16 65 Couples with RPL shou ld be informed that smoking, alcohol 
consumption, obesity and excessive exercise could have a 
negative impact on their chances of a live birth, and therefore 
cessation of smoking, a normal body weight, limited alcohol 
consumption and a normal exercise patt ern is recommended. GPP 
16 66 Sperm selection is not recommended as a treatment in 
couples with RPL GPP In the absence of any data in RPL, the GDG recommends 
against sperm selection in a GPP. 
16 67 Antioxidants for men have not been shown to improv e the 
chance of a live birth. Conditional ⊕ In a Cochrane review, antioxidants did improve live birth 
rate in subfertile men, but it did not significantly 
decrease the risk of a pregnancy loss SOF table 8 
17 68 Lymphocyte immunization therapy should no t be used as 
treatment for unexplained RPL as it has no significant effect 
and there may be serious adverse effects. Strong ⊕⊕ LIT should not be used in clinical practice since its 
scientific foundation is weak, its effect to prevent 
miscarriage is not e stablished and there are many 
proven and potential adverse effects. SOF table 9 
17 69 Intravenous immunoglobulin (IvIg) is not recommended as a 
treatment of RPL. Strong ⊕⊕ Based on the available evidence , IVIG cannot be 
recommended for clinical use in w omen with RPL. 
Further randomized controlled trials are needed. SOF table 10 
17 70 Glucocorticoids are not recommended as a treatment of Strong ⊕⊕ The evidence points toward some beneficial effect of 
prednisolone in selected women with RPL. However, SOF table 11 [14] 
 
unexplained RPL or RPL with selected immunological 
biomarkers. based on adverse events associated with the use of 
prednisone, the GDG decided to recommend against 
treatment awaiting further studies. 
17 71 Heparin or low dose aspirin are not reco mmended, as t here is 
evidence that they do not improve live birth rate in women 
with unexplained RPL . Strong ⊕⊕⊕ Based on a meta -analysis and results of two subsequent 
large randomized controlled trials there is no evidence 
that heparin alone, aspirin alo ne, or heparin in 
combination with low -dose aspirin improves the live 
birth rate in unexplained RPL. SOF table 12 
17 72 Low dose folic acid is routinely started preconceptional ly to 
prevent neural tube defects, but it has not been shown to 
prevent pregnan cy loss in women with unexplained RPL. Strong ⊕⊕ Based on the absence of evidence for a benefit, and 
possible harms, high -dose folic acid supplementation 
should not be used for women with RPL without 
hyperhomocyste inemia or underlying conditions 
(diabete s, epilepsy) associated with increased risk of 
neural tube defects. 
17 73 Vaginal progesterone does not improve live birth rates in 
women with unexplained RPL . Conditional ⊕⊕⊕ Vaginal progesterone during early pregnancy has no 
beneficial effect in women with unexplained RPL. There 
is some evidence that oral dydrogesterone initiated when fetal heart action can be confirmed may be 
effective but more trials are needed. SOF table 13 
17 74 There is insufficient evidence to recommend intralipid 
therapy for im proving live birth rate in women with 
unexplained RPL. Strong ⊕ There is no evidence to support the use of Intralipid therapy in the treatment of RPL and the treatment is 
associated with potential adverse effects. 
17 75 There is insufficient evidence to recommended G -CSF in 
women with unexplained RPL. Conditional ⊕⊕ A single randomized controlled trial suggests a 
substantial benefit of G -CSF in RPL but it needs to be 
confirmed in other trials in different populations. SOF table 14 
17 76 There is no evidence to recommended endometrial scratching 
in women with unexplained RPL GPP There is no evidence that endometrial scratching 
improves subsequent pregnancy outcome in women 
with RPL. 
18 77 If women with RPL ask about using multivitamin supplements, 
they should be advised on multivitamin supplements that are 
safe in pregnancy. GPP Based on frequent questions from women with RPL, it 
was decided to add a recommendation on vitamin 
supplements. As there is no conclusive evidence, they are not recommende d as treatment. However, based on 
the possible harms associated with some vitamin 
supplements (vit amin A, E), the GDG recommends 
advice on safe options. 
 [15] 
 
Part A: Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 
DEFINITION OF RPL 
A pregnancy loss (miscarriage) is defined as th e spontaneous demise of a pregnancy before the fetus 
reaches viability. The term therefore includes all pregnancy losses (PLs) from the time of conception 
until 24 weeks of gestation. It should be noted that advances in neonatal care have resulted in a sma ll 
number of babies surviving birth before 24 weeks of gestation (Green -top Guideline, 2011 ) and 
different definitions apply in different countries . 
The distinction between primary and secondary recurrent pregnancy loss can be made. Primary RPL is 
described as RPL without a p revious ongoing pregnancy (viable pregnancy) beyond 2 4 weeks’ gestation, 
while secondary RPL is defined as an episode of RPL after one or more previous pregnancies progressing 
beyond 24 weeks’ gestation. 
By definition, “ recurrent ” pregnancy loss is define d as the loss of two or more pregnancies. However, 
to which extent this definition needs to be extended or constricted is less clear , as is shown by different 
definitions used in different guidelines and different countries . 
For this guideline, we tried to collect all evidence / opinions with regard to the definition of RPL : 
- There is no pathophysiological proof that help us in the context of the discussion of consecutive 
versus non-consecutive losses. 
- There is some evidence from one observational stud y that whether the pregnancy losses are 
consecutive or not, or two versus three losses is not associated with the risk of APS (van den 
Boogaard et al., 20 13) 
- There is some evidence from one observational study that there is no difference in the probability 
of carrier status (of a structural chromosomal abnormality ) between couples that had two or 
three consecutive pregnancy losses , compared to two or thre e non -consecutive losses (van den 
Boogaard et al., 2010 ). 
- There is some evidence from one observational study that whether the pregnancy losses are 
consecutive or not impacts on prognosis in unexplained RPL (Egerup et al., 2016 ). 
- Only a minority of the RPL couples (estimated to be less than 10%) experience 2 or more non -
consecutive pregnancy losses ( van den Boogaard et al., 2010 , van den Boog aard et al., 2013 ) 
With regard to the definition of RPL, and taken into account the evidence above, the GDG would like to 
stress the importance of the issue and the need for further scientific research (including epidemiological studies on the effect of various RPL definitions on diagnosis , prognosis and treatment ). 
The GDG believes that defining RPL as two or more pregnancy losses will facilitate research , shared 
decision -making and psychological support to couples . In addition, testing for APS, a treat able sub-
diagnosis of RPL, can be performed after two losses. 
The GDG acknowledges that the definition of RPL may in the future be further restricted but currently 
the data are lacking to do so. 
There was some discrepancy in opinions among the guideline group members regarding the definition. 
Some guideline group members would like to stress that they disagree with the suggested definition 
and will keep a definition of three or more consecutive losses in their clinical practice [16] 
 
In conclusion and after si gnificant debate in the GDG , the definition of RPL is set as follows: 
A diagnosis of Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL) could be considered after the loss 
of two or more pregnancies . 
 
For this guideline, we have based our recommendations on offering investi gations and/or treatments 
on the best available evidence . Where available from the studies , we have added details on whether 
investigations should be performed after 2 pregnancy losses, or whether they can be postponed. 
However, for most investigations, th e decision on when to start investigations will have to be decided 
by the doctor and the couple, as the result of shared decision -making , and be compliant with available 
resources. 
A pregnancy in the definition is confirmed at least by either serum or uri ne b -hCG, i.e. including non-
visualized pregnancy losses (biochemical pregnancy losses and/or resolved and treated pregnancies of 
unknown location). In the non -visualized pregnancy loss group , pregnancy losses after gestational week 
6 are included, where a n ultrasound examination was only done after complete exp ulsion of the 
embryo and trophoblast or no ultrasound was done after heavy bleeding: it includes pregnancies that would have been classified as clinical miscarriages in case an earlier ultrasound sca n had been done.
 
If identified as such, ectopic and molar pregnancies should not be in cluded in the definition. 
Implantation failure is also excluded from the definition. Pregnancy losses both after spontaneous 
conception and after ART treatments should be included in the definition. 
Recurrent “Early” Pregnancy Loss (REPL) is the loss of two or more pregnancies before 10 weeks of 
gestational age (Kolte et al. , 201 5a). 
TERMINOLOGY 
The terminology used for pregnancy loss needs to be clear, consistent and patient -sensitive. For the 
purposes of this guideline, the GDG recommends the use of ‘pregnancy loss’ as a general term, and 
‘early embryo loss’, ‘first trimester pregnancy loss’ and ‘second trimester pregnancy loss’ when 
gestation -specific reference is needed. 
We recommend the use of ‘ recurrent pregnancy loss’ to describe repeated pregnancy demise and to 
reserve ‘ recurrent miscarriage’ to describe cases where all pregnancy losses have been confirmed as 
intrauterine miscarriages. 
The terms spontaneous abortion, chemical pregnancy and blighted ovum are ambiguous and should be 
avoided (Kolte et al. , 2015a ). 
The use of consistent terminology and careful description of couples ’ reproductive history is of the 
utmost importance in RPL research as it is a prerequisite for comparison of studies (Kolte et al. , 2015a ). 
The GDG concludes to use the term Recurrent Pregnancy Loss. 
 [17] 
 
PREVALENCE OF RPL 
Pregnancy loss is a common complication in early pregnancy. The data of the Scottish regis try show a 
prevalence of miscarriage of 5% ( http://www.isdscotland.org/Health -Topics/Maternity -and-
Births/Publications/data -tables.asp ). These data a re based on clinical losses, after the missed menstrual 
period, or a positive pregnancy test, excluding biochemical pregnancy losses. Other studies ha ve shown 
a higher prevalence of pregnancy loss, ranging from 10 to 15%. A population based register study 
showed that 13.5% of the pregnancies intended to be carried to term ended with fetal loss (Nybo 
Andersen et al. , 2000 ) 
Recurrent pregnancy loss is less prevalent. It has been reported that RPL affects approximately 1% to 
2% of women, when defined as three consecutive pregnancy losses prior to 20 weeks from the last 
menstrual period (Ford and Schust, 2009 ). Larsen reported a prevalence of 0.8% to 1.4% if only clinical 
miscarriages (confirmed by ultrasound and/ or histology) are included; adding biochemical losses 
increases the prevalence to 2% to 3% (Larsen et al. , 2013 ). However , these and other similar reviews 
often do not quote original sources of their data. 
The exact prevalence of RPL is very difficult to estimate, as both the numbers in the numerator 
(experienced RPL) and the denominator (women at risk of RPL, all women at fertile age, or all women 
who try to get pregnant), are difficult to obtain. 
In one study amongst female doctors who retrospectively reported about their previous pregnancies, 
0.8% had experienc ed RPL among those who had attempted pregnancy ≥3 times (Alberman, 1988 ). In 
another study, 1.4% of women with ≥2 previous pregnancies had experienced R PL (Stray -Pedersen and 
Lorentzen -Styr, 1 979) and in a Danish questionnaire -based study , 0.8% had experienced RPL among 
women with ≥2 pregnancies (Fertility and employment ). These studies, which all include a well -defined 
population in the denominator, thus find that the RPL prevalence is between 0.8% and 1.4% among 
women with ≥2 pregnancies. In a more recent Japanese questionnaire -based study among an 
unselected group of women aged 35 -79 years, 0.88% reported a history of ≥3 consecutive miscarriages 
(Sugiura -Ogasawara et al. , 2013b ). Except for the latter, these studies are old (or include women being 
pregnant many years ago) and from a time where the methods for detection of very early pregnancy 
loss wer e uncertain . The RPL prevalence would probably be larger if these studies were repeated today. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPACT OF RPL 
Recurrent pregnancy loss has a significant emotional impact on women and their partners. Studies to date have focused mainly on wome n with RPL (Rowsell et al. , 2001 , Craig et al. , 2002 , 
Andalib et al. , 
2006 , Kagami et al. , 2012 , Mevorach -Zussman et al. , 2012 , Sugiura -Ogasawara et al. , 2013a , Toffol et 
al., 2013 , Kolte et al. , 2015b ) and while there are several studies on (usually male) partners’ rea ctions 
to sporadic pregnancy loss (Boynton, 2015 ) there are few if any that focus on RPL. 
For m ost women and their partners, pregnancy loss represents the loss of a baby and the hopes and 
plans invested in that child. Feelings of loss and grief, common after a single pregnancy loss, can 
intensify with repeated losses, as can a sense of personal fail ure (Stirtzinger and Robinson, 1989 , Brier, 
2008 , Bardos et al. , 2015 ). Some losses may weigh more heavily than others do, irrespective of 
gestation or pregnancy order. [18] 
 
Support and understanding, along with acknowledgement that these reactions are normal and 
understandable, can help most couples , but some couples will require referral for professional 
counselling or support. 
The delivery and organization of care can also affect the individual’s experience. In addition to medical 
expertise, couples want the medical team to know their obstetric history a nd to provide compassionate 
care (show understanding, take them seriously, show empathy) , and clear information (on RPL and 
progress) (Musters et al. , 2013 ) and recognition that RPL is a significant life event (based on survey 
results of the Miscarriage Association ; www.miscarriageassociation.org.uk ). 
Pregnancy after RPL 
Anxiety about pregnancy after RPL is both normal and understandable. Before trying to conce ive, most 
couples want an explanation for their losses and treatment that will prevent a recurrence. Without one 
or both of these, many couples are vulnerable to offers of tests and treatments that are not evidence-
based. The same may be true for couples whose treatment plan has not resulted in a live baby. Some 
couples will decide to stop trying. 
With or without specific treatment, couples value a plan for the pregnancy after RPL, with the care of 
a dedicated and supportive individual physician or team (Musters et al. , 2013 ). There is only limited and 
weak evidence that this approach in itself improves pregnancy outcome (Stray -Pedersen and Stray -
Pedersen, 1984 , Clifford et al. , 1997 , Liddell et al. , 1997) but even if not, it is hard to argue against this 
approach. 
Pregnancy loss is a significant negative life event and the repetitive nature of 
RPL may intensify the grief experienced. Studies have mostly focused on 
women, and there is a need for st udies on the emotional impact of RPL on men. 
Clinicians and clinics should take the psychosocial needs of couples faced with 
RPL into account when offering and organizing care for these couples. 
More information on caring for the RPL couple is presented in PART B. 
 
References 
www.miscarriageassociation.org.uk . 
Alberman E. The epidemiology of repeated abortion Early Pregnancy Loss . 1988. Springer, pp. 9 -17. 
Andalib A, Rez aie A, Oreizy F, Shafiei K, Baluchi S. A study on stress, depression and NK cytotoxic potential in 
women with recurrent spontaneous abortion. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol 2006; 5: 9-16. 
Bardos J, Hercz D, Friedenthal J, Missmer SA, Williams Z. A national survey on public perceptions of miscarriage. 
Obstet Gynecol 2015; 125: 1313- 1320. 
Boynton P. Miscarriage: you don't have to be strong for me. Lancet 2015; 385: 222- 223. 
Brier N. Grief following miscarriage: a comprehensive review of the literature. J Womens H ealth (Larchmt) 
2008; 17: 451- 464. 
Clifford K, Rai R, Regan L. Future pregnancy outcome in unexplained recurrent first trimester miscarriage. Hum Reprod 1997;
12: 387- 389. [19] 
 
Craig M, Tata P, Regan L. Psychiatric morbidity among patients with recurrent miscarri age. Journal of 
Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynecology 2002; 23: 157- 164. 
Egerup P, Kolte AM, Larsen EC, Krog M, Nielsen HS, Christiansen OB. Recurrent pregnancy loss: what is the impact 
of consecutive versus non -consecutive losses? Hum Reprod 2016; 31: 2428 -2434. 
Fertility and employment. The Danish Data Archives No. 0363, Odense University. 1979. 
Ford HB, Schust DJ. Recurrent pregnancy loss: etiology, diagnosis, and therapy. Rev Obstet Gynecol 2009; 2: 76-
83. 
Green -top Guideline. The investigation and treat ment of couples with recurrent first -trimester and second -
trimester miscarriage. 2011. 
Kagami M, Maruyama T, Koizumi T, Miyazaki K, Nishikawa -Uchida S, Oda H, Uchida H, Fujisawa D, Ozawa N, 
Schmidt L et al. Psychological adjustment and psychosocial stress among Japanese couples with a history of 
recurrent pregnancy loss. Hum Reprod 2012; 27: 787- 794. 
Kolte AM, Bernardi LA, Christiansen OB, Quenby S, Farquharson RG, Goddijn M, Stephenson MD, Eshre Special Interest Group EP. Terminology for pregnancy loss pri or to viability: a consensus statement from the ESHRE early 
pregnancy special interest group. Hum Reprod 2015a;
30: 495- 498. 
Kolte AM, Olsen LR, Mikkelsen EM, Christiansen OB, Nielsen HS. Depression and emotional stress is highly 
prevalent among women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Hum Reprod 2015b; 30: 777- 782. 
Larsen EC, Christiansen OB, Kolte AM, Macklon N. New insights into mechanisms behind miscarriage. BMC Med 
2013; 11: 154. 
Liddell HS, Sowden K, Farquhar CM. Recurrent miscarriage: screening for polycyst ic ovaries and subsequent 
pregnancy outcome. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 1997; 37: 402-406. 
Mevorach -Zussman N, Bolotin A, Shalev H, Bilenko N, Mazor M, Bashiri A. Anxiety and deterioration of quality of 
life factors associated with recurrent miscarriage in an observational study. J Perinat Med 2012; 40: 495- 501. 
Musters AM, Koot YE, van den Boogaard NM, Kaaijk E, Macklon NS, van der Veen F, Nieuwkerk PT, Goddijn M. 
Supportive care for women with recurrent miscarriage: a survey to quantify women's preferences. Hum Reprod 
2013; 28: 398- 405. 
Nybo Andersen AM, Wohlfahrt J, Christens P, Olsen J, Melbye M. Maternal age and fetal loss: population based register linkage study. Bmj 2000;
320: 1708- 1712. 
Rowsell E, Jongman G, Kilby M, Kirchmeier R, Orford J. The psycholog ical impact of recurrent miscarriage, and the 
role of counselling at a pre -pregnancy counselling clinic. Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology 2001; 19: 
33-45. 
Stirtzinger R, Robinson GE. The psychologic effects of spontaneous abortion. CMAJ 1989; 140: 799- 801, 805. 
Stray- Pedersen B, Lorentzen -Styr AM. The prevalence of toxoplasma antibodies among 11,736 pregnant women 
in Norway. Scand J Infect Dis 1979; 11: 159- 165. 
Stray- Pedersen B, Stray -Pedersen S. Etiologic factors and subsequent reproductive perf ormance in 195 couples 
with a prior history of habitual abortion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984; 148: 140- 146. 
Sugiura- Ogasawara M, Ozaki Y, Suzumori N. Mullerian anomalies and recurrent miscarriage. Curr Opin Obstet 
Gynecol 2013a; 25: 293- 298. 
Sugiura- Ogasawara M, Suzuki S, Ozaki Y, Katano K, Suzumori N, Kitaori T. Frequency of recurrent spontaneous 
abortion and its influence on further marital relationship and illness: the Okazaki Cohort Study in Japan. J Obstet 
Gynaecol Res 2013b; 39: 126- 131. 
Toffol E, Koponen P, Partonen T. Miscarriage and mental health: results of two population -based studies. 
Psychiatry Res 2013; 205: 151- 158. 
van den Boogaard E, Cohn DM, Korevaar JC, Dawood F, Vissenberg R, Middeldorp S, Goddijn M, Farquharson RG. 
Number and sequence of prece ding miscarriages and maternal age for the prediction of antiphospholipid 
syndrome in women with recurrent miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2013; 99: 188- 192. 
van den Boogaard E, Kaandorp SP, Franssen MT, Mol BW, Leschot NJ, Wouters CH, van der Veen F, Korevaar J C, 
Goddijn M. Consecutive or non -consecutive recurrent miscarriage: is there any difference in carrier status? Hum 
Reprod 2010; 25: 1411- 1414. 
 
 [20] 
 
PART B: Organization of care 
 
KEY QUESTION: HOW SHOULD CARE FOR THE R PL PATIENT BE ORGANIZE D? 
ACCESS TO CARE 
A dedicated Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL) clinic is an outpatient clinic that offers specialist 
investigations, support and if possible treatment of couples with RPL. These consultant- led clinics 
provide a dedicated and focused service to couples who have experienced RPL. It is a non -acute service, 
and the couples should preferably be seen and tested prior to a new pregnancy. Couples with two or 
more pregnancy losses could be referred to a RPL clinic. 
Information provision is one of the important aims of a RPL clinic. Investigations do not necessarily lead 
to treatment options and this should be clear from the beginning. New unproven interventions should 
be tested through clinical evaluation studies (Van den Berg et al. , 2014 ). 
THE RPL CLINIC 
The following e lements are required in a RPL clinic: 
o Staffing 
Experienced staff members ( gynecologists / fertility doctors/specialized nurses) appropriately trained in 
ultrasound, and with appropriate listening skills are part of the RPL team. Ideally there should also be trained and qualified staff ( e.g. psychologists/ social workers/counsellors) either onsite or accessible, 
who offer support tailored to the psychologi cal needs of the couples . 
o First Visit 
The first visit should allow time for the clinician to review the patient’s history, to answer questions and 
to propose a plan for investigations and, perhaps, treatment. In advance of the appointment, providing 
written information for couples about what to expect can help to reduce anxiety and manage 
expectations. 
o Equipment/ Location 
The clinic should have excellent ultrasound provision and offer 3D ultrasound or additional saline or gel 
infusion sonography (see also chapter 8) . The team should have close contact with the appropriate 
laboratories for further testing. The outpatient clinic is preferably not located next to an antenatal clinic, 
maternity unit or obstetrics department ward. 
o Provision of information 
The first visit is the opportunity to provide general information about RPL incidence, causes and 
investigations and to link it to the patient’s history. Staff should be aware that many women with RPL 
will already have information from a variety of sources, an d some explanation and re -education may 
be needed. Patient information leaflets from professional and/or reputable societies or the clinic should 
be offered. (See also the ESHRE patient information leaflet for couples with RPL) In addition, clinics can 
organize information sessions for RPL couples . [21] 
 
o Appropriate evaluation (testing) 
There should be individual evaluation of the investigations appropriate to each woman or couple, based 
on age, fertility/sub -fertility, pregnancy history, family history, previous investigations and/or 
treatments. This should include discussion of wishes or views that the patient already has regarding the 
investigations she wants or does not want. 
It is crucial to explain before testing that investigations may not identify a likely cause or causes for 
previous losses, and what this means for the future. It is equally important to explain that there are some causes for which there is little or no or known treatment or where treatment outcomes are 
uncertain. (See below ‘research’) 
Couples will want to know the timeframe for investigations and discussion of results . They may also 
have questions on whether they should delay conception in the meantime. 
o Care tailored to psychological needs of the couples 
Providing the time and opportunity to discuss pregnancy history, provide information and discuss 
options can be supportive in itself, especially if it is done well, with good listening, sensitive terminology 
and consideration of the pati ent’s experience and feelings. 
o Treatment plan 
Most couples want investigations to show an identifiable problem that has a recognized treatment 
protocol. If results show no obvious cause, couples may be very distressed, even if statistics suggest 
that the prognosis is good. They may need a plan for addit ional support in a subsequent pregnancy, 
such as regular visits and scans. They may also be willing to consider taking part in a clinical trial. 
When diagnosed with a problem for which treatment is uncertain, couples will need more information 
about possib le benefits and disadvantages. 
o Research 
Some couples may be willing to consider taking part in research into RPL treatments/trials or in 
qualitative research. This can feel like a positive step forward, both for themselves and for others. This may be s uggested during a routine clinic visit, but any discussions should take place at a separate visit 
(e.g. with a research nurse). 
 
TREATMENT PLAN , SUPPORTIVE CARE AND PSYCHOLOGICAL CARE 
Couples coming to the RPL clinic primarily seek expertise, investigation s and a treatment plan that will 
reduce the risk of further losses. A plan for the subsequent pregnancy involves potential treatments, 
life style advice where appropriate and the patient’s individual choices regarding seeing the same 
doct or each time, having ultrasound scans , and the frequency of visits. It is important to show 
understanding, good listening skills, awareness of the patient’s obstetric history and respect towards 
her previous pregnancy losses (Musters et al. , 2013 ). 
 
 [22] 
 
Couples ’ psychological states and needs will vary, so there is no single model of care that will suit 
everyone, but the following elements will be appreciated: 
- Recognition of the pat ient as an individual : this woman/couple, this history, this pregnancy, this 
time 
- Time for questions, information, repetition and discussion, especially when the patient is 
distressed or anxious. 
- Good listening : to the facts and the feelings 
- Respect : for t he patient, her partner (male or female), and the pregnancies (or babies) she has 
lost; and for her wishes and choices (even if they are not possible/advisable) 
- Clear and sensitive language : explaining terminology, avoiding insensitive terms (recurrent 
aborter, products of conception, blighted ovum, incompetent cervix, pregnancy failure), and 
mirroring the patient’s preferred terms (baby, fetus, pregnancy etc.) 
- Honesty : about processes, likely outcomes, prognoses; avoid false reassurance 
- Shared planning : a partnership approach, enabling some element of control, can boost patient 
confidence 
- Supportive care in the next pregnancy/ies: access to the team (actual, by phone or online), 
additional/early scans if wanted 
- Kindness : concern, empathy, compassion as app ropriate for that patient 
 
References 
Musters AM, Koot YE, van den Boogaard NM, Kaaijk E, Macklon NS, van der Veen F, Nieuwkerk PT, Goddijn M. 
Supportive care for women with recurrent miscarriage: a survey to quantify women's p references. Hum Reprod 
2013; 28: 398- 405. 
Van den Berg MM, Vissenberg R, Goddijn M. Recurrent miscarriage clinics. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2014; 41: 
145- 155. 
 
 [23] 
 
PART C: Risk factors and health behavior 
 
For some lifestyle behaviors and environmental e xposures, an association with the risk of pregnancy 
complications and/or neonatal malformations is suggested . Some of these factors have been proposed 
as a risk factor for pregnancy loss, and therefore in theory, modification of these behaviors or reductio n 
of the exposures could reduce the risk of pregnancy loss. This section summarizes the evidence on risk 
factors for recurrent pregnancy loss, and on health behavior modifications that could reduce the risk 
of pregnancy loss in couples with recurrent pregn ancy loss (RPL). 
 
1. Risk factors for recurrent 
pregnancy loss 
KEY QUESTION: WHAT ARE THE KNOWN R ISK FACTORS OF RECUR RENT PREGNANCY LOSS? 
1.1 AGE 
Advanced female age is a well -established risk factor for female subfertility, fetal anomalies, stillbirth, 
and obstetric complications ( Nybo Andersen et al. , 2000 , Sauer, 2015 ). Based on a computer simulation 
fertility model that included data on the chance of age -dependent pregnancy loss after conception, 
couples should start trying to conceive w hen the female partner is 31 years of age or younger to h ave 
a chance of at least 90% to realize a family with two c hildren. If IVF is not an option, couples should 
start no later than age 27 years . To achieve a one- child family, couples should start trying before age 
32, or age 35 if IVF is an option ( Habbema et al. , 2015 ). 
Evidence 
Female age 
An association between advanced female age and RPL has been consistently shown in several studies. 
Based on 2 cohorts (n=119+165), Cauchi and colleagues concluded that female age less than 30 years 
correlated significantly with success rate in subsequent pregnancy in women with RPL and that female 
age above 30 years is a risk factor for pregnancy loss in women with RPL ( Cauchi et al. , 1991 ). 
A descriptive cohort study assessing the chance of live birth in 987 RPL couples during a 5 -year follow-
up period found a significant decrease in the chance of live birth with increasing female age (Lund et 
al., 2012 ). 
In a cohort study investigating factors associated with PL in 696 women with RPL, and a female age ≥ 
35 years was found to double the risk of another PL, compared to women < 35 years (OR 1.99; 95% CI 
1.45- 2.73) (Lo et al. , 2012 ) 
In an epidemiological study in Scotland (n=151,021) the risk of miscarriage increased dramatically after 
the age of 30, irrespective of previous obstetric history ( Bhattacharya et al. , 2010 ). [24] 
 
Finally, a retrospective cohort study concluded th at female age (older than 35 years) was the only 
statistically significant predictor of the chromosomal anomaly risk in sporadic and recurrent PL (Grande 
et al. , 2012). Cytogenetic abnormalities are further addressed in Chapter 4 (Screening for genetic 
factors). 
Male age 
Most studies evaluating male age have reported a significant association between increasing male age 
and the incidence of miscarriage ( Sharma et al. , 2015 ). To our knowledge, there are no studies on the 
impact of male age on RPL. 
Recommendation s 
Women should be sensitively informed that the risk of 
preg nancy loss is lowest in women aged 20 to 35 years. Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
Women should be sensitively informed that the risk of 
pregnancy loss rapidly increases after the age of 40. Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification 
Female age is an important risk factor for RPL; women o lder than 40 years have a higher risk of RPL, 
and have worse prognosis compared to younger women. In couples diagnosed with RPL, the 
information that age is a risk factor is still important as it may affect the diagnostic procedures, and the 
decision -makin g of treatment or expectant management. 
Although the evidence is of low quality (based on observational studies), the GDG decided to strongly 
recommend information provision on the topic, but it has to be explained sensitively. 
1.2 STRESS 
Evidence 
Stud ies have suggested that maternal stress during pregnancy is possibly associated with an increased 
risk of several adverse pregnancy and birth outcomes , but there are currently no high quality studies 
available . The impact of stress on the risk of miscarria ge or recurrent pregnancy loss is unclear. 
We found two studies assessing stress in women with RPL. From a case –control study it was concluded 
that stress is a risk factor for RPL based on the finding of a significantly higher total score on the 
perceived stress scale (PSS) among 45 women with unexplained RPL compared with 40 controls (Li et 
al., 2012 ). In another study, stress and depression were assessed in 301 RPL patients and 1813 women 
without RPL trying to conceive. A high stres s level, defined as ≥19 on the PSS scale, was more prevalent 
in women with RPL (41.2%) as compared to controls (23.2%). In addition, the odds of moderate to 
severe depression was more than five times higher in women with RPL ( Kolte et al. , 2015 ). 
An association between RPL and stress can be assumed based on these studies, but it is unclear whether 
stress results from RPL, or whether stress is a causing factor for the next pregnancy loss. [25] 
 
One small study (22 pregnancies) on pregnancy loss and stress during pregnancy showed an association 
between maternal stress and pregnancy loss, possibly mediated through higher cortisol levels 
(Nepomnaschy et al. , 2006 ). Other studies however found no evidence for stress as a factor leading to 
pregnancy loss (Nelson et al. , 2003 , Plana -Ripoll et al. , 2016 ). 
Recommendation 
Stress is associated with RPL, but couples should be 
informed that there is no evidence that stress is a dir ect 
cause of pregnancy loss. Strong ⊕ 
Justification 
Whether stress increases the chance of another pregnancy loss in the next pregnancy is a major 
concern of patients with RPL. 
The studies to date on stress in couples with pregnancy loss have signific ant limitations with regard to 
quality, different scales are used, and stress and distress are mixed. Overall, the studies indicate that there is an association between stress and pregnancy loss, but they 
provide no information on whether the stress is a result of RPL, or whether stress could be a causal 
factor in RPL. Ideally, prospective studies should be performed assessing the impact of high stress on 
the outcome of a subsequent pregnancy . 
1.3 OCCUPATIONAL OR ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSU RE 
Evidence 
We found o nly two small studies evaluating occupational or environmental exposure as risk factor for 
RPL. In the first study serum zinc, copper, and vitamin E levels were significantly lower in 35 women 
with RPL and serum selenium, lead, and cadmium were significantly higher compared with 34 controls, 
which could indicate that heavy metals and a lack of micronutrients could cause pregnancy loss in 
women with RPL (Ajayi et al. , 2012 ). In the second study , higher levels of organochlorine pesticides 
were detected in blood of 30 women with RPL compared to 30 controls, which could indicate an 
association between organoch lorine pestic ides and RPL ( Pathak et al. , 2010 ). 
A descriptive review , summarizing studies on occupational exposures associated with pregnancy loss , 
reported that the evidence was inconclusive for video display terminals an d electromagnetic field (Gold 
and Tomich, 1994 ). An association was consistently reported by studies evaluating exposure to organic 
solvents and pregnancy loss. The review did not include RPL as an outcome and most studies described 
in the review were small and poor quality. A more recent s tudy reported an increased risk of pregnancy 
loss in personnel exposed to anesthetic gases in operating and recovery rooms (n=8032) as compared 
to non -exposed hospital staff (n=2525) (OR 1.98 ; 95% CI 1.53- 2.56). The authors recommend 
minimizing exposure to waste anesthetic gases (Guirguis et al. , 1990 ) 
Conclusion 
Based on only a few small studies, exposure to occupational and environmental factors (heavy metals, pesticide , lack of micronutrients) seems to be associated with an increased risk of pregnancy loss in [26] 
 
women with RPL. Although exposure to possible hazardous substances should be avoided during 
pregnancy (for all pregnant women), there are insufficient data to recommend protection against a 
certain occupational or environmental factor in women with RPL. 
1.4 CHRONIC ENDOMETRITIS 
Evidence 
Chronic endometritis is characterized by a plasma cell infiltrate in the endometrium associated with a 
range of pathogeni c organisms. There have been a series of papers suggesting a 7 -58% prevalence of 
chronic endometritis in women with RPL (Cicinelli et al. , 2014 , McQueen et al. , 2014 , McQueen et al. , 
2015 ). The prevalence is dependent on the method of detection with high rates reported when 
hysteroscopy and /or immunohi stochemistry with antibodies to CD138 are used (Kitaya, 2011 , Russell 
et al. , 2013 , Cicinelli et al. , 2014 , McQueen et al. , 2014, McQueen et al. , 2015 , Bouet et al. , 2016 ). 
However, there are no studies comparing rates of endometritis in women with RPL to control women, 
or discussing the predictive value of a positive test for endometritis. 
Antibiotics were found to remove the endometritis with a n apparent improvement in live birth rate 
(Cicinelli et al. , 2014 , McQueen et al. , 2014 ). However, this concept has not been tested in randomized 
controlled trials. 
Conclusion 
Further research is needed including prospective observational studies and randomized controlled trials before screening women for endometritis can be recommended. 
1.5 ENDOMETRIAL DEC IDUALIZATION 
The mechanism of endometrial changes in early pregnancy (i.e. endometrial decidualization) and during 
the menstrual cycle is not yet completely elucidated. Endometrial cells seem to form a checkpoint for 
embryo quality resulting in implantatio n processes for normal embryos and rapid demise of 
endometrium (menstruation) in case of “abnormal” embryos ( Lucas et al. , 2016 ). 
Recent observations have suggested that in women with RPL, abnormal decidualization may render the 
endometrium excessively permissive to implantation (i.e. a defect in the checkpoint) but unable to 
sustain the pregnancy , but f urther (prospective) studies are needed before any firm conc lusions or 
recommendations can be formulated for clinical practice . 
References 
Ajayi OO, Charles -Davies MA, Arinola OG. Progesterone, selected heavy metals and micronutrients in pregnant 
Nigerian women with a history of recurre nt spontaneous abortion. Afr Health Sci 2012; 12: 153- 159. 
Bhattacharya S, Townend J, Bhattacharya S. Recurrent miscarriage: Are three miscarriages one too many? Analysis 
of a Scottish population -based database of 151,021 pregnancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol R eprod Biol 2010; 150: 24-
27. 
Bouet PE, El Hachem H, Monceau E, Gariepy G, Kadoch IJ, Sylvestre C. Chronic endometritis in women with 
recurrent pregnancy loss and recurrent implantation failure: prevalence and role of office hysteroscopy and 
immunohistochemi stry in diagnosis. Fertil Steril 2016; 105: 106-110. 
Cauchi MN, Pepperell R, Kloss M, Lim D. Predictors of pregnancy success in repeated miscarriage. Am J Reprod Immunol 1991;
26: 72-75. [27] 
 
Cicinelli E, Matteo M, Tinelli R, Pinto V, Marinaccio M, Indraccolo U, De Ziegler D, Resta L. Chronic endometritis 
due to common bacteria is prevalent in women with recurrent miscarriage as confirmed by improved pregnancy 
outcome after antibiotic treatment. Reprod Sci 2014; 21: 640-647. 
Gold EB, Tomich E. Occupational hazards to fertility and pregnancy outcome. Occup Med 1994; 9: 435- 469. 
Grande M, Borrell A, Garcia -Posada R, Borobio V, Munoz M, Creus M, Soler A, Sanchez A, Balasch J. The effect of 
maternal age on chromosomal anomaly rate and spectrum in recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2012; 27: 3109-
3117. 
Guirguis SS, Pelmear PL, Roy ML, Wong L. Health effects associated with exposure to anaesthetic gases in Ontario 
hospital personnel. Br J Ind Med 1990; 47: 490- 497. 
Habbema JD, Eijkemans MJ, Leridon H, te Velde ER. Realizing a desired family size: when should couples start? 
Hum Reprod 2015; 30: 2215- 2221. 
Kitaya K. Prevalence of chronic endometritis in recurrent miscarriages. Fertil Steril 2011; 95: 1156- 1158. 
Kolte AM, Olsen LR, Mikkelsen EM, Christiansen OB, Nielsen HS. Depressi on and emotional stress is highly 
prevalent among women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Hum Reprod 2015; 30: 777- 782. 
Li W, Newell -Price J, Jones GL, Ledger WL, Li TC. Relationship between psychological stress and recurrent 
miscarriage. Reprod Biomed Online 2012; 25: 180- 189. 
Lo W, Rai R, Hameed A, Brailsford SR, Al- Ghamdi AA, Regan L. The effect of body mass index on the outcome of 
pregnancy in women with recurrent miscarriage. J Family Community Med 2012; 19: 167- 171. 
Lucas ES, Dyer NP, Murakami K, Lee YH, Ch an YW, Grimaldi G, Muter J, Brighton PJ, Moore JD, Patel G et al. Loss 
of Endometrial Plasticity in Recurrent Pregnancy Loss. Stem Cells 2016; 34: 346- 356. 
Lund M, Kamper -Jorgensen M, Nielsen HS, Lidegaard O, Andersen AM, Christiansen OB. Prognosis for live birth in 
women with recurrent miscarriage: what is the best measure of success? Obstet Gynecol 2012; 119: 37-43. 
McQueen DB, Bernardi LA, Stephenson MD. Chronic endometritis in women with recurrent early pregnancy loss and/or fetal demise. Fertil Steril 2014;
101: 1026- 1030. 
McQueen DB, Perfetto CO, Hazard FK, Lathi RB. Pregnancy outcomes in women with chronic endometritis and recurrent pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2015;
104: 927- 931. 
Nelson DB, Grisso JA, Joffe MM, Brensinger C, Shaw L, Datner E. Does stres s influence early pregnancy loss? Ann 
Epidemiol 2003; 13: 223- 229. 
Nepomnaschy PA, Welch KB, McConnell DS, Low BS, Strassmann BI, England BG. Cortisol levels and very early pregnancy loss in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;
103: 3938- 3942. 
Nybo Anderse n AM, Wohlfahrt J, Christens P, Olsen J, Melbye M. Maternal age and fetal loss: population based 
register linkage study. Bmj 2000; 320: 1708- 1712. 
Pathak R, Mustafa M, Ahmed RS, Tripathi AK, Guleria K, Banerjee BD. Association between recurrent miscarriages 
and organochlorine pesticide levels. Clin Biochem 2010; 43: 131-135. 
Plana -Ripoll O, Parner E, Olsen J, Li J. Severe stress following bereavement during pregnancy and risk of pregnancy 
loss: results from a population -based cohort study. J Epidemiol Communi ty Health 2016; 70: 424- 429. 
Russell P, Sacks G, Tremellen K, Gee A. The distribution of immune cells and macrophages in the endometrium of 
women with recurrent reproductive failure. III: Further observations and reference ranges. Pathology 2013; 45: 
393- 401. 
Sauer MV. Reproduction at an advanced maternal age and maternal health. Fertil Steril 2015; 103: 1136- 1143. 
Sharma R, Agarwal A, Rohra VK, Assidi M, Abu -Elmagd M, Turki RF. Effects of increased paternal age on sperm 
quality, reproductive outcome and assoc iated epigenetic risks to offspring. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2015; 13: 35. 
 [28] 
 
2. Health behavior modifications 
KEY QUESTION: ARE HEALTH BEHAVIOR MODIFICATIONS RELEVA NT FOR REDUCING THE RISK OF 
PREGNANCY LOSS IN WO MEN WITH A HISTORY O F RPL? 
2.1 SMOKING CESSATI ON 
Evidence 
Smoking is strongly associated with adverse obstetric and neonatal outcomes, including ectopic 
pregnancy, stillbirth, placenta praevia, preterm birth, low birth weight, and congenital anomalies. 
Studies have also reported associations between m aternal smoking during pregnancy and problems 
during childhood, including sudden infant death syndrome , obesity, psychosocial problems and 
malignancies (Leung and Davies, 2015 ). Smoking cessation is therefore recommended to all pregnant 
women. 
The impact of smoking or smoking cessation on pregnancy loss in women with RPL is less clear. In a 
retrospective study, comparing lifestyle behavior in 326 women with RPL a nd 400 controls who had at 
least one live birth, environmental exposure to tobacco smoke (passive smoking) significantly increased 
the risk of RPL compared with tobacco -free controls. The risk increased with the daily duration of 
exposure (adjusted OR 2.30 ; 95% CI 1.50- 3.52 for short exposure of <1h/day; adjusted OR 4.75; 95% CI 
3.23- 6.99 for long exposure of ≥1 h/day). Female smoking , consumption of alcohol or coffee intake 
were not associated with the risk of RPL (Zhang et al. , 2010 ). 
Other stu dies have evaluated the effect of maternal and paternal smoking on the risk of sporadic 
pregnancy loss. A small study investigating the association of several lifestyle factors with early 
pregnancy loss (EPL) in 128 pregnancies found no evidence for any ri sk factors including maternal and 
paternal smoking (Wilcox et al. , 1990 ). A similar larger study looked at risk factors for EPL in 1196 IVF 
pregnancies of which 195 resulted in EPL. In their study, smoking was associated with a significant 
increased risk of EPL after adjus ting for other factors (OR 2.00 ; 95% CI 1.27 -3.15). B ody mass index 
(BMI) and female age were not associated with EPL (Winter et al. , 2002 ). In a prospective st udy, the 
impact of paternal smoking on the risk of pregnancy loss was evaluated in 526 couples. The adjusted odds ratio for total pregnancy loss (early pregnancy loss or spontaneous miscarriage ) for women of 
heavy smokers (≥20 cigarettes/day) was 1 .17 in the first conception cycle, 1 .22 in the first 2 cycles, 1 .39 
in the first 3 cycles, and 1 .45 in all conceptions. The impact of male smoking was more significant in 
heavy smokers compared to mode rate smokers (<20 cigar ettes/day) (
Venners et al. , 2004 ). 
We found no studies on the effect of smoking cessation on the chance of a live birth in couples with 
RPL. 
Recommendation 
Couples with RPL should be informed that smoking could 
have a negative impact on their chances of a live birth, and 
therefore cessation of smoking is recommended. GPP [29] 
 
Justification 
Smoking has not been conclusively shown to be a risk factor for RPL . However, based on an established 
association between smoking and poor obstetric outcomes, and between smoking and general health, 
cessation of smoking could be recommended in couples with RPL even in the absence of prospective 
studies on s moking cessation and chance of live birth. 
2.2 STRIVING FOR A HEALTH Y, NORMAL RANGE BODY MASS INDEX 
Evidence 
Weight loss 
Obesity has a significant impact on female reproductive health. Increased body mass index (BMI) is associated with subfertility, poo rer outcomes following fertility treatment, and pregnancy loss 
(Metwally et al. , 2008 , Pandey et al. , 2010
). 
A normal BMI for a Caucasian population is considered 20 -30 kg / m2. As such a BMI of 25 -30 kg/m2 is 
classified as overweight, although the adverse effects on reproduction and early pregnancy loss in 
overweight people are minimal ( Metwally et al. , 2010 ). Ethnicity interacts with the health risks posed 
by obesity so that a BMI of less than 27 kg/m2 is recommended for people of Asian origin rather than 
30kg/m2 (Misra et al. , 2009 ). 
Obesity (BMI >30 kg/m2 according to WHO) has also been evaluated as a risk factor for RPL. A systematic 
review reported a higher prevale nce of RPL in obese women as compared to women with a normal BMI 
(0.4% versus 0.1%; OR 3.51; 95% CI 1.03 -12.01) based on 1644 obese women and 3288 controls (Lashen 
et al. , 2004 , Boots and Stephenson, 2011 ). In women with RPL (n=491), there was a higher miscarriage 
rate in the obese versus non -obese women (OR 1.71; 95% CI 1.05 -2.8) (Metwally et al. , 2010 ). The latter 
study also reported that an increased BMI was the second -most significant factor predicting early 
pregnancy loss (after advanced female age ). The presence of PCOS or the number of previous losses 
did not predict a pregnancy loss in the next pregnancy (Metwally et al. , 2010 ) 
More recent studies on obesity and RPL also found an association . Boots and colleagues assessed the 
frequency of a euploid miscarriage in 372 women with RPL. There were 117 subsequent miscarriages 
and the frequency of a euploid miscarriage among obese women was 58% compared with 37% of non -
obes e women (relative risk RR 1.63; 95% CI 1.08 -2.47) (Boots et al. , 2014 ). In the retrospective study of 
Zhang, mentioned above, evaluating the impact of lifestyle f actors on the risk of RPL, a BMI of 24.0 or 
greater was associated with an increased risk of RPL (adjusted OR 1.55; 95% CI 1.12 -2.14) (Zhang et al. , 
2010 ). Lo and colleagues assessed the relationship between maternal BMI and the future outcomes of 
pregnancy in 696 couples with unexplained RPL. They found that BMI, female age , number of previous 
pregnancy losses, and ethnicity were significantly associated with preg nancy outcome. Logistic 
regression demonstrated that maternal obesity (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) significantly increased the risk of 
miscarriage in couples with unexplained R PL (OR 1.73; 95% CI 1.06- 2.83). There was no increased risk 
in women with overweight (OR 1. 27; 95% CI 0.89 -1.83) (Lo et al. , 2012 ) 
Gradual weight loss has been shown to improve fertility and the outcomes of fertility treatments. 
(Pandey et al. , 2010 )). We found no studies on the effect o f weight loss on recurrent pregnancy loss. [30] 
 
Gaining weight 
Being underweight (BMI <18.5) was found to be significantly associated with sporadic first trimester 
miscarriag e in a large case -control study (OR 1.72 ; 95% CI 1.17 -2.53) (Maconochie et al. , 2007 ). The 
evidence of an association of maternal underweight and RPL is scarce, and do es not support an 
increased risk of RPL in women with low BMI. In a study as sessing risk factors for PL in 696 women with 
RPL, Lo and colleagues found no increased risk of subsequent PL in women that are underweight as 
compared to women with normal BMI (OR 0.12; 95% CI 0.15- 1.00) (Lo et al. , 2012 ). 
The impact of maternal BMI on the risk of early pregnancy loss was assessed in an oocyte donation 
model. The miscarriage rate was 18.2% in lean women (BMI <20kg/m²), which was not significantly 
different from women with normal BMI (13.3%) ( (Bellver et al. , 2003 ) 
Male weight 
To our knowledge there are no studies evaluating the impact of male weight on RPL . Indirect evidence 
of the impact of male factors, including obesity, on pregnancy loss through sperm DNA damage is 
discussed in chapter 9 . 
Recommendation 
Couples with RPL should be informed that maternal obesity 
or being significantly underweight is associ ated with 
obstetric complications and could have a negative impact on 
their chances of a live birth and on their general health. Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
Striving for a healthy normal range BMI is recommended. GPP 
Justification 
Maternal obesity is a strong risk fac tor in RPL, but there are no studies evaluating the impact of weight 
loss on subsequent PL. However, weight loss has a positive impact on fertility outcomes and reduced weight is associated with reduced complications during pregnancy and birth , and reduced 
cardiovascular and diabetic morbidity and mortality. The GDG formulated a strong recommendation 
for information provision and for striving for a healthy normal BMI (20 -25 kg/m
2 for Caucasians). 
2.3 REDUCING CAFFEINE INT AKE 
Evidence 
Observational studies have reported a dose- dependent association between caffeine intake and late 
pregnancy loss (Greenwood et al. , 2010 ). At least one large case -control study did not find an effect o f 
caffeine when adjusting for nausea. They compared 603 cases with 6116 controls, and found a strong 
trend of increas ed prevalence of pregnancy loss (late miscarriage and stillbirth) with increasing daily 
caffeine consumption, but they also found that the effect of caffeine was almost entirely due to the 
effect of nausea (women who felt sick did not tend to drink coffee, the main source of caffeine) 
(Maconochie et al. , 2007 ). [31] 
 
From a retrospective case- control study, caffeine was suggested as a risk factor for RPL. The odds ratio 
for RPL in women with moderate (150 -300 mg/day) or high (>300 mg/day) caffeine intake during the 
periconceptional period and early gestation as compared to mild (<150 mg/day) consumption were 
3.045 (95% CI 1.23 -7.28) and 16.016 (95% CI 6.54 -39.61). There was a linear association between the 
amount of daily caffeine intake and the risk of multiple pregnancy losses . The effect of reducing caffeine 
intake on the pregnancy outcome w as not evaluated ( Stefanidou et al. , 2011 ). 
CYP1A2 is an enzyme primarily responsible for caffeine metabolism , and was assessed as a susceptibility 
gene for the effect of caffeine intake on RPL. They reported a significantly increased risk of RPL only 
among women who had homozygous CYP1A2*1F alleles with a dosage effect of daily caffeine intake . 
Caffeine intake had no effect on the RPL risk among women who had other CYP1A2 genotypes. (Sata et 
al., 2005 ) 
Conclusion 
Some studies have also suggested caffei ne intake as a risk factor for RPL, but not all studies reported 
an association. An association has been described between caffeine intake and late pregnancy loss. 
Based on the evidence, it is unclear whether caffeine intake is a risk factor for RPL. 
 
2.4 EXERCISE 
Evidence 
To our knowledge there are no studies investigating the impact of exercise on the chances of a live birth 
in women with recurrent pregnancy loss. 
Exercise during pregnancy is generally advocated, as it is believed to provide various benefits for the 
women’s health. A review of 2008 assessing the effects of physical activity during pregnancy on several outcomes concluded that physical activity does appear to reduce the risk of preeclampsia and 
gestational diabetes. The results for miscarri age were less clear. The reviewers found one study 
showing a beneficial effect of leisure -time physical activity; however, four studies found no effect 
(Schlussel et al. , 2008
). Another, more recent review, also reported diverging results concerning the 
association between exe rcise during early pregnancy and miscarriage . Two case -control studies fo und 
that exercise was a ssoci ated with a lower risk of miscarriage, one large cohort study reported a graded 
association between exercise and higher risk of miscarriage, and two studie s (of which one was also 
included in the review of Schlussel) showed the same risk for miscarriage in exercising versus non -
exercising pregnant women (Hegaard et al. , 2016 ). With regards to occupational physical activity, three 
studies reported no effect, while two high quality studi es pointed to high- intensity occupational activity 
as a risk factor for miscarriage ( Schlussel et al. , 2008 ). 
 [32] 
 
2.5 AVOIDING ALCOHOL 
Evidence 
Alcohol has a clear negative impact on pregnancy and neonatal outcomes, not the least of which are 
fetal alcohol spectrum disorders. Th erefore, it is advisable that women avoid consumption of alcohol 
during the pregnancy. 
With regard to pregnancy loss, the evidence is not consistent, but a large proportion of the studies have shown that alcohol consumption during pregnancy increases risk of pregnancy loss, with a threshold 
between two to four drinks
1 per week (Andersen et al. , 2012 , Avalos et al., 2014 ). A case -control study 
reported a dose -dependent association between alcohol consumption and miscarriage. An increasing 
risk of miscarriage was found in women who drink regularly (at least once a week) (OR 1.46 ; 95% CI 
1.16- 1.85) and those who drink more than 14 units of alcohol per week (OR 1.64 ; 95% CI 1.09 -2.47) 
compared to controls who do not drink alcohol at all (Maconochie et al. , 2007 ). 
We did not find any studies on the impact of consuming alcohol on the chance of a live birth in couples 
with RPL. 
Recently, studies have explored the impact of paternal alcohol consumption on the outcome of ART pregnancies, including semen parameters and pr egnancy loss. Paternal alcohol consumption of more 
than five drinks a week was shown to be associated with a reduction in sperm count and in reproductive 
potential in a cross -sectional study (Jensen et al. , 2014
). In a longitudinal cohort study of the impact of 
several fertility treatments on the chance of early pregnancy loss, Brandes and colleagues found an association of paternal alcohol consumption with early pregnancy loss after fertility treatment (
Brandes 
et al. , 2011 ). 
Recommendation 
Couples with RPL should be informed that excessive alcohol 
consumption is a po ssible risk factor for pregnancy loss and 
proven risk factor for fetal problems (Fetal alcohol 
syndrome). Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
Couples with RPL should be advised to limit alcohol 
consumption. GPP 
 
Justification 
Alcohol consumption is a weak risk factor for obs tetric and neonatal complications, including pregnancy 
loss. We found no studies evaluating alcohol consumption in women with RPL. The GDG recommends 
clinicians to provide information on alcohol, and to advice women to limit consumption based on the 
absenc e of harms and similar to other pregnant women. Women suggesting that alcohol use has caused 
 
1 Women were asked the “total number of alcohol consumptions” with one beer is equal to 12 ounces; one glass 
of wine or champagne is equal to 4 ounces, and one mixed drink is equal to 1 ounce of hard liquor. [33] 
 
their previous pregnancy loss can be informed that there is no evid ence for a causal association. From 
clinical experience, it was noted that women with RPL genera lly avoid alcohol consumption. 
2.6 OTHER LIFESTYLE CHANG ES 
Whether intercourse during pregnancy can cause a n early pregnancy loss is a matter of debate as there 
are no studies on the topic for sporadic early pregnancy loss or RPL (Moscrop, 2012 ). Women with 
threatened early pregnancy loss are often advised to refrain from intercourse at least until the 
bleeding/pain have stopped, but this advice is based on presumptions of the doctor, not clinical 
evidence. Furthermore, such advice may cause guilt in couples experiencing pregnancy loss. Until 
evidence i s available, clinicians are recommended to inform women asking about intercourse during 
pregnancy and pregnancy loss, that there is no evidence on the topic. 
Similarly, we found no evidence that using soft drugs (e.g. cannabis) could be a risk factor for pregnancy 
loss in women with RPL. However, avoiding soft drugs is in general recommended, and especially during 
pregnancy. 
Exposure to high dose radiation during pregnancy can potentially induce deleterious effects to the 
embryo or fetus, including congenital malformations, mental retardation and fetal death ( Brent, 2015 ). 
The extent of the damage is dependent on the stage o f development, and the absorbed dose of 
radiation. However, most radiological di agnostic procedures will use ionizing radiation at low doses, 
below the no -adverse- effect level. Evidence to date suggests that there is n o increased risk of the 
offspring, nor is there increased risk of pregnancy loss in parents who have been exposed to diagnostic 
radiological procedures ( Brent, 2015 ). 
References 
Andersen AM, Andersen PK, Olsen J, Gronbaek M, Strandberg -Larsen K. Moderate alcohol intake during 
pregnancy and risk of fetal death. Int J Epidemiol 2012; 41: 405-413. 
Avalos LA, Roberts SC, Kaskutas LA, Block G, Li DK. Volume and type of alcohol during early pregnancy and the risk 
of miscarriage. Subst Use Misuse 2014; 49: 1437- 1445. 
Bellver J, Rossal LP, Bosch E , Zuniga A, Corona JT, Melendez F, Gomez E, Simon C, Remohi J, Pellicer A. Obesity 
and the risk of spontaneous abortion after oocyte donation. Fertil Steril 2003; 79: 1136- 1140. 
Boots C, Stephenson MD. Does obesity increase the risk of miscarriage in sponta neous conception: a systematic 
review. Semin Reprod Med 2011; 29: 507- 513. 
Boots CE, Bernardi LA, Stephenson MD. Frequency of euploid miscarriage is increased in obese women with 
recurrent early pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2014; 102: 455- 459. 
Brandes M, Ve rzijden JC, Hamilton CJ, de Weys NP, de Bruin JP, Bots RS, Nelen WL, Kremer JA. Is the fertility 
treatment itself a risk factor for early pregnancy loss? Reprod Biomed Online 2011; 22: 192- 199. 
Brent RL. Protection of the gametes embryo/fetus from prenatal radiation exposure. Health Phys 2015; 108: 242-
274. 
Greenwood DC, Alwan N, Boylan S, Cade JE, Charvill J, Chipps KC, Cooke MS, Dolby VA, Hay AW, Kassam S et al. 
Caffeine intake during pregnancy, late miscarriage and stillbirth. Eur J Epidemiol 2010; 25: 275- 280. 
Hegaard HK, Ersboll AS, Damm P. Exercise in Pregnancy: First Trimester Risks. Clin Obstet Gynecol 2016; 59: 559-
567. 
Jensen TK, Gottschau M, Madsen JO, Andersson AM, Lassen TH, Skakkebaek NE, Swan SH, Priskorn L, Juul A, 
Jorgensen N. Habitual alcohol c onsumption associated with reduced semen quality and changes in reproductive 
hormones; a cross -sectional study among 1221 young Danish men. BMJ Open 2014; 4: e005462. 
Lashen H, Fear K, Sturdee DW. Obesity is associated with increased risk of first trimester and recurrent 
miscarriage: matched case -control study. Hum Reprod 2004; 19: 1644- 1646. [34] 
 
Leung LW, Davies GA. Smoking Cessation Strategies in Pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2015; 37: 791- 797. 
Lo W, Rai R, Hameed A, Brailsford SR, Al- Ghamdi AA, Regan L. The effect of body mass index on the outcome of 
pregnancy in women with recurrent miscarriage. J Family Community Med 2012; 19: 167- 171. 
Maconochie N, Doyle P, Prior S, Simmons R. Risk factors for first trimester miscarriage --results from a UK -
population -based case -control study. Bjog 2007; 114: 170- 186. 
Metwally M, Ong KJ, Ledger WL, Li TC. Does high body mass index increase the risk of miscarriage after 
spontaneous and assisted conception? A meta -analysis of the evidence. Fertil Steril 2008; 90: 714- 726. 
Metwall y M, Saravelos SH, Ledger WL, Li TC. Body mass index and risk of miscarriage in women with recurrent 
miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2010; 94: 290- 295. 
Misra A, Chowbey P, Makkar BM, Vikram NK, Wasir JS, Chadha D, Joshi SR, Sadikot S, Gupta R, Gulati S et al. 
Consensus statement for diagnosis of obesity, abdominal obesity and the metabolic syndrome for Asian Indians 
and recommendations for physical activity, medical and surgical management. J Assoc Physicians India 2009; 57: 
163- 170. 
Moscrop A. Can sex during preg nancy cause a miscarriage? A concise history of not knowing. Br J Gen Pract 
2012; 62: e308- 310. 
Pandey S, Pandey S, Maheshwari A, Bhattacharya S. The impact of female obesity on the outcome of fertility 
treatment. J Hum Reprod Sci 2010; 3: 62-67. 
Sata F, Yam ada H, Suzuki K, Saijo Y, Kato EH, Morikawa M, Minakami H, Kishi R. Caffeine intake, CYP1A2 
polymorphism and the risk of recurrent pregnancy loss. Mol Hum Reprod 2005; 11: 357- 360. 
Schlussel MM, Souza EB, Reichenheim ME, Kac G. Physical activity during preg nancy and maternal -child health 
outcomes: a systematic literature review. Cad Saude Publica 2008; 24 Suppl 4: s531- 544. 
Stefanidou EM, Caramellino L, Patriarca A, Menato G. Maternal caffeine consumption and sine causa recurrent miscarriage. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2011;
158: 220- 224. 
Venners SA, Wang X, Chen C, Wang L, Chen D, Guang W, Huang A, Ryan L, O'Connor J, Lasley B et al. Paternal 
smoking and pregnancy loss: a prospective study using a biomarker of pregnancy. Am J Epidemiol 2004; 159: 993-
1001. 
Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, Baird DD. Risk factors for early pregnancy loss. Epidemiology 1990; 1: 382- 385. 
Winter E, Wang J, Davies MJ, Norman R. Early pregnancy loss following assisted reproductive technology 
treatment. Hum Reprod 2002; 17: 3220- 3223. 
Zhang BY, Wei YS, Niu JM, Li Y, Miao ZL, Wang ZN. Risk factors for unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion in 
a population from southern China. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2010; 108: 135- 138. 
 
 [35] 
 
PART D: Investigations in RPL 
 
3. Medical and family history 
Evidence 
The first visit after referral for RPL should allow time for the clinician to review the patient’s history, 
which includes medical, obstetric, and family history, but also information on lifestyle of both the male 
and female partner. 
We have summarized the evidence for known and suspected lifestyle risk factors in RPL in part C of this 
document. Studies have suggested an impact of the following lifestyle factors on the risk of RPL: 
smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, excessive exercise and being overwei ght or underweight. 
Assessment of these lifestyle factors in both the male and female partner is recommended. 
In addition to lifestyle factors, information should be collected on a previous diagnosis of medical 
conditions that may be associated with RPL, including thrombophilia, PCOS, and diabetes, or a family 
history of hereditary thrombophilia. 
Medical and family history could be helpful in deciding which investigations are relevant for the 
individual patient (age, fertility/sub -fertility, pregnancy his tory, family history, previous investigations 
and/or treatments). However, no studies have been performed that could advise clinicians on which 
diagnostic tests are relevant for a specific patient and, more importantly, which are not. 
From the evidence and recommendations in this guideline, some diagnostic tests, although not 
recommended for all couples , can be relevant only in selected RPL couples , for instance: 
- prolactin testing in women with clinical symptoms of hyperprolactinemia (oligo -amenorrhea) 
- HLA class II determination in women with secondary RPL after the birth of a boy (Nielsen et al. , 
2009 ) 
- sperm DNA fragmentation assessment can be more relevant in males with unhealthy lifestyles 
(smoking, alcohol, excessive exercise, unhealthy body weight) (indirect evidence from infertile 
couples) 
Other investigations could be less relevant in specific couples . For instance , it has been shown that 
parental karyotyp ing is less relevant in couples with female age above 39, less than 3 pregnancy losses 
and a negative family history, as in these couples the chance of being a carrier of a translocation is very 
low (below 2.2 %) (Franssen et al. , 2005 ). 
There were no studies linking family or medical history to genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue, testing 
for antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), thyroid screening, antinuclear antibodies (ANA) testing, or 
assessment of uterine anatomy. 
Female age and number of previous losses are the only known factors consistently shown to impact prognosis. This has been described in detail in chapter 10 on prognosis . [36] 
 
Recommendation 
Medical and family history could be used to tailor diagnostic 
investigations in RPL . GPP 
 
The GDG recommends to base prognosis on the number of 
preceding pregnancy losses and female age. Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
 
Justification 
The GDG concludes that a thorough reproductive hist ory should be taken in couples presenting with 
RPL and stresses that number of preceding pregnancy losses and female age provide the best available 
prognostic information. 
References 
Franssen MT, Korevaar JC, Leschot NJ, Bossuyt PM, Knegt AC, Gerssen -Schoorl KB, Wouters CH, Hansson KB, 
Hochstenbach R, Madan K et al. Selective chromosome analysis in couples with two or more miscarriages: case -
control study. Bmj 2005; 331: 137- 141. 
Nielsen HS, Steffensen R, Varming K, Van Halteren A G, Spierings E, Ryder LP, Goulmy E, Christiansen OB. 
Association of HY -restricting HLA class II alleles with pregnancy outcome in patients with recurrent miscarriage 
subsequent to a firstborn boy. Hum Mol Genet 2009; 18: 1684- 1691. 
 
 [37] 
 
4. Screening for geneti c factors 
KEY QUESTION: WHAT IS THE VALUE OF SCREENING FOR GENET IC FACTORS IN THE DI AGNOSIS 
OF RECURRENT PREGNAN CY LOSS? 
4.1 GENETIC ANALYSIS OF P REGNANCY TISSUE 
There are two common types of abnormalities that occur in early pregnancy losses : development al and 
genetic abnormalities . Most pregnancies that miscarry early are morphological ly abnormal (Philipp et 
al., 2003 ). The use of embryoscopy, direct visualization of the embryo or early fetus in utero has shown 
that these abn ormalities occur in 86 -91% of miscarriages where an embryo is present. Some of these 
phenotypically abnormal embryos will also be genetically abnormal, as will some phenotypically normal 
embryos. This chapter will address the genetic analysis of both pregn ancy tissue and parental blood. 
Evidence 
Genetic abnormalities of the conceptus are a recognized cause of sporadic and recurrent pregnancy 
loss (RPL). In a systematic review, the prevalence of chromosome abnormalities in a single sporadic 
miscarriage was 45% (95% CI 38 -52; 13 studies; 7012 samples). The prevalence of chromosome 
abnormalities in a subsequent miscarriage after preceding RPL was comparable (prevalence 39% ; 95% 
CI 29 -50; 6 studies ; 1359 samples) (van den Berg et al. , 2012 ). 
It is possible to ascertain whether an early pregnancy loss is d ue to a genetically abnormal embryo or 
fetus (aneuploidy) by analyzing the pregnancy or fetal tissue (Mathur et al. , 2014 ). Published studies 
have used a variety of genetic techniques (conventional karyotyping, fluorescence in situ hybridization 
[FISH ], or array –based comparative genomic hybridization [ array -CGH ]). Analysis by conventional 
karyotyping is limited by the failure of tissue culture and the fact that it does not distinguish between 
maternal contamination and a normal (euploid) female fetus (Robberecht et al. , 2009 ). FISH is limited 
as it only uses prob es for certain chromosomes, and therefore does not necessarily detect the 
chromosomal cause of the miscarriage. Array CGH is a better technique, and currently preferred technique, looking at all chromosomes and avoiding the limitations associated with kary otype and FISH 
(
Kudesia et al. , 2014 , Mathur et al. , 2014 ). New techniques such as next generation seque ncing (NGS) 
have not yet been extensively investigated in genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue but may be useful in 
the near future (Shamseldin et al. , 2013 ). 
Several authors have suggested a strategy of karyotyping the pregnancy tissue of the second 
miscarriage and only proceeding to further maternal investigations (for thrombophilia, thyroid 
dysfunction, uterine malformations) for the cause of the recurrent pregnancy loss if the result is euploid 
(Hogge et al. , 2003, Bernardi et al. , 2012 , Foyouzi et al. , 2012 ). 
Determining the chromosomal status of pregnancy tissue from women with recurrent pregnancy loss 
may provide them with a cause or reason for the particular loss being investigated , but i t does not 
necessarily rule out other underlying conditions . No clear effect of genetic testing of the pregnancy 
tissue on prognosis (subsequent live birth) has been described so far and the role of genetic analysis of 
pregnancy tissue should be further elaborated w ithin a prognostic model. [38] 
 
If women are offered genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue, they should be aware of the issues as 
mentioned. 
Recommendation 
Genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue i s not routinely 
recommended but it c ould be performed for explanat ory 
purposes . Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
For genetic analysis of the pregnancy tissue, array -CGH is 
recommended based on a reduced maternal contamination 
effect. Strong ⊕⊕ 
Justification 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Karyotyping of the 
pregnancy tissue Yes Yes No No 
 
Aneuploidy is a recognized cause of pregnancy loss, and the frequency of aneuploid early pregnancy 
losses increases with female age. Aneuploidies occur in comparable frequencies in both women with 
sporadic and recurrent pregnancy loss. Genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue has the benefit of providing 
the patient with a reason for the pregnancy loss and may help to determine whether further 
investigations or treatments are required. As the impact of further clinical decision ma king and the 
exact influence on prognosis for an individual patient is unclear . The GDG decided to formulate a 
conditional recommendation on genetic testing of the pregnancy tissue. 
The preferred method of genetic analysis is array -CGH, as this is not limi ted by tissue culture failure or 
false negative results due to maternal cell contamination. However, array -CGH has some limitations 
with regard to not being able to detect balanced rearrangements and low- level mosaicism (<10 –15%) 
(Sahoo et al. , 2017 ) and low sensitivity for minor copy number variants (Freeman et al. , 2006 ). A recent 
study su ggests that array -CGH can also be used for cytogenetic analysis of spontaneously discharged 
pregnancy tissue , although high incidence of maternal contamination needs to be taken into account 
(Ozawa et al. , 2016 ). New techniques such as next generation sequencing (NGS) may be useful in the 
near future (Shamseldin et al., 2013 ). 
 [39] 
 
4.2 PARENTAL GENETIC ANAL YSIS 
Evidence 
Abnormal parental karyotypes were found in around 1.9% of individuals (n=20432) referred for genetic 
testing after recurrent pregnancy loss in a large retrospective cohort study (Barber et al. , 2010 ) 
(estimated 3.8% of couples in ( Franssen et al. , 2006 )). In a nother retrospective study of 795 couples 
with two or more pregnancy losses, chromosomal abnormalities were found in 3.5% of the couples . 
The subsequent miscarriage rate was higher and the live birth rate was lower in carrier couples, 
although the cumulative live birth rate was 64 %. (Flynn et al. , 2014 ). Another cohort study reported a 
lower live birth rate in carrier cou ples (63.0%) compared to women with a normal karyotype (78.7%) . 
This study did not mention the number of carrier couples deciding not to attempt to conceive again 
(Sugiura -Ogasawara et al. , 2008 ). 
The subsequent pregnancy loss has been shown to be dependent on the nature of the parental 
karyotype abnormality with more pregnancy losses in carriers of reciprocal translocations and inversions as compare d to R obertsonian translocations or other types of abnormalities (
Sugiura -
Ogasawara et al. , 2004 , Franssen et al. , 2006 , Stephenson and Sierra, 2006 ). For example, in one case -
control study 85 of 157 (54%) with reciprocal translocations had one or more miscarriages compared 
with 18 of 37 (49%) with inversions, 13 of 38 (34%) with R obertsonian translocations, and four of 15 
(27%) with other types of abnormality (Franssen et al. , 2006 ). 
Ongoing pregnancies with unbalanced translocations were detected in less than 1% in carrier couples 
seen for prenatal diagnosis in a large retrospective study (Barber et al., 2010 ), and in 2.9% of 34 
pregnancies in carrier couples in a smaller study (Sugiura -Ogasawara et al. , 2004 ) These numbers are 
in contrast with a case -control study showing that couples have a high -perceived risk of receiving an 
abnormal result and a suboptimal understanding of the tests carried out ( Vansenne et al. , 2011 ). 
Deduction from two large nationwide studies reveals a negligible chance, an estimated 0, 04%, of a live 
born handicapped child with unbalanced chromosome abnormalities in the unselected RPL population 
(Franssen et al. , 2006 , Barber et al. , 2010 ). 
Although parental karyotyping could provide relevant information for those couples whose karyotypical 
abnormality put them at high risk of a subsequent pregnancy loss, the benefit is limited in other couples. 
In a nested case -control study with 279 carrier couples and 428 controls , it was reported that the 
probability of carrier status is ver y low in couples with higher female age ( ≥ 39 years ), fewer than 3 
pregnancy losses and no indication for a n abnormal parental karyotype from the family history, and 
therefore testing may be of limited value in these couples (Franssen et al. , 2005 ). 
A proportion ( 15.1 %/17.8% ) of carrier couples opt not to try to conceive again following an abnormal 
parental karyotype result ( Franssen et al. , 2006, Flynn et al. , 2014 ). In non-carriers, the proportion was 
only 6% (Franssen et al. , 2006 ). In carrier couples the main reasons to not try to conceive were the risk 
of having a child with congenital abnormalities and not wanting to have more miscarriages , in non-
carrier coup les the main reasons were advanced maternal age and fear of further miscarriages 
(Franssen et al. , 2006 ). 
 
 [40] 
 
Recommendation s 
Parental karyotyping is not r outinely recommended in 
couples with RPL. It could be carried out after individual 
assessment of risk . Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Parental genetic 
testing Yes Yes1 Yes2 No 
1 For couples with a pa rental chromosome abnormality, about one third of pregnancy losses are caused by parental 
chromosome abnormality; the other losses are aneuploidies, unexplained or a contribution of other underlying factor 
might exist . 
2 Increased chance of a subsequent pr egnancy loss in case of carrier status; Negligible chance of a live born child with 
an unbalanced chromosome abnormality for the whole RPL population 
 
It was decided to recommend parental karyotyping in RPL couples only after an individual risk 
assessment . Parental karyotyping can be recommended based on genetic history (for instance in case 
of the previous birth of a child with congenital abnormalities , offspring with unbalanced chromosome 
abnormalities in the family , or detection of a translocation in th e pregnancy tissue ). For other couples, 
the benefit of the test is limited as the chances of finding an abnormality are very low: in couples with 
female age above 39, less than three pregnancy losses and a negative family history, the chance of 
being a car rier of a translocation is very low (Franssen et al. , 2005 ). 
Parental karyotyping may provide couples with a possible contributing factor and prognostic 
information for the subsequent pregnancy. Regarding prognosis, couples should be informed that, even 
if a parental abnormality is found after karyotyping , the cumulative live birth rates are good , as are the 
chances of a healthy child, despite a higher risk of a subsequent pregnancy loss. Furthermore, they 
should be informed of the limitations of karyotyping , including that k aryotyping does not predict 
unbalanced translocation in next pregnancy. 
Information provision will aid couples in decision making regardin g continuing to try to conceive, stop 
trying, or choose invasive tests like prenatal diagnosis or preimplantation genetic testing (PGT ) (for 
instance PGT -SR in case of a balanced translocation) (see also chapter 11). 
References 
Barber JC, Cockwell AE, Grant E, Williams S, Dunn R, Ogilvie CM. Is karyotyping couples experiencing recurrent 
miscarriage worth the cost? Bjog 2010; 117: 885- 888. 
Bernardi LA, Plunkett BA, Stephenson MD. Is chromosome testing of the second miscarriage cos t saving? A 
decision analysis of selective versus universal recurrent pregnancy loss evaluation. Fertil Steril 2012; 98: 156- 161. 
Flynn H, Yan J, Saravelos SH, Li TC. Comparison of reproductive outcome, including the pattern of loss, between couples with ch romosomal abnormalities and those with unexplained repeated miscarriages. J Obstet Gynaecol 
Res 2014;
40: 109- 116. 
Foyouzi N, Cedars MI, Huddleston HG. Cost -effectiveness of cytogenetic evaluation of products of conception in 
the patient with a second pregn ancy loss. Fertil Steril 2012; 98: 151- 155. [41] 
 
Franssen MT, Korevaar JC, Leschot NJ, Bossuyt PM, Knegt AC, Gerssen -Schoorl KB, Wouters CH, Hansson KB, 
Hochstenbach R, Madan K et al. Selective chromosome analysis in couples with two or more miscarriages: case -
control study. Bmj 2005; 331: 137- 141. 
Franssen MT, Korevaar JC, van der Veen F, Leschot NJ, Bossuyt PM, Goddijn M. Reproductive outcome after 
chromosome analysis in couples with two or more miscarriages: index [corrected] -control study. Bmj 2006; 332: 
759- 763. 
Freeman JL, Perry GH, Feuk L, Redon R, McCarroll SA, Altshuler DM, Aburatani H, Jones KW, Tyler -Smith C, Hurles 
ME et al. Copy number variation: new insights in genome diversity. Genome Res 2006; 16: 949- 961. 
Hogge WA, Byrnes AL, Lanasa MC, Surti U. The clinical use of karyotyping spontaneous abortions. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2003; 189: 397- 400; discussion 400 -392. 
Kudesia R, Li M, Smith J, Patel A, Williams Z. Rescue karyotyping: a case series of array -based comparative genomic 
hybridization evaluation of ar chival conceptual tissue. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2014; 12: 19. 
Mathur N, Triplett L, Stephenson MD. Miscarriage chromosome testing: utility of comparative genomic hybridization with reflex microsatellite analysis in preserved miscarriage tissue. Fertil Ster il 2014;
101: 1349- 1352. 
Ozawa N, Sago H, Matsuoka K, Maruyama T, Migita O, Aizu Y, Inazawa J. Cytogenetic analysis of spontaneously discharged products of conception by array -based comparative genomic hybridization. Springerplus 2016;
5: 874. 
Philipp T, Phi lipp K, Reiner A, Beer F, Kalousek DK. Embryoscopic and cytogenetic analysis of 233 missed abortions: 
factors involved in the pathogenesis of developmental defects of early failed pregnancies. Hum Reprod 2003; 18: 
1724- 1732. 
Robberecht C, Schuddinck V, Fryn s JP, Vermeesch JR. Diagnosis of miscarriages by molecular karyotyping: benefits 
and pitfalls. Genet Med 2009; 11: 646- 654. 
Sahoo T, Dzidic N, Strecker MN, Commander S, Travis MK, Doherty C, Tyson RW, Mendoza AE, Stephenson M, 
Dise CA et al. Comprehensive g enetic analysis of pregnancy loss by chromosomal microarrays: outcomes, benefits, 
and challenges. Genet Med 2017; 19: 83-89. 
Shamseldin HE, Swaid A, Alkuraya FS. Lifting the lid on unborn lethal Mendelian phenotypes through exome 
sequencing. Genet Med 2013; 15: 307- 309. 
Stephenson MD, Sierra S. Reproductive outcomes in recurrent pregnancy loss associated with a parental carrier of a structural chromosome rearrangement. Hum Reprod 2006;
21: 1076- 1082. 
Sugiura- Ogasawara M, Aoki K, Fujii T, Fujita T, Kawaguchi R, Maruyama T, Ozawa N, Sugi T, Takeshita T, Saito S. 
Subsequent pregnancy outcomes in recurrent miscarriage patients with a paternal or maternal carrier of a 
structural chromosome rearrangement. J Hum Genet 2008; 53: 622- 628. 
Sugiura- Ogasawara M, Ozaki Y, Sato T, Suzumori N, Suzumori K. Poor prognosis of recurrent aborters with either 
maternal or paternal reciprocal translocations. Fertil Steril 2004; 81: 367- 373. 
van den Berg MM, van Maarle MC, van Wely M, Goddijn M. Genetics of early miscarriage. Biochim Bio phys Acta 
2012; 1822: 1951- 1959. 
Vansenne F, Goddijn M, Redeker B, Snijder S, Gerssen -Schoorl K, Lemmink H, Leschot NJ, van der Veen F, Bossuyt 
PM, de Borgie CA. Knowledge and perceived risks in couples undergoing genetic testing after recurrent 
miscarriage or for poor semen quality. Reprod Biomed Online 2011; 23: 525- 533. 
 
 [42] 
 
5. Thrombophilia screening 
Thrombophilia is a hereditary or acquired condition that predispose s women with RPL to venous 
thrombo embolism (i.e. venous thrombo sis and pulmonary embolism) . 
KEY QUESTION: WHAT IS THE VALUE OF THROMBOPHILIA SCREE NING IN WOMEN WITH RPL? 
5.1 HEREDITARY THROMBOPHI LIA 
Several genetic causes predisposing patients to venous thromboembolism (VTE) have been identified 
and are currently tested among patients presenting with a thromboembolic event, or their family 
members. Even in th e setting of venous thromboembolism , the value of testing and treatment is 
controversial (Bates et al., 2016 ). Genetic thrombophili a factors have been evaluated in women with 
RPL, as they are presumed to be a causing factor of RPL, and could be associated with severe obstetric 
complications. This includes Factor V Leiden mutation, Prothrombin mutati on, Protein C, Protein S and 
Antithrombin deficiency. 
The prevalence of hereditary thrombophilia in women with RPL is unclear. 
Evidence 
Factor V Leiden mutation 
The factor V Leiden mutation (1691G→A) renders factor V resistant to cleavage by activated protein C 
(also termed Activated Protein C resistance) . 
Studies on the Factor V Leiden mutation and RPL were summarized and analyzed for analytical validity, 
clinical validity a nd clinical utility (Bradley et al. , 2012 ). The reviewers concluded that the test for the 
Factor V Leiden was of adequate quality with high sensitivity and spec ificity (98.8% and 99.3%, 
respectively). Regarding the clinical validity, the reviewers reported a significant association between 
the factor V Leiden (F5 c.1691G>A) genotype and RPL (OR 2.02; 95% CI 1.60 -2.55 ; based on 33 case-
control studies), and betwee n the factor V Leiden mutation and the risk of a pregnancy loss in the next 
pregnancy (OR 1.93; 95% CI 1.21 –3.09; based on 4 prospective cohort studies) . Carriers of the Factor V 
Leiden mutation were more likely to have a subsequent loss as compared to non-carriers ( OR 2.03 ; 95% 
CI 1.29 -3.17; based on eight cohort studies) (Bradley et al. , 2012 ). 
With regard to the clinical utility, the reviewers concluded that a positive test result was not associated 
with improved outcomes for the couples based on the lack of an effect of treatments on pregnancy 
outcome (see chapter 1 2) and the lack of evidence for non- health related benefits (for example 
information on a cause for RPL). In addition, there were several harms in testing, including 
anticoagulant- related maternal risks, costs, and unneeded treatment after a false -positive result . 
In addition to a congenital form (caused by a factor V Leiden mutation) , activated pr otein C resistance 
can also be acquired. Acquired activated protein C resistance was associated with a higher risk of RPL 
in the first trimester (OR 2 .60; 95% CI 1 .21-5.59) based on two studies (Robertson et al. , 2006 ). 
Prothrombin mutation 
The 20210G→A mutation in the gene encoding prothrombin raises plasma concentrations of prothro mbin and thereby increases the risk of thrombosis. [43] 
 
A significant association between the Prothrombin mutation and RPL was reported by the reviews on 
the topic, al though the details were inconsistent. A review from 2015 reported an overall 2 -fold 
increased risk of RPL in women with G20210A (pooled OR 1.81 ; 95% CI 1.26 -2.60 ; based on 37 case -
control studies). They found this association in European studies, among ol der women and for fetal 
loss (>10 weeks) (rather than embryonic loss i.e. <10 weeks ) (Gao and Tao, 2015 ). Bradley and 
colleagues also reported a significant associ ation (OR 2.07; 95% CI 1.59 -2.70; based on 29 case-control 
studies), but they did not find any diagnostic criteria associated with the prothrombin mutation and 
RPL (Bradley et al. , 2012 ). Finally, Rey and colleagues reported an association between prothrombin 
mutation and RPL (OR 2 .05; 95% CI 1.18-3.54; 9 studies ; n=2087) and between the mutation and RPL 
before 13 weeks (OR 2 .32; 95% CI 1.12-4.79; 4 studies ; n=97 9). The association was found for women 
with two or more pregnancy losses , but not for three or more pregnancy losses (Rey et al. , 2003 ). 
Bradley and colleagues also analyzed the relevance of testing for the prothrombin G20210A mutation. 
Again, they found adequate analytic validity (sensitivity 98.3%, spec ificity 99.6%). The association 
between the mutation and the risk of a next pregnancy loss was not significant (OR 3.29; 95%CI 0. 594-
18.19 , 1 study), nor was the occurrence rate (OR 1.77; 95%CI 0.87 -3.61; four cohort studies). Similar to 
Factor V Leiden, the clinical utility was judged as minimal and the harms of testing outweigh the benefits 
(Bradley et al. , 2012 ). 
Protein C, Protein S and Antithrombin deficien cy 
Inherited deficiencies of anticoagulant proteins, e.g. protein C, protein S and Antithrombin are less 
common , but more strongly associated with venous thromboembolism than factor V Leiden and the 
prothrombin mutation . In a review, they reported no stron g or significant association between 
deficiencies in these proteins and RPL (Protein C: OR 1.57; 95% CI 0.23 -10.54 ; 2 studies ; n=633 - Protein 
S: 14.72; 95%CI 0.99- 217.01 ; 2 studies; n=624 – Antithrombin: OR 0.88; 95% CI 0.17 -4.48; 1 study ; 
n=204) (Rey et al. , 2003 ). A more recent cross -sectional study on protein S found no difference in the 
frequency of the protein S missense variant (PS -Tokushima) between 355 women with RPL and 101 
parous controls. They also reported that there was no difference in live birth rate between women with 
RPL with low PS activi ty or normal PS activity (Matsukawa et al. , 2017 ). 
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) mutation 
MTHFR gene polymorphisms have historically been c lassified as a hereditary thrombophilia factor but 
the mutations are no longer considered for routine assessment of thrombosis risk ( Levin and Varga, 
2016 ). 
Two mutations of the MTHFR gene have been studied. The 677C→T mutation results in a thermolabile 
variant of MTHFR that can cause mild to moderate hyperhomocysteinemia. An association between 
677C→T MTHFR and RPL has been reported by some reviews (Nelen et al. , 2000, Govindaiah et al. , 
2009 , Chen et al. , 2016) , while others did not find evidence of an association ( Rey et al. , 2003 ). Although 
less well studies, no significant association s were found between other mutations of the MTHFR gene 
and RPL (Hickey et al. , 201 3, Chen et al. , 2016 ) 
Recommendation 
For women with RPL, we suggest not to screen for 
hereditary thrombophilia unless in the context of research , 
or in women with additional risk factors for thrombophil ia. Conditional ⊕⊕⊕ [44] 
 
Justificat ion 
 
Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Hereditary 
thrombophilia* No/weak Unclear Yes No 
* this includes Factor V Leiden mutation - Prothrombin mutation - MTHFR mutation - Protein C, Protein S and 
Antithro mbin deficiency 
 
There is no, or a weak association at best, between RPL and hereditary thrombophilia. The 
recommendation not to screen for h ereditary thrombophilia in women experiencing RPL is similar to 
the recommendations of the guideline on VTE, thr ombophilia, antithrombotic therapy and pregnancy 
of the American College of Chest Physicians ( Bates et al. , 2012 ). If additional risk factors for hereditary 
thro mbophilia are present (for instance family members with hereditary thrombophilia, or previous 
VTE), screening can be considered. Also in a research setting, scre ening can be considered to provide 
further data on the impact of thrombophilia in women experie ncing RPL. 
Due to physiological changes, thrombophilia markers increase or decrease during pregnancy 
(Kristoffersen et al., 2017 ). Correct interpretation of results and diagnosis of h ereditary thrombophilia 
is possible for the DNA mutations factor V Leiden and prothrombin 20210A, but can be problematic for 
antithrombin, protein C, and most notably protein S. Therefore, it is recommended to postpone 
screening for hereditary thrombophilia until 6 weeks after the pregnancy loss. 
5.2 ACQUIRED THROMBOPHILI A 
Acquired thrombophilia refers to antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). APS is diagnosed based on the 
persistent presence of a ntiphospholipid antibodies and vascular thrombosis and/or pregnancy 
complications (Miyakis et al. , 2006 ). 
Three clinically relevant and well -characterized an tiphospholipid antibodies (i.e. antibodies associated 
with thrombosis) are lupus anticoagulant (LA), anticardiolipin antibodies (ACA, IgG and IgM), and β2 
glycoprotein I antibodies (aβ2GPI , IgG and IgM ). 
The Miyakis criteria , an update of the Sapporo class ification of 1999, have been determined by 
consensus . The clinical criterion ‘three or more unexplained consecutive spontaneous miscarriages 
before the 10th week of gestation, with maternal anatomic or hormonal abnormalities and paternal 
and maternal chrom osomal causes excluded. ’ is one of the clinical criteria which may lead to the 
diagnosis APS (Miyakis et al. , 2006 ). After the Miyakis criteria have been publ ished, new evidence has 
appeared. In a retrospective cohort study, there was no difference in the number of pregnancy losses, 
the sequence of pregnancies, or maternal age between women with RPL and APS and women with 
unexplained RPL. Therefore, the authors concluded that it is justifiable to offer testing for APS to all 
women with a history of two or more, consecutive or nonconsecut ive, pregnancy losses (van den 
Boogaard et al. , 2013 ). [45] 
 
Evidence 
Lupus anticoagulant 
In a meta -analysis, a strong, consistent and significant association was reported of Lupus anticoagulant 
(LA) with late RPL (prior to 24 weeks’ gestation with (OR 7.79 ; 95% CI 2.30- 26.45 ; based on 9 case -
control studies ; n = 2195). There were no data available to pool RPL prior to 13 weeks’ gestation 
(Opatrny et al. , 2006 ). 
Anticardiolipin Antibod ies 
Anticardiolipin IgG antibodies (ACA) were found to be associated with RPL prior to 13 weeks’ gestation 
(OR 3.56; 95% CI 1.48 –8.59; 2 studies ; n=907 ; all titers ) and with RPL prior to 24 weeks’ gestation (OR 
3.57; 95% CI 2.26 -5.65; 10 studies ; n=3631) (Opatrny et al. , 2006 ). A further analysis of studies only 
including moderate and high ACA titers increased the strength of the association (OR 4.68 ; 95% CI 2.9 6-
7.40; 6 studies; n = 2724). 
In the same meta -analysis, an association was reported between ACA Ig M with RPL prior to 24 weeks’ 
gestation (OR 5.61, 95% CI 1.26 -25.03; 4 studies; n=1822). This association was no longer found if only 
moderate and high ACA IgM titers were included (OR 4.03 ; 95% CI 0.84 -19.34; 3 studies ; n=1579). There 
were no data for women exclusively positive for ACA IgM, nor did the authors find any studies in women 
with RPL prior to 13 weeks’ gestation ( Opatrny et al. , 2006 ). 
An association between both positive ACA IgG and IgM and RPL prior to 24 weeks’ gestation was found 
(OR 5.39 ; 95% CI 3.72 -7.82; 10 studies ; n=3534) when restricting the a nalysis to 10 homogeneous 
studies using an a priori definition for moderate to high antibody titers (Opatrny et al. , 2006 ). 
β2 glycoprotein I antibodies 
Based on five studies, no statistically significant association was found between aβ2GPI antibodies and 
RPL prior to 13 weeks’ gestation (OR 2.12 ; 95% CI 0.69 -6.53; 5 studies; n=1788) . However, the risk 
appears increased and th e upper boundary of the 95% CI may indicate a large effect (Opatrny et al. , 
2006 ). 
Other Antibodies 
Recently, studies have been evaluating the diagnostic potential of new antibodies against phospholipids. In general the added clinical value of these antibodies, alone or in panel, in addition to 
LA, ACA and aβ2GPI antibodies is limited and inconsistent, and should be confirmed before applied in 
clinical practice (Aoki et al. , 1993 , Subrt et al. , 2008 , Tebo et al. , 2008
). 
A similar conclusion can be drawn for anti -Annexin V ( Bizzaro et al. , 2005 , Galli et al. , 2007 , Vora et al. , 
2008 , Sater et al. , 2011 ). 
Recommendation s 
For women with RPL we recommend screening for 
antiphospholipid antibodies (LA and ACA [IgG and IgM]) , 
after two pregnancy losses. Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
For women with RPL screening for aβ2GPI can be 
considered after two pregnancy losses. GPP [46] 
 
Justification 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Antiphospholipid 
antibodies : LA and 
ACA (IgG and IgM) Yes Yes Yes Weak evidence 
aβ2GPI Possible 
(not statistically 
significant) Possible No data No data 
 
Screening of antiphospholipid antibodies can provid e information for a diagnosis of APS and possible 
treatment . In addition, screening is of value in women with RPL with regard to providing them with a 
possible cause (as aPL have been suggested to play a role in the pathogenesis of RPL via complement 
activation (Arachchillage et al. , 2015 )), and t o possibly prevent pregnancy complications associated with 
APS (pre -eclampsia, placenta -mediated complications, neonatal mortality) (Bouvier et al. , 2014 ) 
Screening for aβ2GPI antibodies could be considered in women with RPL to improve future knowledge. 
The results of a recent prospective study, although needing confirmation, suggests that a decrease in 
aβ2GPI antibodies (IgM) with anticoagulant treatment was c orrelated with better pregnancy o utcomes 
(Song et al. , 2017 ). 
Although the time interval for reliable testing of LA, ACA and aβ2GPI antibodies after a pregnancy (loss) 
is not known, generally a time interval of 6 weeks is considered appropriate. Confirmation of the test 
results after at least 12 weeks is necessary in the Miyakis criteria for APS diagnosis (Miyakis et al., 2006 ). 
The GDG group reached consensus that it can be recommended to screen for antiphospholipid 
antibodies after two pregnancy losses and recommends further study of clinical criteria for the 
diagnos is of APS (e.g. female age, number of pregnancy losses, consecutive or non -consecutive losses). 
References 
Aoki K, Hayashi Y, Hirao Y, Yagami Y. Specific antiphospholipid antibodies as a predictive variable in patients with 
recurrent pregnancy loss. Am J Reprod Immunol 1993; 29: 82-87. 
Arachchillage DR, Machin SJ, Mackie IJ, Cohen H. Diagnosis and management of non -criteria obstetric 
antiphospholipid syndrome. Thromb Haemost 2015; 113: 13-19. 
Bates SM, Greer IA, Middeldorp S, Veen stra DL, Prabulos AM, Vandvik PO, American College of Chest P. VTE, 
thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 
9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence -Based Clinical Practice Gui delines. Chest 2012; 141: e691S -
736S. 
Bates SM, Middeldorp S, Rodger M, James AH, Greer I. Guidance for the treatment and prevention of obstetric -
associated venous thromboembolism. J Thromb Thrombolysis 2016; 41: 92-128. 
Bizzaro N, Tonutti E, Villalta D, Tam poia M, Tozzoli R. Prevalence and clinical correlation of anti -phospholipid -
binding protein antibodies in anticardiolipin -negative patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and women 
with unexplained recurrent miscarriages. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2005; 129: 61-68. 
Bouvier S, Cochery- Nouvellon E, Lavigne -Lissalde G, Mercier E, Marchetti T, Balducchi JP, Mares P, Gris JC. 
Comparative incidence of pregnancy outcomes in treated obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome: the NOH -APS 
observational study. Blood 2014; 123: 404-413. [47] 
 
Bradley LA, Palomaki GE, Bienstock J, Varga E, Scott JA. Can Factor V Leiden and prothrombin G20210A testing in 
women with recurrent pregnancy loss result in improved pregnancy outcomes?: Results from a targeted 
evidence -based review. Genet Med 2012; 14: 39-50. 
Chen H, Yang X, Lu M. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene polymorphisms and recurrent pregnancy loss 
in China: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2016; 293: 283- 290. 
Galli M, Borrelli G, Jacobsen EM, Marfisi RM, Fin azzi G, Marchioli R, Wisloff F, Marziali S, Morboeuf O, Barbui T. 
Clinical significance of different antiphospholipid antibodies in the WAPS (warfarin in the antiphospholipid 
syndrome) study. Blood 2007; 110: 1178- 1183. 
Gao H, Tao FB. Prothrombin G20210A mu tation is associated with recurrent pregnancy loss: a systematic review 
and meta -analysis update. Thromb Res 2015; 135: 339- 346. 
Govindaiah V, Naushad SM, Prabhakara K, Krishna PC, Radha Rama Devi A. Association of parental 
hyperhomocysteinemia and C677T Me thylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) polymorphism with recurrent 
pregnancy loss. Clin Biochem 2009; 42: 380- 386. 
Hickey SE, Curry CJ, Toriello HV. ACMG Practice Guideline: lack of evidence for MTHFR polymorphism testing. Genet Med 2013;
15: 153- 156. 
Kristoffersen AH, Petersen PH, Roraas T, Sandberg S. Estimates of Within -Subject Biological Variation of Protein 
C, Antithrombin, Protein S Free, Protein S Activity, and Activated Protein C Resistance in Pregnant Women. Clin 
Chem 2017; 63: 898- 907. 
Levin BL, Varga E. MTHFR: Addressing Genetic Counseling Dilemmas Using Evidence -Based Literature. J Genet 
Couns 2016; 25: 901- 911. 
Matsukawa Y, Asano E, Tsuda T, Kuma H, Kitaori T, Katano K, Ozaki Y, Sugiura- Ogasawara M. Genotyping analysis 
of protein S -Tokushima (K196E) and the involvement of protein S antigen and activity in patients with recurrent 
pregnancy loss. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2017; 211: 90-97. 
Miyakis S, Lockshin MD, Atsumi T, Branch DW, Brey RL, Cervera R, Derksen RH, PG DEG, Koike T, Meroni PL et al. 
International consensus statement on an update of the classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). 
J Thromb Haemost 2006; 4: 295- 306. 
Nelen WL, Blom HJ, Steegers EA, den Heijer M, Eskes TK. Hyperhomocysteinemia and recurrent early pregnancy 
loss: a meta- analysis. Fertil Steril 2000; 74: 1196- 1199. 
Opatrny L, David M, Kahn SR, Shrier I, Rey E. Association between antiphospholipid antibodies and recurrent fetal 
loss in women without autoimmune disease: a metaanalysis. J Rheumatol 2006; 33: 2214- 2221. 
Rey E, Kahn SR, David M, Shrier I. Thrombophilic disorders and fetal loss: a meta- analysis. Lancet 2003; 361: 901-
908. 
Robertson L, Wu O, Langhorne P, Twaddle S, Clark P, Lowe GD, Walker ID, Greaves M, Brenkel I, Regan L et al. 
Thrombop hilia in pregnancy: a systematic review. Br J Haematol 2006; 132: 171- 196. 
Sater MS, Finan RR, Mustafa FE, Al -Khateeb GM, Almawi WY. Anti -annexin V IgM and IgG autoantibodies and the 
risk of idiopathic recurrent spontaneous miscarriage. J Reprod Immunol 2011; 89: 78-83. 
Song Y, Wang HY, Qiao J, Liu P, Chi HB. Antiphospholipid Antibody Titers and Clinical Outcomes in Patients with 
Recurrent Miscarriage and Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome: A Prospective Study. Chin Med J (Engl) 
2017; 130: 267- 272. 
Subrt I, Ul cova -Gallova Z, Bibkova K, Micanova Z, Hejnalova M, Cerna M, Hradecky L, Novotny Z. Recurrent 
pregnancy loss and frequency of eight antiphospholipid antibodies and genetic thrombophilic factors in Czech 
women. Am J Reprod Immunol 2008; 59: 193- 200. 
Tebo AE, Jaskowski TD, Hill HR, Branch DW. Clinical relevance of multiple antibody specificity testing in anti -
phospholipid syndrome and recurrent pregnancy loss. Clin Exp Immunol 2008; 154: 332- 338. 
van den Boogaard E, Cohn DM, Korevaar JC, Dawood F, Vissenberg R, Middeldorp S, Goddijn M, Farquharson RG. 
Number and sequence of preceding miscarriages and maternal age for the prediction of antiphospholipid 
syndrome in women with recurrent miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2013; 99: 188- 192. 
Vora S, Shetty S, Salvi V, Satoska r P, Ghosh K. Thrombophilia and unexplained pregnancy loss in Indian patients. 
Natl Med J India 2008; 21: 116- 119. 
 [48] 
 
6. Immunological screening 
KEY QUESTION: WHAT IS THE VALUE OF IMMUNOLOGICAL SCREE NING IN THE DIAGNOSI S OF 
RPL? 
6.1 HUMAN LEUKOCYTE ANTIG EN (HLA) 
Evidence 
Due to the different ways HLA2 can influence immune reactions, studies of HLA in R PL can be divided 
into three main categories: 1) studies of HLA allele compatibility (sharing) between partners with R PL, 
2) studies of HLA allele prevalence in women with R PL and 3) studies of HLA- C and - G alleles in partners 
with R PL. 
HLA compatibility 
Increased HLA compatibility between partners was originally thought to decrease the probability of the 
mother to produce so -called blocking antibodies that were suggested to protect against fetal rejection. 
A meta -analysis reported that allele sharing in the HLA -A, -B and - C loci was not found with different 
frequencies in R PL and control couples whereas sharing in the HLA- DR locus was borderline significantly 
increased (Beydoun and Saftlas, 2005 ). In a subsequent large case -control study using up- to-date DNA -
based HLA determination no increased HLA -DR sharing was found in RPL couples (Aruna et al. , 2011 ). 
HLA allele prevalence in women with R PL 
In one case -control study of 588 Caucasian women with RPL and 562 Caucasian control s, the HLA -
DRB1*03 allele was found significantly more often in women with RPL than controls also after 
correction for multiple comparisons (Kruse et al. , 2004 ). The association to HLA -DRB1*03 was stronger 
in women with ≥ 4 previous pregnancy losses or women with secondary R PL (OR = 1.8, 95% CI 1.3 -2.5). 
This dose response effect supports a causative role for HLA -DRB1*03 (or a gene variant in LD with this 
allele ) in R PL (or at least secondary R PL) (Kruse et al. , 2004 ). Other studies have been conducted on the 
HLA class II genes (HLA-DRB1 or –DQB1 ) but they included insufficient numbers of patients and controls 
to have sufficient power after correction for multiple testing, which is essential whe n studying multiple 
HLA alleles. There are no prospective studies investigating the prognostic impact of carrying HLA -
DRB1*03 , or other HLA genes . 
In a cohort study, it has been suggested that the prior birth of a boy in women with secondary RPL can 
affec t subsequent pregnanc y outcome negatively (for birth after a firstborn boy vs. a firstborn girl; 
adjusted OR 0.37; 95% CI 0.2 -0.7) (Nielsen et al. , 2008 ). A prospective study (n=358) provided evidence 
that women with secondary R PL after the birth of a boy have a significantly lower (22%) subsequent 
live birth rate when they carried one of three HLA class II alleles DRB1*15 :01; -DQB1*05 :01/05:02 and 
-DRB3*03:01 k nown to predispose to clinically relevant anti -HY immune reactions ( Nielsen et al., 2009 ). 
 
2 The HLA region comprises several genetic loci located on chromosome 6 and it contains the most polymorphic 
genes known in humans. Dependent on the genetic distance between the various HLA loci, the alleles of the genes 
in each locus display various degrees of linkage disequilibrium (LD), which means that alleles in different loci are 
inherited together more or less o ften than expected by chance. LD to genetic variants in other loci in the HLA 
region must be considered when finding a specific allele associated with RPL . [49] 
 
Carrying two of these HLA alleles was associated with a significantly higher risk than carrying zero or 
one allele suggesting a dose -response relationship. In a subsequent cohort study of long -term outcome 
(n=585) the negative prognostic effect of HLA -DRB1*15 and - *DQB1*05:01/02 was confirmed. 
Furthermore, HLA -DRB1*07:01 and HLA- DRB3*03:01 also seemed to have a negative prognostic effect, 
though probably weaker . As in the Nielsen study, the negative prognostic effect of maternal carriage of 
HY-restricting HLA class II alleles on subsequent live birth was only observed for women with a firstborn 
boy (Kolte et al., 2016 ). 
HLA-C and -G alleles in couples 
Reactions of NK cells (cytotoxicity and cytokine production) in pregnant women are suggested to be 
modified by interactions between specific receptors ( Killer immunoglobulin -like receptors or KIRs) on 
the NK cells and HLA -C or HLA -G, which are the only HLA genes expressed on the trophoblast.3 Hiby 
and colleagues reported that the co mbination of the woman carrying KIR genes that are mainly 
inhibitory and the man carrying C2 allotypes is more frequent among RPL than control couples (Hiby et 
al., 2008 ). Another case -control study reported that maternal inhibitory KIRs in combination with C2 
homozygo sity in both partners was found significantly more often in controls (Faridi and Agrawal, 
2011 ). In a third study no association between maternal activating or inhibitory KIR and RPL could be 
detected in 52 women with RPL (Witt et al. , 2004 ), whereas smaller studies found a significant increase 
in activating or decrease of inhibitory KIRs in women with RPL (Varla -Leftherioti et al. , 2003 , Vargas et 
al., 2009 ). Due to the contradictive findings concerning KIR genotyping in couples with RPL, KIR and 
HLA-C typing is not suitable for diagnostic and thera peutic purposes at present . 
Another set of studies have investigated HLA -G polymorphisms in RPL. Soluble HLA -G is suggested to 
modulate NK cytotoxicity and cytokine secretion at the feto -maternal interface. Low plasma soluble 
HLA-G levels may be associated with homozygosity for a HLA-G14 bp insertion in the HLA- G gene. Two 
meta -analyses reported that the HLA- G14 bp insertion frequency was significantly increased in women 
with RPL (OR 1.27 (1.04- 1.55) and 1.47 (1.13 -1.91), respectively ) (Wang et al. , 2013 , Fan et al. , 2014 ). 
Since the HLA -G14 bp insertion is in strong positive linkage disequilibrium with the HLA -DRB1*03 allele 
(Hviid and Christiansen, 2005 ), the question remains whether the association of R PL to the HLA -G14 bp 
insertion is secondary to a primary associ ation to the HLA -DRB*03 allele. 
Recommendation 
HLA determination in women with RPL is not recommended 
in clinical practice . Only HLA class II determination (HLA-
DRB1*15 :01 and HLA -DQB1*05 :01/05:2) could be 
considered in Scandinavian women with secondary RP L after 
the birth of a boy , for prognostic purposes . Conditional ⊕⊕ 

3 HLA-C alleles can be divided into C1 and C2 groups according to a genetic dimorphism leading to changes in the 
segment of HLA -C molecule that can bind KIR. This binding between KIR and HLA -C will ultimately result in either 
inhibition or activation of NK cell function. [50] 
 
Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
HLA-compatibility Controversial 
evidence NA No prognostic 
potential NA 
HLA class II: 
HLA-DR (maternal) Strong, but only 
shown in 
Scandinavian 
women YES, especially 
for sec ondary 
RPL after first 
born boy Negative impact 
on future live 
birth None available 
HLA-G Significant but 
weak No data No data NA 
KIR and HLA -C Controversial 
evidence No data No data NA 
The assoc iation between subsequent pregnancy outcome and HLA polymorphisms in women or 
couples with RPL is not sufficiently studied. For HLA compatibility and HLA -C alleles in couples, the 
evidence for an association with RPL is inconsistent, while a weak associati on is reported for specific 
HLA-G alleles in RPL women. Investigation of HLA -DR (or other classical HLA genes ) in women with RPL 
is not recommended in clinical practice , but could be performed in a research setting. An exception 
could be investigation of c lass II HLA in women with secondary RPL after the birth of a boy , even though 
this has only be en shown in a large Scandinavian study and needs further confirmation. 
6.2 ANTI-HY ANTIBODIES 
Anti-HY antibodies are antibodies directed against male -specific m inor histocompatibility (HY) antigens 
expressed on most or all nucleated cells from males. 
Evidence 
Detection of anti -HY antibodies in the serum of women with RPL may display some negative prognostic 
impact; women without these antibodies had a subsequent 61% livebirth rate compared with 48% in 
anti-HY antibody positive women in an observational study ( Nielsen et al. , 2010b ), but confirmatory 
studies are needed . 
Recommendation 
Measurement of anti -HY antibodies in women with RPL is 
not recommended in clinical practice . Conditional ⊕⊕ 
Justification 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Anti-HY immunity Moderate 
(only shown in 
Scandinavian 
women ) YES, especially 
for sec RPL after 
first born boy Negative impact 
on future live 
birth* None available [51] 
 
* Prognostic impact is stronger for women with secondary RPL with a first -born boy and HLA class II alleles 
predisposing to anti -HY immunity 
Since the risk increment conferred by carrying t hese HLA alleles is substantial in women with secondary 
RPL after a birth of a boy, clinicians could consider offering HLA-DRB1 typing to these patients for 
clarification of the pathogenes is and assessment of prognosis . However, so far the testing will provide 
no change in treatment offers. 
6.3 CYTOKINES 
Evidence 
In general, investigation of the cytokine levels in peripheral blood is not informative except for TNF -α, 
a marker for the degree of systemic inflammation. High plasma TNF- α levels are reported to increase 
the risk of miscarriage in women with RPL (Mueller -Eckhardt et al. , 1994 ) and high TNF -α and TNF -
α/IL10 ratios characterize women with euploid compared to aneuploid miscarriage s (Calleja -Agius et 
al., 2012 ). Women with secondary R PL seem to have significantly higher plasma levels of TNF- α in early 
pregnancy than women with primary R PL (Piosik et al. , 2013 ). Lee and colleagues found a significantly 
increased percentage of Th1 cells expressing intracellular TNF -α in peripheral blood lymphocytes and a 
significantly increased TNF -α/IL10 Th-cell rati o in R PL patients compared to controls (Lee et al. , 2013 ). 
In a study of mitogen -stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes, Th2 cytokine secretion was significantly 
higher in pregnant fertile controls and R PL women who later gave birth compared with R PL women 
who miscarried ( Makhseed et al. , 2001 ). However, the fact tha t some samples were taken at time of 
miscarriage and some at time of birth may flaw the results . In another small study, it was found that 
mitogen -stimulated lymphocytes from women with RPL who later went on to miscarry produce more 
TNF-α than those of pat ients who gave birth (Kruse et al. , 2003 ). 
The plasma levels or in -vitro production of many cytokines are influenced by polymorphisms in the 
cytokine genes , which has also been explored in women experiencing RPL. In two studies an association 
between TGFB1 or TNF -α gene polymorphism s and R PL was reported ( Amani et al. , 2005, Zhang et al. , 
2012 ) . However, meta -analyses have not been able to find polymorphisms in relevant cytokine genes 
associated with R PL, except for a weak association to a -1082 IL10 genotype (Choi and Kwak -Kim, 2008 , 
Medica et al. , 2009 ). 
Recommendation s 
Cytokine testing should not be used in women w ith RPL in 
clinical practice. Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
Cytokine polymorphisms should not be tested in women with 
RPL. Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
 
 [52] 
 
Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Cytokines Yes Unclear Unknown NA 
Polymorphisms in 
cytokine gene s No association NA NA NA 
 
Research into the role of cytokines in R PL is complex since the function of cytokines may change 
according to length of gestation and cytokine production of blood lymphocytes . Furthermore, plasma 
cytokine concentrations may be c ompletely different from that in the uterus and measurement of 
cytokines in endometrial tissue, d ecidual tissue or endometrial flushings is subject to technical 
difficulties. 
Although studies have shown an association between TNF -α and RPL, the relevance of routine testing 
is unclear. Measuring cytokine levels or evaluating c ytokine gene polymorphisms in women with RPL 
are so far only useful in the context of research projects . 
6.4 ANTINUCLEAR ANTIBODIE S (ANA) 
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) are antibodies directed against various components of the cell nuclei , 
often detected in patients with autoimmune diseases. 
Evidence 
In an older review, 10 out of 12 case -control studies found an increased prevalence of ANA in women 
with RPL (Christiansen, 1996 ). In the ni ne relevant studies subsequently published, six found a 
significantly increased prevalence of ANA in women with RPL compared with controls (Ogasawara et 
al., 1996 , Stern et al. , 1998, Kaider et al. , 1999 , Matsubayashi et al. , 2001 , Ticconi et al. , 2010 , 
Molazadeh et al. , 2014 ) whereas three did not (Bustos et al. , 2006 , Giasuddin et al. , 2010 , Hefler -
Frischmuth et al. , 2017 ). 
Some studies reported that ANA positiv ity was more prevalent in women with RPL with a new 
miscarriage (n=24) as compared to those who gave birth (n=82) (Cavalcante et al. , 2014 ). Similarly, a 
higher miscarriage rate was reported in ANA- positive as compared to ANA -negative women with RPL 
in a small prospective study (Harger et al. , 1983 ). However, the study by Ogasawara did not find that 
the presence of ANA could predict new pregnancy loss (Ogasawara et al. , 1996 ). 
A direct pathophysiological link betwe en the presence of autoantibodies such as ANA in women with 
RPL and fetal death has not yet been documented. A known genetic predisposing factor is the HLA-
DRB1*03 allele, which is associated with both production of various autoantibodies including ANA and 
the risk of R PL (Christiansen, 1996 ). 
Recommendation 
Antinuclear antibodies ( ANA ) testing could be considered for 
explanatory purposes. Conditional ⊕⊕ [53] 
 
Justificat ion 
 
Measurement of ANA in women with RPL could be considered since the majority of case -control studies 
document an association to R PL and there is some evidence (from smaller prospective studies) tha t 
ANA presence affects the prognosis negatively (Harger et al. , 1983 , Cavalcante et al. , 2014 ). Whet her 
ANA positivity can identify a subset of women with RPL that responds beneficially to various forms of 
immunotherapy is unknown and can only be shown in randomized controlled trials. 
6.5 NATURAL KILLER CELLS (NK CELLS ) 
Evidence 
Investigations of NK cell s in R PL can be divided into (1) flow- cytometric analyses or tests of NK cell 
cytotoxicity of peripheral blood lymphocytes before or during pregnancy and (2) studies of NK cells in 
pre-pregnancy endometrial biopsies or decidual tissue from miscarriages and terminated pregnancies . 
NK cells in peripheral blood 
In several large studies of good or acceptable quality it was found that the percentage of CD56+ NK 
cells in peripheral blood taken prior to pregnancy is significantly higher in R PL women than control s 
(Kwak et al. , 1995 , Shakhar et al. , 2003 , Perricone et al. , 2007 , Prado -Drayer et al. , 2008 , King et al. , 
2010 , Karami et al. , 2012, Yoo et al. , 2012 , Lee et al. , 2013 ) , or had predictive value for subsequent 
pregnancy outcome ( Emmer et al. , 1999 , Emmer et al. , 2000 ) whereas other studies did not find NK cell 
numbers or percentages associated to R PL (Chao et al. , 1995 , Wang et al. , 2008 , Carbone et al. , 2009 ) 
or predictive fo r outcome (Morikawa et al. , 2001 , Yamada et al. , 2003 , Liang et al. , 2012 ). In many of 
these case- control studies most of the R PL women were nulliparous and most controls were 
multiparous; which can flaw the results since a previous successful pregnancy can induce permanent 
changes in lymphocyte subs ets including NK cells ( Shakhar et al. , 2003 ). 
Several of the studies of pre- pregnancy blood samples found significantly increased NK cell cytotoxicity 
in women with RPL compared to controls ( Shakhar et al. , 2006, Hadinedoushan et al. , 2007 , Karami et 
al., 2012 , Lee et al. , 2013 ) whereas a study p erformed during pregnancy did not find such a difference 
(Chao et al. , 1995 ). One small prospective study found significantly reduced NK cytotoxicity in women 
with RPL compared with controls (Souza et al. , 2002 ). 
Aoki and colleagues reported that R PL patients with high pre -pregnancy peripheral blood NK cell 
cytotoxicity had a significantly higher subsequent rate of miscarriage compared with those with lower 
NK cyto toxicity (71% versus 20%) (Aoki et al. , 1995 ). Smaller studies found a higher or similar NK cell 
cytotoxicity in patients with a subsequent euploid miscarriage compared with those with a live birth 
(Morikawa et al. , 2001 , Yamada et al. , 2003 ). However, in prospective studies it was reported that high 
NK cell cytotoxicity before pregnancy had no impact on subsequent miscarriage ra tes; in the study of 
Katano there was no impact of NK cytotoxicity even after adjustment for recognized risk factors for 
miscarriage (Emmer et al. , 1999 , Liang et al. , 2012 , Katano et al. , 2013 ) . Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
ANA antibodies Association 
found i n most 
studies Probably not – 
no 
documentation Unclear NA [54] 
 
NK cells in endometrial biopsies or decidual tissue 
One small case -control study reported that the CD56bright NK cell subset was significantly lower in 
endometrial biopsies of women with RPL than in controls (Lachapelle et al. , 1996 ) whereas other studies 
found that the frequency of CD56+ (or unspecified NK cells) cells was significantly higher in R PL than in 
controls (Clifford et al. , 1999 , Quenby et al. , 2005, Tuckerman et al. , 2007 ). In two case -control studies, 
no difference was found in NK cell subsets in the endometrium between women with RPL and controls 
(Michimata et al. , 2002 , Shimada et al. , 2004 ). Importantly , no relationship between C D56+ NK cell 
count in the endometrium and subsequent pregnancy outcome was found in a blind retrospective study 
(Tuckerman et al. , 2007 ). 
Studies comparing NK cell subsets in decidual tissue from miscarriages of women with RPL with tissue 
from women having a termination of pregnancy found differences in NK cell subsets between the two 
groups (Vassiliadou and Bulmer, 1996 , Ozcimen et al. , 2009 , Bao et al. , 2012 ). However, since the tissue 
in the former cases is necrotic and often inflamed and the latter cases is fresh and vital, these kind of 
studies provide limited valid information. 
In a series of studies, combinations of maternal KIR gene polymorphisms and parental HLA -C allotypes 
have been investiga ted in R PL and controls couples as a measure of the potential for maternal NK cell 
activation (Varla -Leftherioti et al. , 2003 , Witt et al. , 2004, Hiby et al. , 2008 , Vargas et al. , 2009 , Faridi 
and Agrawal, 2011 ). These studies have been previously discussed a nd evaluated in the HLA section. 
Recommendation 
There is insufficient evidence to recommend NK cell testing 
of either peripheral blood or endometrial tissue in women 
with RPL. Strong ⊕ 
Justificat ion 
 
Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
NK in Peripheral 
blood : numbers Weak No Unclear – No No 
NK cell cytotoxicity in 
peripheral blood Unclear / No No 
NK in endometrium / 
uterine Weak / Unclear No 
From studies ana lyzing NK cells in peripheral blood lymphocytes before or during pregnancy, there 
seems to be a weak association with RPL, but NK cell testing cannot be used to select women with RPL 
for immunological treatments. 
Furthermore, there are significant technic al challenges; the frequencies of NK cell subsets between the 
endometrium and peripheral blood are extremely different. NK cells can be measured in endometrial 
biopsies taken in non- pregnant cycles by immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry of homogenized 
tissue. The former technique is prone to subjective evaluation and using the latter can change surface [55] 
 
marker expression since the tissue undergoes enzymatic digestion. Furthermore, endometrial and 
peripheral blood NK cell numbers fluctuate hugely in the me nstrual cycle so exact timing of samples is 
crucial but has rarely been done. 
The measurement of uterine NK cells, although in theory a better approach, is also unfit for clinical 
practice due to lack of consensus about ranges of normal values and lack of standardization in the 
measurement of NK cells. 
6.6 OTHER IMMUNOLOGICAL T ESTS 
Evidence 
Anti-HLA antibodies 
In a large retrospective cohort study , anti-HLA class I or II antibodies could be detected with significantly 
increased frequency in multiparous controls compared with women with RPL, which can be explained 
by the higher number of previous deliveries in the former group (Bartel et al. , 2011 ). However, women 
with “unexplained” RPL had the same prevalence of these antibodies as the women in whom the cause 
of RPL was considered known. In a small study on the prospective impact of antibodies blocking mixed lymphocyte reactions (which may be similar to anti -HLA a ntibodies), these antibodies were not 
predictive of subsequent pregnancy outcome (
Jablonowska et al., 2001 ). Another study reported that 
in pregnant women with RPL , those that were HLA -antibody positive had lower live birth rate (41%) as 
compared to HLA -antibody negative RPL women (76%) ( Adjusted OR 0.22; 95% CI 0.07 -0.68) (Nielsen 
et al. , 2010a ). A meta -analysis found no significant effect of anti -HLA antibodies (class I and II) on first 
trimester complications (RPL) but the included studies showed significant heterogeneity (Lashley et al. , 
2013 ). 
Celiac disease serum markers 
A recent case- control study measured tissue transglutaminase (tTG) antibodies (IgA + IgG) and 
endomysial antibodies (IgA + IgG) in 116 women with unexplained RPL and 116 age -matched controls. 
Although women with RPL had significantly higher serum levels of IgG tTG antibodies compared with 
controls, the proportion of women with antibodies indicative of celiac disease was very low and similar 
in both groups (Sharshiner et al. , 2013 ). Therefore, testing for c eliac disease serum markers is not 
indicated in women with RPL in absence of symptoms of ce liac disease. 
Antisperm antibodies 
Antisperm antibodies have also been described in women with RPL, although the results are inconsistent and the relevance is unclear. Al-Hussein and colleagues concluded that there was no 
significant difference with respe ct to elevated antiparental antibodies and pregnancy outcome based 
on flow cytometric analysis of maternal antipaternal antibodies in the sera of 24 women with RPL, and 
6 controls with no history of RPL ( Al-Hussein et al. , 2002
). In another case -control study, anti-sperm 
antibodies (measured by ELISA) were found in 22.6% of 155 women with RPL , which was significantly 
more compared to controls (8%, n=50) (Motak -Pochrzest and Malinowski, 2013 ). However, in a study 
without control group anti -sperm antibodies were found in only 4.8% of 123 women with RPL 
(Christiansen et al. , 1998 ). 
Other immune biomarkers such as IL2 receptor levels (Wilson et al ., 2003 ), anti -protein Z presence 
(Sater et al. , 2011 ) and anti -complementary activity (Quinn and Petric, 1988 ) have only been studied in 
a single study and it is impossible to assess their clinical impact. [56] 
 
Recommendation 
Testing anti -HLA antibodies in women with RPL is not 
recommended . Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
Justificat ion 
Overall, there is no documentation for the value of measuring anti -HLA antibodies in the screening of 
women with RPL and it is not recommended to measure it in these women . Several other 
immunological tests were described in a single study , but until further data, they are not recommended 
in clinical practice. 
References 
Al-Hussein K, Al -Mukhalafi Z, Bertilsson PA, Jaroudi K, Shoukri M, Hollander J. Value of flow cytometric assay for 
the detection of antisperm antibodies in women wi th a history of recurrent abortion. Am J Reprod Immunol 
2002; 47: 31-37. 
Amani D, Dehaghani AS, Zolghadri J, Ravangard F, Niikawa N, Yoshiura K, Ghaderi A. Lack of association between 
the TGF -beta1 gene polymorphisms and recurrent spontaneous abortion. J Re prod Immunol 2005; 68: 91-103. 
Aoki K, Kajiura S, Matsumoto Y, Ogasawara M, Okada S, Yagami Y, Gleicher N. Preconceptional natural -killer -cell 
activity as a predictor of miscarriage. Lancet 1995; 345: 1340- 1342. 
Aruna M, Nagaraja T, Andal Bhaskar S, Tarakesw ari S, Reddy AG, Thangaraj K, Singh L, Reddy BM. Novel alleles of 
HLA-DQ and - DR loci show association with recurrent miscarriages among South Indian women. Hum Reprod 
2011; 26: 765- 774. 
Bao SH, Shuai W, Tong J, Wang L, Chen P, Sun J. Increased expression o f Toll- like receptor 3 in decidual natural 
killer cells of patients with unexplained recurrent spontaneous miscarriage. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 
2012; 165: 326- 330. 
Bartel G, Walch K, Wahrmann M, Pils S, Kussel L, Polterauer S, Tempfer C, Bohmig GA. Prevalence and qualitative 
properties of circulating anti -human leukocyte antigen alloantibodies after pregnancy: no association with 
unexplained recurrent miscarriage. Hum Immunol 2011; 72: 187- 192. 
Beydoun H, Saftlas AF. Association of human leucocyte an tigen sharing with recurrent spontaneous abortions. 
Tissue Antigens 2005; 65: 123- 135. 
Bustos D, Moret A, Tambutti M, Gogorza S, Testa R, Ascione A, Prigoshin N. Autoantibodies in Argentine women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Am J Reprod Immunol 2006;
55: 201-207. 
Calleja -Agius J, Jauniaux E, Muttukrishna S. Inflammatory cytokines in maternal circulation and placenta of 
chromosomally abnormal first trimester miscarriages. Clin Dev Immunol 2012; 2012: 175041. 
Carbone J, Gallego A, Lanio N, Navarro J, Orera M, Aguaron A, Fernandez -Cruz E, Sarmiento E. Quantitative 
abnormalities of peripheral blood distinct T, B, and natural killer cell subsets and clinical findings in obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome. J Rheumatol 2009;
36: 1217- 1225. 
Cavalcante MB, Costa FD, A raujo Junior E, Barini R. Risk factors associated with a new pregnancy loss and perinatal 
outcomes in cases of recurrent miscarriage treated with lymphocyte immunotherapy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 
Med 2014 : 1-5. 
Chao KH, Yang YS, Ho HN, Chen SU, Chen HF, Da i HJ, Huang SC, Gill TJ, 3rd. Decidual natural killer cytotoxicity 
decreased in normal pregnancy but not in anembryonic pregnancy and recurrent spontaneous abortion. Am J 
Reprod Immunol 1995; 34: 274- 280. 
Choi YK, Kwak -Kim J. Cytokine gene polymorphisms in recurrent spontaneous abortions: a comprehensive review. 
Am J Reprod Immunol 2008; 60: 91-110. 
Christiansen OB. A fresh look at the causes and treatments of recurrent miscarriage, especially its immunological 
aspects. Hum Reprod Update 1996; 2: 271- 293. [57] 
 
Christiansen OB, Ulcova -Gallova Z, Mohapeloa H, Krauz V. Studies on associations between human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) class II alleles and antiphospholipid antibodies in Danish and Czech women with recurrent 
miscarriages. Hum Reprod 1998; 13: 3326- 3331. 
Cliffo rd K, Flanagan AM, Regan L. Endometrial CD56+ natural killer cells in women with recurrent miscarriage: a 
histomorphometric study. Hum Reprod 1999; 14: 2727- 2730. 
Emmer PM, Nelen WL, Steegers EA, Hendriks JC, Veerhoek M, Joosten I. Peripheral natural killer cytotoxicity and 
CD56(pos)CD16(pos) cells increase during early pregnancy in women with a history of recurrent spontaneous abortion. Hum Reprod 2000;
15: 1163- 1169. 
Emmer PM, Veerhoek M, Nelen WL, Steegers EA, Joosten I. Natural killer cell reactivity and HLA -G in recurrent 
spontaneous abortion. Transplant Proc 1999; 31: 1838- 1840. 
Fan W, Li S, Huang Z, Chen Q. Relationship between HLA -G polymorphism and susceptibility to recurrent 
miscarriage: a meta -analysis of non -family -based studies. J Assist Reprod Genet 2014; 31: 173-184. 
Faridi RM, Agrawal S. Killer immunoglobulin -like receptors (KIRs) and HLA -C allorecognition patterns implicative 
of dominant activation of natural killer cells contribute to recurrent miscarriages. Hum Reprod 2011; 26: 491- 497. 
Giasuddi n AS, Mazhar I, Haq AM. Prevalence of anticardiolipin antibody in Bangladeshi patients with recurrent 
pregnancy loss. Bangladesh Med Res Counc Bull 2010; 36: 10-13. 
Hadinedoushan H, Mirahmadian M, Aflatounian A. Increased natural killer cell cytotoxicity an d IL-2 production in 
recurrent spontaneous abortion. Am J Reprod Immunol 2007; 58: 409- 414. 
Harger JH, Archer DF, Marchese SG, Muracca- Clemens M, Garver KL. Etiology of recurrent pregnancy losses and 
outcome of subsequent pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1983; 62: 574- 581. 
Hefler -Frischmuth K, Walch K, Hefler L, Tempfer C, Grimm C. Serologic markers of autoimmunity in women with 
recurrent pregnancy loss. Am J Reprod Immunol 2017; 77. 
Hiby SE, Regan L, Lo W, Farrell L, Carrington M, Moffett A. Association of materna l killer -cell immunoglobulin -like 
receptors and parental HLA -C genotypes with recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2008; 23: 972- 976. 
Hviid TV, Christiansen OB. Linkage disequilibrium between human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II and HLA -G--
possible implicati ons for human reproduction and autoimmune disease. Hum Immunol 2005; 66: 688- 699. 
Jablonowska B, Palfi M, Ernerudh J, Kjellberg S, Selbing A. Blocking antibodies in blood from patients with 
recurrent spontaneous abortion in relation to pregnancy outcome and intravenous immunoglobulin treatment. 
Am J Reprod Immunol 2001; 45: 226- 231. 
Kaider AS, Kaider BD, Janowicz PB, Roussev RG. Immunodiagnostic evaluation in women with reproductive failure. 
Am J Reprod Immunol 1999; 42: 335- 346. 
Karami N, Boroujerdnia MG, Nik bakht R, Khodadadi A. Enhancement of peripheral blood CD56(dim) cell and NK 
cell cytotoxicity in women with recurrent spontaneous abortion or in vitro fertilization failure. J Reprod Immunol 
2012; 95: 87-92. 
Katano K, Suzuki S, Ozaki Y, Suzumori N, Kitaori T, Sugiura -Ogasawara M. Peripheral natural killer cell activity as a 
predictor of recurrent pregnancy loss: a large cohort study. Fertil Steril 2013; 100: 1629- 1634. 
King K, Smith S, Chapman M, Sacks G. Detailed analysis of peripheral blood natural killer ( NK) cells in women with 
recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2010; 25: 52-58. 
Kolte AM, Steffensen R, Christiansen OB, Nielsen HS. Maternal HY -restricting HLA class II alleles are associated 
with poor long -term outcome in recurrent pregnancy loss after a boy. Am J Reprod Immunol 2016; 76: 400- 405. 
Kruse C, Steffensen R, Varming K, Christiansen OB. A study of HLA -DR and - DQ alleles in 588 patients and 562 
controls confirms that HLA -DRB1*03 is associated with recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2004; 19: 1215- 1221. 
Kruse C, Varming K, Christiansen OB. Prospective, serial investigations of in -vitro lymphocyte cytokine production, 
CD62L expression and proliferative response to microbial antigens in women with recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2003;
18: 2465- 2472. 
Kwak JY , Beaman KD, Gilman -Sachs A, Ruiz JE, Schewitz D, Beer AE. Up -regulated expression of CD56+, 
CD56+/CD16+, and CD19+ cells in peripheral blood lymphocytes in pregnant women with recurrent pregnancy 
losses. Am J Reprod Immunol 1995; 34: 93-99. 
Lachapelle MH, Miron P, Hemmings R, Roy DC. Endometrial T, B, and NK cells in patients with recurrent 
spontaneous abortion. Altered profile and pregnancy outcome. J Immunol 1996; 156: 4027- 4034. [58] 
 
Lashley EE, Meuleman T, Claas FH. Beneficial or harmful effect of antipaterna l human leukocyte antibodies on 
pregnancy outcome? A systematic review and meta- analysis. Am J Reprod Immunol 2013; 70: 87-103. 
Lee SK, Na BJ, Kim JY, Hur SE, Lee M, Gilman -Sachs A, Kwak -Kim J. Determination of clinical cellular immune 
markers in women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Am J Reprod Immunol 2013; 70: 398- 411. 
Liang P, Mo M, Li GG, Yin B, Cai J, Wu T, He X, Zhang X, Zeng Y. Comprehensive analysis of peripheral blood 
lymphocytes in 76 women with recurrent miscarriage before and after lymphocyte immu notherapy. Am J Reprod 
Immunol 2012; 68: 164- 174. 
Makhseed M, Raghupathy R, Azizieh F, Omu A, Al -Shamali E, Ashkanani L. Th1 and Th2 cytokine profiles in 
recurrent aborters with successful pregnancy and with subsequent abortions. Hum Reprod 2001; 16: 2219- 2226. 
Matsubayashi H, Sugi T, Arai T, Kondo A, Suzuki T, Izumi S, McIntyre JA, Makino T. Different antiphospholipid 
antibody specificities are found in association with early repeated pregnancy loss versus recurrent IVF -failure 
patients. Am J Reprod Immunol 2001; 46: 323- 329. 
Medica I, Ostojic S, Pereza N, Kastrin A, Peterlin B. Association between genetic polymorphisms in cytokine genes and recurrent miscarriage --a meta -analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 2009;
19: 406- 414. 
Michimata T, Ogasawara MS, Tsuda H, Suzum ori K, Aoki K, Sakai M, Fujimura M, Nagata K, Nakamura M, Saito S. 
Distributions of endometrial NK cells, B cells, T cells, and Th2/Tc2 cells fail to predict pregnancy outcome following 
recurrent abortion. Am J Reprod Immunol 2002; 47: 196- 202. 
Molazadeh M, Karimzadeh H, Azizi MR. Prevalence and clinical significance of antinuclear antibodies in Iranian 
women with unexplained recurrent miscarriage. Iran J Reprod Med 2014; 12: 221- 226. 
Morikawa M, Yamada H, Kato EH, Shimada S, Ebina Y, Yamada T, Sagawa T, Kobashi G, Fujimoto S. NK cell activity 
and subsets in women with a history of spontaneous abortion. Cause, number of abortions, and subsequent 
pregnancy outcome. Gynecol Obstet Invest 2001; 52: 163- 167. 
Motak -Pochrzest H, Malinowski A. The occurrence of immuno logical disturbances in patients with recurrent 
miscarriage (RM) of unknown etiology. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 2013; 34: 701- 707. 
Mueller -Eckhardt G, Mallmann P, Neppert J, Lattermann A, Melk A, Heine O, Pfeiffer R, Zingsem J, Domke N, 
Mohr -Pennert A. Immunoge netic and serological investigations in nonpregnant and in pregnant women with a 
history of recurrent spontaneous abortions. German RSA/IVIG Study Group. J Reprod Immunol 1994; 27: 95-109. 
Nielsen HS, Andersen AM, Kolte AM, Christiansen OB. A firstborn boy is suggestive of a strong prognostic factor in secondary recurrent miscarriage: a confirmatory study. 
Fertil Steril 2008; 89: 907- 911. 
Nielsen HS, Steffensen R, Varming K, Van Halteren AG, Spierings E, Ryder LP, Goulmy E, Christiansen OB. 
Association of HY -restricting HLA class II alleles with pregnancy outcome in patients with recurrent miscarriage 
subsequent to a firstborn boy. Hum Mol Genet 2009; 18: 1684- 1691. 
Nielsen HS, Witvliet MD, Steffensen R, Haasnoot GW, Goulmy E, Christiansen OB, Claas F. The presence of HLA -
antibodies in recurrent miscarriage patients is associated with a reduced chance of a live birth. J Reprod Immunol 
2010a; 87: 67-73. 
Nielsen HS, Wu F, Aghai Z, Steffensen R, van Halteren AG, Spierings E, Christiansen OB, Miklos D, Goulmy E. H -Y 
antibody titers are increased in unexplained secondary recurrent miscarriage patients and associated with low 
male : female ratio in subsequent live births. Hum Reprod 2010b; 25: 2745- 2752. 
Ogasawara M, Aoki K, Kajiura S, Yagami Y. Are antinuclear antibodie s predictive of recurrent miscarriage? Lancet 
1996; 347: 1183- 1184. 
Ozcimen EE, Kiyici H, Uckuyu A, Yanik FF. Are CD57+ natural killer cells really important in early pregnancy failure? 
Arch Gynecol Obstet 2009; 279: 493- 497. 
Perricone C, De Carolis C, Giaco melli R, Zaccari G, Cipriani P, Bizzi E, Perricone R. High levels of NK cells in the 
peripheral blood of patients affected with anti -phospholipid syndrome and recurrent spontaneous abortion: a 
potential new hypothesis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2007; 46: 1574- 1578. 
Piosik ZM, Goegebeur Y, Klitkou L, Steffensen R, Christiansen OB. Plasma TNF -alpha levels are higher in early 
pregnancy in patients with secondary compared with primary recurrent miscarriage. Am J Reprod Immunol 
2013; 70: 347- 358. 
Prado -Drayer A, Teppa J, Sanchez P, Camejo MI. Immunophenotype of peripheral T lymphocytes, NK cells and 
expression of CD69 activation marker in patients with recurrent spontaneous abortions, during the mid -luteal 
phase. Am J Reprod Immunol 2008; 60: 66-74. [59] 
 
Quenby S, Kalumbi C, Bates M, Farquharson R, Vince G. Prednisolone reduces preconceptual endometrial natural 
killer cells in women with recurrent miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2005; 84: 980- 984. 
Quinn PA, Petric M. Anticomplementary activity in serum of women with a history of re current pregnancy loss. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 158: 368- 372. 
Sater MS, Finan RR, Al -Hammad SA, Mohammed FA, Issa AA, Almawi WY. High Frequency of anti -protein Z IgM 
and IgG autoantibodies in women with idiopathic recurrent spontaneous miscarriage. Am J R eprod Immunol 
2011; 65: 526- 531. 
Shakhar K, Ben -Eliyahu S, Loewenthal R, Rosenne E, Carp H. Differences in number and activity of peripheral 
natural killer cells in primary versus secondary recurrent miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2003; 80: 368- 375. 
Shakhar K, R osenne E, Loewenthal R, Shakhar G, Carp H, Ben -Eliyahu S. High NK cell activity in recurrent 
miscarriage: what are we really measuring? Hum Reprod 2006; 21: 2421- 2425. 
Sharshiner R, Romero ST, Bardsley TR, Branch DW, Silver RM. Celiac disease serum markers and recurrent 
pregnancy loss. J Reprod Immunol 2013; 100: 104- 108. 
Shimada S, Kato EH, Morikawa M, Iwabuchi K, Nishida R, Kishi R, Onoe K, Minakami H, Yamada H. No difference in natural killer or natural killer T- cell population, but aberrant T- helper cell population in the endometrium of 
women with repeated miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2004;
19: 1018- 1024. 
Souza SS, Ferriani RA, Santos CM, Voltarelli JC. Immunological evaluation of patients with recurrent abortion. J 
Reprod Immunol 2002; 56: 111- 121. 
Stern C, Cham ley L, Hale L, Kloss M, Speirs A, Baker HW. Antibodies to beta2 glycoprotein I are associated with in 
vitro fertilization implantation failure as well as recurrent miscarriage: results of a prevalence study. Fertil Steril 
1998; 70: 938- 944. 
Ticconi C, Roton di F, Veglia M, Pietropolli A, Bernardini S, Ria F, Caruso A, Di Simone N. Antinuclear autoantibodies 
in women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Am J Reprod Immunol 2010; 64: 384- 392. 
Tuckerman E, Laird SM, Prakash A, Li TC. Prognostic value of the measurement of uterine natural killer cells in the 
endometrium of women with recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2007; 22: 2208- 2213. 
Vargas RG, Bompeixe EP, Franca PP, Marques de Moraes M, da Graca Bicalho M. Activating killer cell immunoglobulin -like receptor genes' a ssociation with recurrent miscarriage. Am J Reprod Immunol 2009;
62: 34-
43. 
Varla -Leftherioti M, Spyropoulou -Vlachou M, Niokou D, Keramitsoglou T, Darlamitsou A, Tsekoura C, 
Papadimitropoulos M, Lepage V, Balafoutas C, Stavropoulos- Giokas C. Natural killer (NK) cell receptors' repertoire 
in couples with recurrent spontaneous abortions. Am J Reprod Immunol 2003; 49: 183- 191. 
Vassiliadou N, Bulmer JN. Immunohistochemical evidence for increased numbers of 'classic' CD57+ natural killer 
cells in the endometrium o f women suffering spontaneous early pregnancy loss. Hum Reprod 1996; 11: 1569-
1574. 
Wang Q, Li TC, Wu YP, Cocksedge KA, Fu YS, Kong QY, Yao SZ. Reappraisal of peripheral NK cells in women with recurrent miscarriage. Reprod Biomed Online 2008;
17: 814- 819. 
Wang X, Jiang W, Zhang D. Association of 14 -bp insertion/deletion polymorphism of HLA -G gene with unexplained 
recurrent spontaneous abortion: A meta -analysis Tissue Antigens . 2013, pp. 108 -115. 
Wilson R, Moore J, Jenkins C, Miller H, Maclean MA, McInnes IB, Walker JJ. Abnormal IL -2 receptor levels in non -
pregnant women with a history of recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2003; 18: 1529- 1530. 
Witt CS, Goodridge J, Gerbase -Delima MG, Daher S, Christiansen FT. Maternal KIR repertoire is not associated 
with recurre nt spontaneous abortion. Hum Reprod 2004; 19: 2653- 2657. 
Yamada H, Morikawa M, Kato EH, Shimada S, Kobashi G, Minakami H. Pre -conceptional natural killer cell activity 
and percentage as predictors of biochemical pregnancy and spontaneous abortion with normal chromosome 
karyotype. Am J Reprod Immunol 2003; 50: 351- 354. 
Yoo JH, Kwak -Kim J, Han AR, Ahn H, Cha SH, Koong MK, Kang IS, Yang KM. Peripheral blood NK cell cytotoxicities 
are negatively correlated with CD8(+) T cells in fertile women but not in women wit h a history of recurrent 
pregnancy loss. Am J Reprod Immunol 2012; 68: 38-46. 
Zhang B, Liu T, Wang Z. Association of tumor necrosis factor -alpha gene promoter polymorphisms ( -308G/A, -
238G/A) with recurrent spontaneous abortion: a meta -analysis. Hum Immunol 2012; 73: 574-579. 
 [60] 
 
7. Metabolic and endocrinologic factors 
KEY QUESTION: WHAT IS THE VALUE OF SCREENING FOR METAB OLIC/ENDOCRINOLOGICA L 
ABNORMALITIES IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF RPL? 
7.1 THYROID DYSFUNCTION 
Thyroid hormones are essential for fetal development. A r ecent review on the thyroid function and 
reproduction concluded that thyroid hormone disorders and increased Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) 
antibodies (TPO -Ab) are associated with disturbed folliculogenesis, spermatogenesis, fertilization and 
embryogenesis, supp orting a n important role for thyroid hormone dis orders and thyroid autoimmunity 
in subfertility and pregnancy loss (Vissenberg et al. , 2015 ). 
Evidence 
Hyperthyroidism 
Hyperthyroidism, most often Graves’ disease, is found in 0.1 -0.4% of pregnant women (Bahn et al. , 
2011 ). Those women have an increased risk of sever al pregnancy complications including sporadic 
preg nancy loss, pre -eclampsia, preterm delivery, and congestive heart failure. However, no studies 
were found that described or searched for an association between hyperthyroidism and recurrent 
pregnancy loss (RPL) . 
Hypothyroidism 
We did not identify any high quality studies on an association between overt hypothyroidism and RPL. 
One moderate quality study assessed of thyroid function in 163 non- pregnant women with a history of 
RPL and 170 age -matched controls. The prevalence of hypothyroidism, based on serum T3 
(triiodothyronine), T4 ( thyroxine ) and TSH (thyroid stimulating hormone ) levels, was higher in RPL 
women (4.29%) compared to the controls (0.61%), but there was no evidence for a difference in risk of 
RPL between 8 hypothyroid and 325 euthyroid women (OR 7.6 ; 95% CI 0.92 -62) (Rao et al. , 2008 , van 
den Boogaard et al. , 2011 ). 
Three studies investigated a possible association between subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) and RPL. In 
the cohort study of Bernardi and colleagues , 19% of 286 women with RPL (≥ 2 pregnancy losses <10 
weeks) showed subclinical hy pothyroidism, i .e. TSH >2.5 mIU/L with a normal free thyroxine or free 
thyroxine index. They detected a similar cumulative LBR in women with SCH and euthyroid women 
(27/39 (69%) versus 104/141 (74%)) (Bernardi et al. , 2013 ). Similar results were reported by van Dijk 
and colleagues who detected subclinical hypothyroidism in only 2.4% of 848 women with RPL and found 
no differences in live birth or miscarriage ra te between women with subclinical hypothyroidism and 
euthyroid women (van Dijk et al. , 2016 ). In the third study, subclinical hypothyroidism was detected in 
27% of 100 pregnant women with a history of RPL, which was similar to the prevalence in the control 
group of 100 pregnant women without a history of pregnancy loss (24%). In the RPL group, the incidence of subclinical hypothyroidism was significantly high er in the TPOAb positive group compared 
to the TPOAb negative group (52 vs 16%). There was no difference in the prevalence of miscarriage or 
obstetric outcomes between RPL and controls irrespective of TPO status (
Lata et al. , 2013 ). [61] 
 
Isolated hypothyroxin aemia 
Isolated hypothyroxin aemia is defined as a normal female TSH concentration in conjunction with FT4 
concentrations in the lower 5th or 10th percentile of th e reference range ( Stagnaro -Green et al. , 2011 ). 
Isolated hypothyroxinaemia (low Free T4) in pregnancy has been associated with an increased risk of 
obstetric complications and child neurocognitive impairment, although other studies reported no 
association (Lazarus et al. , 2014 ). A recent meta -analysis found an association of i solated 
hypothyroxina emia with placental abruption, but not with pregnancy loss ( Chan and Boelaert, 2015 ). 
Thyroid autoantibodies 
In women with RPL, thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies (TPOAb) are mostly studied, and shown to be 
more relevant than antibodies against the thyroid gland (Marai et al. , 2004 ). 
The prevalence of TPO Ab is 8 -14% in women of reproductive age. TPOAb predispose to hypothyroidism, 
but the majority of women having TPOAb is euthyroid. 
An association between TPOAb and RPL was found in a meta -analysis of 13 studies (3 cohort, 10 case -
control studies ). The odds of miscarriage with thyroid autoantibodies was increased for RPL women ( OR 
4.22; 95% CI 0.97- 18.44 ; 3 studies ; n=221 ). The reviewers noted that there was an unexplained 
heterogeneity in the analysis (I² =75%). Furthermore, they found an increase in the odds of miscarriage 
in RPL women with thyroid autoantibodies but normal thyroid function ( OR 1.86; 95% CI 1.18- 2.94; 10 
studies; n=2753 ) (Thangaratinam et al., 2011 ). Based on similar studies, another review also reported 
an association between the thyroid antibodies and increased risk of RPL (OR 2.3 ; 95% CI 1.5 -3.5) (van 
den Boogaard et al. , 2011 ). 
A more recent case- control study detected thyroid autoantibodies (anti -thyroglobulin (TGAb), TPOAb 
or anti-TSH receptor (TSHr -Ab) autoantibodies ) in 28.75% of 160 women with RPL and in 13% of 100 
women of the control group. There was no difference in the prevalence or titers of thyroid 
autoantibodies in women with two losses compared to those with three or more losses. Among the 
women of RPL group, 91.3% of women positive for thyroid autoantibodies were pos itive also for other 
autoantibodies (mostly ANA) , compared t o only 53.1% of RPL women without thyroid autoantibodies . 
Most of the women included in the study were euthyroid (96.3% of women with RPL and 93% of the controls) (Ticconi et al. , 2011
). 
In conclusion, a clear association between thyroid auto immunity and RPL has been found. 
Recommendation s 
Thyroid screening (TSH and TPO antibodies) is 
recommended in women with RPL . Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
 
Abnormal TSH and TPO -antibody levels should be followed 
up by T4 testing in women with RPL . Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
 [62] 
 
Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Hypothyroidism Only sporadic PL Only for 
sporadic PL Yes Supplementation 
of Levothyroxine 
Subclinical 
hypothyroidism Yes Yes No clear effect 
as of yet. Unknown if 
effective 
Hyperthyroidism No No No clear effect 
as of yet. Yes: 
Propylthiouracil 
TPO-antibodies Yes Yes Yes Need for 
treatment 
studies 
TG antibodies No Mostly detected 
combined with 
TPO antibodies Yes Need for 
treatment 
studies 
 
Based on a high prevalence of subclinical hypothyroidism and thyroid auto immunity in women with 
RPL and potential of treatment options testing for thyroid function is recommended. 
7.2 PCOS AND DISTURBANCES OF THE INSULIN METABOL ISM 
Evidence 
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) 
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is associated with several pregnancy complications, including 
gestational diabetes, pre -eclamptic toxemia , preg nancy -induced hypertension and probably pregnancy 
loss (Homburg, 2006 ). The uncertainty for an association between PCOS and pregnancy loss could be 
explained by several factors suggested to be associated with both PCOS and pregnancy loss, including 
obesity, hyperinsulinemia, LH hypersecretion, hyperandrogenism, and thrombophilia ( Homburg, 2006 , 
Kazerooni et al. , 2013 , Ke, 2014 ). 
In the cohort study of Sagle, PCOS was significantly more prevalent in 56 women with RPL had polycystic 
ovaries compared with 11 parous women (82% v ersu s 18%) (Sagle et al. , 1988 ) In the study by Watson, 
81% of the women showed PCO morpholog y compared to 10% of 10 multiparous controls (Watson et 
al., 1993 ). In another small study, no difference was found in the prevalence of PCOS morphology 
between 42 women with RPL and 18 fertile controls (16 .3% v ersu s 0%) (Okon et al. , 1998 ). 
In the cohort study of Rai, PCOS morphology was not predictive of live birth in women with RPL, live 
birth rate was 60.9% in women with PCOS and 58 .5% in women without PCOS (Rai et al. , 2000 ). Similar 
findings were reported in a smaller cohort study of 17 women with PCOS and 31 women without PCOS 
(Liddell et al. , 1997 ). 
Insulin metabolism 
Several markers for insulin metabolism have been asse ssed in women with RPL and controls, including 
fasting insulin (FI), fasting glucose (FG), the fasting glucose to insulin ratio (FG/FI), and insulin resistance 
(IR). Insulin resistance is a condition in which the efficacy of insulin in promoting the absorp tion and [63] 
 
utilization of glucose by organs, tissues, and cells is lower than normal. Individuals with IR show glucose 
levels that are either normal or high, and insulin levels that are more or no less than normal (Wang et 
al., 2011 ). Studies have used different definitions for Insulin resistance, including a fasting insulin level 
>20 µU/m l or a fasting glucose to insulin ratio of <4.5. The homeostatic model assess ment insulin 
resistance (HOMA -IR) index is a quantitative assessment of the contributions of insulin resistance and 
deficient β -cell function to the fasting hyperglycemia , calculated by comparing the patient's fasting 
values with the model's predictions. 
Insulin resistance, calculated via the HOMA -IR index, FI and FG were evaluated in 65 women with 
idiopathic RPL and 53 fertile controls with no pregnancy losses . HOMA -IR index (2.98 versus 2.69) and 
FI (15.24 versus 12.83) were significantly higher in the RPL patients, FG was significantly higher in the 
control group (85.6 versus 79.8) (Ispasoiu et al. , 2013 ). 
In the case -control study of Maryam, FG, FI, FG to FI ratio and IR were measured in 50 women with RP L 
and compared to 50 controls. The differences in the frequency of FG, FI and FG to FI ratio were not 
significantly different between women with RPL and controls. IR was detected in 24% of the women 
with RPL as compared to 8% of the control s (OR 3.6 ; 95% CI 1.1 -12.3) (Maryam et al. , 2012 ). 
In another case -control study, i nsulin resistance was also more prevalent in 74 women non -pregnant, 
nondiabe tic women with RPL as compared to 74 parous women with no RPL (27.0% v ersu s 9.5 %; OR 
2.55; 95% CI 1.40 -90.1). The groups had similar FG levels , FI levels and FG/FI ratios. (Craig et al., 2002 ). 
Another test used for glucose metabolism is the glucose tolerance test. The prevalence of an abnormal 
test result for the oral glucose tolerance test was higher in 164 women with RPL compared to 74 
controls who had prev iously at least two normal full term pregnancies (17.6% v ersu s 5.4%). Two women 
had a GTT result of more than 200 mg/ dl and were diagnosed with diabetes mellitus (Zolghadri et al., 
2008 ). Similarly, Wang and colleagues showed that the 1 -, 2-, and 3 -hour plasma glucose and insulin 
levels after OGTT (measured in early pregnancy) were significantly higher in women with RPL (more 
than 2 PLs) as compared to contr ols who were early in their pregnancy and who did not have a history 
of an unhealthy pregnancy (Wang et al., 2011 ). No statistically significant differences wer e found in the 
FG, FI, HOMA -IR, and HOMA - beta between the patient and control groups. 
PCOS and insulin metabolism 
A retrospective case- control study comparing the characteristics of RPL women with PCOS (n=126) and 
without PCOS (n=117) described significan tly higher BMI, LH/FSH ratio, post- prandial blood sugar, 
HOMA -IR and homocysteine levels in women with PCOS compared to those without PCOS. There was 
no difference in prolacti n, TSH, or FG (Chakraborty et al. , 2013 ). 
Another case -control study by Kazerooni compared several parameters in four groups of 60 women : 
PCOS with RPL, RPL without PCOS, PCOS without RPL, and women without RPL or PCOS. They found the 
highest levels for fasting insulin in women with PCOS and RPL; and significantly lower levels in all other 
groups. For the Quantitative Insulin Sensitivity Check Index (calculated 1/log(FI)+log(FG)), the lowest 
index was found in women with PCOS with RPL, with significantly higher levels in all other groups. There 
was no significant difference in fasting insulin or the Quantitative Insulin Sensitivity Check Index between women with RPL and without RPL (both without PCOS). For women with PCOS, FI was higher 
and the Quantitative Insulin Sensitivity Check Index was lower in women with RPL compared to those 
without RPL (Kazerooni et al. , 2013
). [64] 
 
A recent case -contr ol study found higher levels of maternal serum fructosamine (a marker of glycemic 
control) in women with RPL (n=117) as compared to controls, which could indicate an association 
between subclinical glucose intolerance and RPL, a lthough this needs confirmat ion (Romero et al. , 
2016 ). 
Recommendation 
Assessment of PCOS, fasting insulin and fasting glucose is not 
recommended in women with RPL to improve next 
pregnan cy prognosis . Strong ⊕⊕ 
Justification 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
PCOS YES YES NO Metformin for 
sporadic PL no 
studies for RPL 
Insulin resistance* YES ( OR 3.6 ) Unclear No studies No studies 
Fasting insulin Inconsistent 
(2 YES, 1 NO) Unclear No studies No studies 
Fasting glucose NO NO No studies No studies 
* IR calculated based on fasting insulin and fasting glucose 
 
Insulin resistance is shown to be more prevalent in women with a history of RPL than in women without 
RPL. The mechanism of how insulin resistance can result in pregnancy loss is unknown, and to our 
knowledge has not been described. In addition , we did not find any studies on the prognostic potential. 
7.3 PROLACTIN DEFICIENCY 
Prolactin is a hormone, essential to female reproduction. Prolactin may play an important role in 
maintaining corpus luteum function and progesterone secretion, although the mechanism is still 
unclear (Li et al. , 2013 ). 
Evidence 
One case- control study reported RPL to be associated with abnormalities in prolactin secretion during 
the follicular phase, after finding higher mean concentrations of prolactin in 42 non -pregnant women 
with a history of RPL as compared to 42 nulligravid females with tubal or male factor infertility without 
miscarriage (14.2 ±6.7 ng/ml versus 10.5 ±3.5 ng/ml ; 95% CI 0.8 -6.1) (Busse n et al. , 1999 ). 
In contrast, a recent cross -sectional descriptive study found no difference in basal serum prolactin 
(evaluated with the thyrotrophin- releasing hormone (TRH) test) in 69 women with RPL compared to 31 
women with primary infertility or 30 fertile women. Also the prevalence of hyperprolactinemia, defined [65] 
 
as basal serum prolactin ≥15 ng/m l was similar in RPL women (15/69 ; 21.7%) as compared to infertile 
women (13/31 ; 41.9%) and fertile controls (5/30 ; 16.7%) (Triggianese et al. , 2015 ). 
Li and colleagues found hyperprolactinemia in three of 174 women with unexplained RPL , the other 
women had prolactin levels within the normal range (<660 mIU/l ). In the same study, the prognostic 
potential of prolactin was evaluated in 109 RPL women; those who miscarried had significantly lower 
serum prolactin concentrations (adjusted OR 0.99 ; 95% CI 0.97 -0.99 after adjustment for age) 
compared to those who had a live birth. They concluded that lower basal serum prolactin 
concentrations were associated with an increased risk of miscarriage in a subsequent pregnancy in 
women with unexplained RPL (Li et al. , 2013 ). 
Prolactin levels are often measured for assessment of ovulatory dysfunction. 
Recommendation 
Prolactin testing is not recommended in women with RPL in 
the absence of clinical symptoms of hyperprolactinemia 
(olig o/amenorrhea) . Conditional ⊕⊕ 
Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Prolactin Inconsistent 
results No data Possible Yes 
 
Studies have been performed on serum and endometrial prolactin with the aim of clarifying the 
associ ation with RPL. However, most of the studies retrieved were of poor quality and many did not 
include a control group. It was concluded that in the absence of consistent evidence on an association 
between prolactin and RPL, prolactin testing is not routinel y recommended. 
Prolactin disorders are possibly associated with PCOS, luteal phase deficiency, stress and obesity, which 
further complicates studies attempting to find a direct link between prolactin and RPL. 
7.4 OVARIAN RESERVE TESTI NG 
Evidence 
From the association between advanced maternal age and RPL, it is suggested that diminished ovarian 
reserve could be a causative or prognostic factor in RPL. 
Ovarian reserve can be assessed with measurements of FSH, estrogen ( E2), inhibin B, and anti -Müllerian 
hormone (AMH), or ultrasound investigation to determine antral follicle count (AFC) and ovarian 
volume. 
In a recent cross -sectional study, ovarian reserve was assessed in 71 women with a history of 
unexplained RPL and compared with 70 age -matched fertile co ntrols. FSH levels were significantly 
higher in women with RPL as compared to controls (8.6 ±3.7 U/ l versu s 7.1 ±3.9 U/ l). The levels of AMH 
were significantly lower in the RPL group (2. 9±1.7 ng/ ml versus 3.6± 1.7 ng/ ml). The percentage of [66] 
 
women with diminish ed ovarian reserve (defined as levels of FSH ≥ 11 U/ l) was significantly higher in 
the RPL group (18.3% v ersus 4.3%), as was the percentage of women with levels of AMH ≤ 1 ng/ ml 
(19.7% v ersu s 5.7%). The levels of LH, FSH/LH ratios, and E2, the mean ovarian volume and AFC were 
similar between the groups ( Atasever et al., 2016 ). 
A cohort study compared the results of ovarian reserve tests (FSH and E2 on Day 3, FSH on Day 10, and 
clomiphene citrate challenge test (CCCT)) between 44 women with RPL and 648 infertile controls 
(without a history of RPL). Day 3 FSH was lower in women with RPL compared to the controls, while the 
results for the CCCT, E2 and FSH on D ay 10 were similar between the groups. The incidence of 
diminished ovarian reserve in women with RPL was 18%. Delivery rates after 1 -year follow- up were 
similar between the groups and poor in women with an abnormal CCCT test (0/8 RPL women and 5/117 
controls) (Hofmann et al. , 2000 ). Incidence of diminished ovarian reserve in RPL was 18%. 
In contrast, no difference was found in FSH levels, measured in early follicul ar phase, between 42 
women with RPL and 42 controls with male or tubal infertility (Bussen et al. , 1999 ). 
No difference for AMH, inhibin B, FSH, LH, E2 (day 2 -3) or FSH, LH, E2 and P (day 8 -9) was found in a 
study comparing 34 women with RPL (both explained and unexplained) with 10 controls with no history 
of pregnancy loss and a normal menstrual cycle ( Prakash et al. , 2006 ). 
Ovarian reserve in women with unexplained RPL has also been compared to ovarian reserve markers in 
women with explained RPL. The percentage of women with elevated FSH and/or estradiol levels 
significantly higher in the unexplained RPL as compared to explained RPL (Trout and Seifer, 2000 , 
Gurbuz et al., 2004 ). Another study found lower levels of AMH and estradiol on Day 3 -5 in women with 
unexplained RPL, with no difference in FSH and LH (Pils et al. , 2016 ). The relevance of these findings is 
unclear. 
Recommendation 
Ovarian reserve testing is not routinely recommended in 
women with RPL . Strong ⊕⊕ 
Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Ovarian reserve No evidence No data Abnormal CCCT 
= poor LBR No studies 
 
Several studies have attempted to evaluate ovarian reserve, but overall, there is insufficient evidence 
to claim an association between low ovarian reserve and RPL . Based on a single study, low ovarian 
reserve could be indicative of a less favorable prognosis in women with infertility and RPL. However, 
this study used the c lomiphene citrate challenge test (CCCT) which is not very sensitive and no longer 
commonly used. 
Even though there are no studies showing an associat ion between RPL (or miscarriage) and Premature 
Ovarian Insufficiency (POI), a proportion of women referred f or RPL show signs of POI. In case of a 
suspicion of POI, ovarian reserve testing can be used for diagnosis of POI and for estimating the future 
chan ces of a live birth for these couples . [67] 
 
7.5 LUTEAL PHASE INSUFFIC IENCY 
Luteal phase insufficiency is described as a condition of insufficient progesterone exposure to maintain 
a regular secretory endometrium and is allowed for normal embryo implantation an d growth (Palomba 
et al. , 2015 ). Progesterone is essential for secretory transformation of the endometrium that permits 
implantation as well as maintenance of early pregnancy. Luteal phase insufficiency can be caused by 
several endocrinopathies, including stress, PCOS, and prolactin disorders (Ke, 2014 ). 
Evidence 
The assessment of a possible association between luteal phase insufficiency and RPL is hampered by 
the diagnostic criteria for luteal phase insufficiency. The sensitivity and specificity of common clinical 
tests used for the diagnosis of luteal phase insufficiency were compared in 19 women with infertility or 
RPL and 15 normal controls. The recommended test for the determination of luteal phase insufficiency 
is a midluteal phas e single serum P rogesterone (P) level <10 ng/mL or the sum of three serum P levels 
that is <30 ng/m l. Timed endometrial biopsy (performed at late luteal phase) was found to have 
marginally acceptable sensitivity and specificity. Low sensitivity and/or spec ificity were found for the 
appearance of basal body temperature charts, luteal phase length ≤11 days, and preovulatory follicle 
diameter (Jordan et al. , 1994 ). Other authors have questioned midluteal phase progesterone level as 
the recommended test for luteal phase insufficiency, as secretion is pulsatile and levels vary significantly 
over a short amount of time ( Shah and Nagarajan, 2013 ). Salivary P assay was unable to diagnose LPD 
(Tulppala et al. , 1991 ) 
The frequenc y of luteal phase insufficiency as an etiologic factor has been assessed in uncontrolled 
studies. In a cohort study, a luteal phase defect, measured by endometrial biopsy, was detected in 
38.6% (32/83) of the women with RPL (Badawy and Westpfal, 2000 ). In a prospective cohort study, a 
luteal phase defect, defined as two late luteal phase endometrial biopsies with maturation delay of >3 
days, was detected in 17 .2% (34/197) of women with three or more consecutive and euploid PLs (<20 
weeks) (Stephenson, 1996 ). 
Despite the diagnostic problems and different tests available, research has attempted to assess a possible link between luteal phase insufficiency and RPL. Two out of th ree controlled studies of 
acceptable quality failed to confirm an association between luteal phase insufficiency and RPL. Jordan and colleagues found a luteal phase de fect, d efined as integrated P < 80 ng x days/ml, in one of three 
women with RPL and two of 15 (13%) normal controls (Jordan et al. , 1994
). Li and colleagues found a 
luteal phase defect, defined as midluteal P <30 nmol/L, in 27% of 122 women with RPL and in 11% of 
18 fertile controls (Li et al. , 2000 ). Balasch and colleagues fo und luteal phase insufficiency, diagnosed 
by endometrial biopsy, in 28 .3% of 60 women with RPL, which was significantly more than in controls 
(4% in 25 fertile women and 12 .9% in 355 infertile patients) (Balasch et al. , 1986 ). 
Finally, luteal phase insufficiency, defined as midluteal phase single serum P level < 10 ng/mL, was found to be not associated with the outcome of the next pregnancy. Of the 197 women wi th a history of two 
consecutive first trimester pregnancy losses, 38 (19.3%) suffered another pregnancy loss. There was no difference in the incidence of another PL between women without or with luteal phase deficiency 
(20.5% (31/151) and 15.2% (7/46), res pectively) (Ogasawara et al. , 1997
). [68] 
 
Recommendation 
Luteal phase insufficiency testing is not recommended in 
women with RPL . Strong ⊕⊕ 
Justification 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Luteal phase 
insufficiency testing* Inconsistent No data No possible 
* midluteal progesterone or endometrial biopsy 
Based on inconsistent evidence of an association, and no clear value for prognosis and treatment, the 
GDG decided not to recommend luteal phase insufficiency testing. The only study evidence for benefit 
of treatment of women with RPL and l uteal phase insufficiency was small, not designed to evaluate 
treatment, and used different treatments (Balasch et al. , 1986 ). 
7.6 ANDROGENS 
Elevated androgen levels are associated with the retardation of endometrial development in luteal 
phase, and have been assessed as a possible cause of (recurrent) pregnancy loss. 
Evidence 
Three case -control studies of acceptable quality show inconsistent results for an association of 
testosterone and RPL. Testosterone and androstenedione levels were significantly higher i n in 42 
women with RPL compared to 18 fertile controls without a history of RPL ( Okon et al. , 1998 ). Similarly, 
testosterone levels were significantly higher in 21 women with unexplained RPL compared to 10 
multiparous women (Watson et al. , 1993 ). However, in the study of Kazerooni, testosterone levels were 
not signif icantly different in 60 women with RPL and 60 healthy controls without a history of pregnancy 
loss (Kazerooni et al. , 2013 ). 
Two prognostic studies found n o association between testosterone levels and the pregnancy outcome 
(LBR) in the next pregnancy ( Rai et al. , 2000, Nardo et al. , 2002 ). 
One study showed a prognostic relevance for the free androgen index (FAI = testosterone*100/ sex hormone -binding globulin [SHBG]). An elevated FAI (>5) was detected in 49 of 437 women with RPL 
(11%). The miscarriage rate was s ignificantly increased in RPL women with elevated FAI as compared 
to women with normal FAI (68% [23/34] vs 40% [91/229]) (Cocksedge et al. , 2008
). 
Recommen dation 
Androgen testing is not recommended in women with RPL . Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
 [69] 

Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Androgens 
(Testosterone) Inconsistent 
(2 YES vs 1 NO) / No / 
Elevated FAI * / / Possible / 
*Free androgen in dex 
 
Based on inconsistent evidence of an association, and no potential effect on prognosis or treatment, 
androgen testing is not recommended. 
7.7 VITAMIN D 
Evidence 
Vitamin D deficiency has been studied extensively in relation to obstetric complications and was 
described as a risk factor for gestational diabetes, small for gestational age infants and preeclampsia in 
systematic reviews (Aghajafari et al. , 2013 ). 
Very few studies have assessed vitamin D in women with RPL and t he results for an association between 
vitamin D deficiency and pregnancy loss are less consistent. 
In a case -control study, e vidence for vitamin D deficiency (<30 ng/ml) was detected in 47.4% of 133 
women with RPL. In addition, decreased vitamin D level was associated with the increased prevalence 
of antiphospholipid antibody, antinuclear antigen antibody (ANA) , anti -ssDNA, and anti -thyro id 
peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) , and with higher peripheral blood CD19+ B and CD56+ NK cell levels and 
NK cytotoxicity ( Ota et al. , 2014 ). A recent stud y of the same research team suggest that vitamin D has 
immune regulatory effects on NK cell cytotoxicity, cytokine secretion and degranulation ( Ota et al. , 
2015 ). 
In an attempt to clarify the role for vitamin D in the complex immunoregulation at the fetal -maternal 
interface and the potential benefit of vitamin D supplementation in RPL, recent studies have explored 
differences in the expression of Vitamin D Recepto r and 25 -hydroxyvitamin D 3-1α-hydroxylase 
(CYP27B1) (mRNA and protein) in chorionic villi and decidua of women with RPL. They reported a lower 
expression of Vitamin D Receptor and 25 -hydroxyvitamin D 3-1α-hydroxylase in women with RPL 
compared with the normal pregnant women (Wang et al. , 2016 , Yan et al. , 2016 ). 
Conclusion 
Even though one study showed a significant prevalence of vitamin D deficiency in women with RPL, 
there are no indications that vitamin D status is a contributing factor for RPL. Moreover, vitamin D 
deficiency was shown to be associated with several obstetric and fetal complications, but there is no 
report of an association between vitamin D status and miscarriage, and hence testing of vitamin D [70] 
 
status is not recommended for women with RPL. Irrespective of RPL, vitamin D supplementation is 
nowadays frequently prescribed in pregnant women (see chapter 13.6 for more details ). 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Vitamin D Possible Possible / Vitamin D 
supplementation 
 
7.8 LUTEINIZING HORMONE (LH) 
High serum concentrations of luteinizing hormone ( LH) (≥10 IU/L) in the early to mid -follicular phase, 
with or without PCOS, have been associated with an increased prevalence of pregnancy loss in several reports, both after spontaneous conception and ART ( Kaur and Gupta, 2016
). 
Evidence 
An association between pre -pregnant elevated LH and pregnancy loss was found in a small 
observational study of 30 women with RPL and 17 women with at least one successful pregnanc y and 
no history of PL. Elevated LH serum (≥10 IU/ l) was found in nine (30%) women with RPL, compared to 
one (1.8%) of the controls. Furthermore, the live birth rate was significantly lower in women with 
elevated LH (2/6; 33%) compared to women with normal LH (15/16; 71%) (Regan et al. , 1990 ). 
In the comparative case -control study of Kazerooni, several parameters were assessed in four groups 
of 60 patients: PCOS with RPL, RPL without PCOS, PCOS without RPL, and women without RPL or PCOS. 
LH serum levels, FSH serum levels and LH/FSH ratio were significantly higher in women with RPL and 
PCOS as compared to women without RPL or PCOS, or women with RPL without PCOS. Serum levels 
were similar in women with RPL without PCOS and controls (women without RPL or PCOS), indicating 
an association of LH, FSH and LH/FSH with PCOS rather than with RPL (Kazerooni et al. , 2013 ). Similarly, 
no differences for LH (day 2 -3) or LH (day 8 -9) were found between 34 women with RPL (both explained 
and unexplained) and 10 controls with no h istory of pregnancy loss and a normal menstrual cycle 
(Prakash et al. , 2006 ). 
Urinary LH levels exceeding the normal range at one or more stages of the cycle were detected in 16 
of 21 (76%) women with RPL. The excessive secretion of LH in the pregnancy loss group was most 
marked in the early luteal phase (days +3 to +6 ), 249±135 IU/ l versus 126±62 in 10 multiparous women. 
Serum LH or FSH levels were not differ ent at either stage of the cycle ( Watson et al. , 1993 ). 
In the cohort study of Sagle, 46 (82%) of the 56 women with RPL had polycystic ovaries compared with 
two (18%) of the 11 parous women. None of the RPL women or controls showed elevated serum LH levels (Sagle et al. , 1988
). 
In contrast to the study o f Regan, no p rognostic potential for elevated LH was detected in two other 
studies. Rai and colleagues found no difference in the live birth rate for RPL women with elevated LH 
(≥10 IU/ l), compared to women with normal serum LH levels (72% [38/53] v ersu s 58% [252/433]) (Rai 
et al. , 2000 ). Similar results were found in a cohort of 37 women with RPL (LBR 39% v ersu s 42%) ( Carp 
et al. , 1995 ) [71] 
 
Recommendation 
LH testing is not routinely recommended in women with RPL Strong ⊕ 
Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Elevated LH (serum) Inconsistent 
(1 YES vs 3 NO) / Inconsistent 
(1 YES vs 2 NO) No studies 
 
There is inconsistent evidence, and therefor e it is not recommended to routine perform LH testing in 
women with RPL. 
7.9 HYPERHOMOCYSTEINEMIA 
Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) , defined as elevated plasma levels of homocysteine (Hcy) , is described 
as a risk factor for venous thromboembolism, and adverse p regnancy outcomes (neural tube defects, 
pre-eclampsia, and placental abruption). 
Plasma homocysteine levels are determined by several factors, including blood levels of vitamin B6, 
vitamin B12, folate, MTHFR mutations, increased age, and hypothyroidism (Hague, 2003 ), which have 
all been suggested to be associated with RPL . 
Evidence 
Hyperhomocystein emia was found to be associated with RPL. In a meta -analysis of case -control studies, 
and association was found between RPL and fasting plasma homocysteine (Hcy) levels (OR 2.7; 95% CI 
1.4-5.2; 3 studies ; n=652) and afterload Hcy (measured after methionine loading ) (OR 4.2; 95% CI 2.0-
8.8; 4 studies ; n=580) (Nelen et al. , 2000 ). 
Recent studies have reported conflicting results . In a small study, fasting total plasma Hcy levels were 
higher in 20 women with RPL (19.2 ± 6.14 μM ) and 20 women with unexplained infertility (21.05 ± 
8.78μM) compared to healthy controls ( 7.85 ± 3.31 μM; p<0.05). The same study reported similar levels 
of vitamin B12 and reduced folate concentrations in patients versus control s (D'Uva et al. , 2007 ). In a 
case -control study including 107 women with unexplained RPL and 343 fertile controls, HHcy was found 
to be significant risk factors for RPL (OR=7.02 ; 95% CI 3.85 -12.80 ). However, this st udy found also an 
association for vitamin B12 deficiency with RPL (OR 16.39 ; 95% CI 7.71 -34.80 ), while f olate deficiency 
was more common in controls (63.47%) as compared to the women with RPL (2.56%) (OR 0.015; 95% 
CI 0.0036 -0.064) (Puri et al. , 2013 ). 
In a large case -control study of postpartum patients who had a history of vascular -related pregnancy 
complications, 569 patients experienced recurrent early pregna ncy loss . Associations were detected of 
Hcy levels with pregnancy -induced hypertension, abruption placentae and Intrauterine growth 
retardation, but these associations were no longer significant after correction for time interval (between delivery and test ing) and maternal age (Steegers -Theunissen et al. , 2004
). In another case-
control study, no significant differences were observed neither in plasm a Hcy levels, red blood cell, [72] 
 
folate or vitamin B12 serum levels between 60 women with unexplained RP L and 30 healthy, fertile 
controls (Creus et al. , 2013 ). Similar results were reported by Zammiti and colleagues, concentrations 
of total plasma Hcy were comparable in 350 women with RPL and 200 healthy controls (10.80 ±7.94 
versus 8.72 ± 6.86 µmol/ml) (Zammiti et al. , 2008 ). Alonso and colleagues diagnosed 2 out of 75 women 
with RPL and HHcy without an MTHFR muta tion and without vitamin defects (vitamin B6, B12, and folic 
acid), while HHcy was not detected in 75 con trols (Alonso et al. , 2002 ). 
Also, no difference was detected in the prevalence of elevated Hcy levels (<12 µmol/l) when comparing 
women with primary versus se condary RPL (2.1% versus 3.0%), or when comparing women with 2Pls 
to women with 3 or more PLs (3.0% versus 1.3%) (Lee et al. , 2016 ) 
Hyperhomocysteinemia has also been suggested as a factor in the link between PCOS and RPL. Two 
recent studies reported that HHcy was associated with RPL in patients with PCOS. The incidence of HHcy 
was significantly higher in RPL -affected PCOS ( 70.63%, n=126) patients, compared to in women with 
RPL without PCOS ( 57.26%, n=117; p<0.04) (Chakraborty et al. , 2013 ). In the study of K azerooni, 
mentioned before, women with RPL and PCOS had si gnificantly higher levels of Hcy (12.4 ± 1.6; n=60) 
compared to women with PCOS and without RPL ( 7.3 ± 1.1; n=60), women with RPL and without PCOS 
(9.65 ± 0.9; n=60), and controls (6.7 ± 1.9; n=60) (Kazerooni et al. , 2013 ). In contrast, the prevalence of 
elevated Hcy levels was comparable between 92 women with RPL and PCOS (8.7%), compared to 92 women with RPL without PCOS (7.6%) (
Moini et al. , 2012 ) 
Finally, one case -control study explored paternal homocysteine levels, and reported an association 
between paternal HHcy and RPL with mean concentrations of 19.6 ± 9.5 µmol/l in 140 men of couples 
with RPL and 14.2 ± 7.4 µmol/l in 140 fathers of healthy controls couples (OR 6.92; 95% CI 3.90 –12.29) . 
The risk of RP L associated with paternal HHcy could be due to its effect on sperm quality by increasing 
DNA damage (Govindaiah et al. , 2009 ). 
Recommendation 
Measurement of homocysteine plasma levels i s not routinely 
recommended in women with RPL . Strong ⊕ 
Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Hyperhomo -
cysteinemia Inconsistent Possible in PCOS No data (high -dose ) folic 
acid and vit B6 
 
LMWH + aspirin 
 
There is inconsistent evidence for an association of elevated Hcy levels with RPL. The imp act of 
pregnancy and several lifestyle factors (vitamin intake and deficiency (vitamin B6, B12, folate), smoking, 
coffee and alcohol consumption, physical activity) on plasma Hcy levels further complicates research 
on the topic. Furthermore, we realize tha t there is a geographical and ethnic variation in the genetic 
pathways of the homocysteine metabolism (Wilcken et al. , 2003 , Binia et al. , 2014 ). [73] 
 
References 
Aghajafari F, Nagulesapillai T, Ronksley PE, Tough SC, O'Beirne M, Rabi DM. Association between maternal serum 
25-hydroxyvitamin D level and pregnancy and neonatal outcomes: systematic review and meta -analysis of 
observational studies. Bmj 2013; 346: f1169. 
Alonso A, Soto I, Urgelles MF, Corte JR, Rodriguez MJ, Pinto CR. Acquired and inherited thrombophilia in women with unexplained fetal losses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;
187: 1337- 1342. 
Atasever M, Soyman Z, Demirel E, Gencdal S, Kelekci S. Diminished ovarian reserve: is it a neglected cause in the assessment of recurrent miscarriage? A cohort study. Fertil Steril 2016;
105: 1236- 1240. 
Badawy SZ, Westpfal EM. Frequency of etiolo gical factors and cost effectiveness of the work up for patients with 
history of recurrent pregnancy loss. Early Pregnancy 2000; 4: 253- 260. 
Bahn RS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, Garber JR, Greenlee MC, Klein I, Laurberg P, McDougall IR, Montori VM, Rivkees 
SA et al. Hyperthyroidism and other causes of thyrotoxicosis: management guidelines of the American Thyroid 
Association and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. Endocr Pract 2011; 17: 456- 520. 
Balasch J, Creus M, Marquez M, Burzaco I, Vanrell JA. The significance of luteal phase deficiency on fertility: a 
diagnostic and therapeutic approach. Hum Reprod 1986; 1: 145-147. 
Bernardi LA, Cohen RN, Stephenson MD. Impact of subclinical hypothyroidism in women with recurrent early 
pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2013; 100: 1326- 1331. 
Binia A, Contreras AV, Canizales -Quinteros S, Alonzo VA, Tejero ME, Silva -Zolezzi I. Geographical and ethnic 
distribution of single nucleotide polymorphisms within genes of the folate/homocysteine pathway metabolism. 
Genes Nutr 2014; 9: 421. 
Bussen S, Sutterlin M, Steck T. Endocrine abnormalities during the follicular phase in women with recurrent 
spontaneous abortion. Hum Reprod 1999; 14: 18-20. 
Carp HJ, Hass Y, Dolicky M, Goldenberg M, Mashiach S, Rabinovici J. The effect of serum foll icular phase luteinizing 
hormone concentrations in habitual abortion: correlation with results of paternal leukocyte immunization. Hum 
Reprod 1995; 10: 1702- 1705. 
Chakraborty P, Goswami SK, Rajani S, Sharma S, Kabir SN, Chakravarty B, Jana K. Recurrent preg nancy loss in 
polycystic ovary syndrome: role of hyperhomocysteinemia and insulin resistance. PLoS One 2013; 8: e64446. 
Chan S, Boelaert K. Optimal management of hypothyroidism, hypothyroxinaemia and euthyroid TPO antibody positivity preconception and in pr egnancy. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2015;
82: 313- 326. 
Cocksedge KA, Saravelos SH, Wang Q, Tuckerman E, Laird SM, Li TC. Does free androgen index predict subsequent pregnancy outcome in women with recurrent miscarriage? Hum Reprod 2008;
23: 797- 802. 
Craig LB, Ke RW, Kutteh WH. Increased prevalence of insulin resistance in women with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2002;
78: 487- 490. 
Creus M, Deulofeu R, Penarrubia J, Carmona F, Balasch J. Plasma homocysteine and vitamin B12 serum levels, red 
blood cell folate concentrations, C677T methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene mutation and risk of recurrent 
miscarriage: a case -control study in Spain. Clin Chem Lab Med 2013; 51: 693- 699. 
D'Uva M, Di Micco P, Strina I, Alviggi C, Iannuzzo M, Ranieri A, M ollo A, De Placido G. Hyperhomocysteinemia in 
women with unexplained sterility or recurrent early pregnancy loss from Southern Italy: a preliminary report. 
Thromb J 2007; 5: 10. 
Govindaiah V, Naushad SM, Prabhakara K, Krishna PC, Radha Rama Devi A. Associat ion of parental 
hyperhomocysteinemia and C677T Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) polymorphism with recurrent 
pregnancy loss. Clin Biochem 2009; 42: 380- 386. 
Gurbuz B, Yalti S, Ozden S, Ficicioglu C. High basal estradiol level and FSH/LH ratio in unexplained recurrent 
pregnancy loss. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2004; 270: 37-39. 
Hague WM. Homocysteine and pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2003; 17: 459-469. 
Hofmann GE, Khoury J, Thie J. Recurrent pregnancy loss and diminished ovarian reserve. Fe rtil Steril 2000; 74: 
1192- 1195. 
Homburg R. Pregnancy complications in PCOS. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006; 20: 281- 292. 
Ispasoiu CA, Chicea R, Stamatian FV, Ispasoiu F. High fasting insulin levels and insulin resistance may be linked to 
idiopath ic recurrent pregnancy loss: a case -control study. Int J Endocrinol 2013; 2013: 576926. 
Jordan J, Craig K, Clifton DK, Soules MR. Luteal phase defect: the sensitivity and specificity of diagnostic methods in common clinical use. Fertil Steril 1994;
62: 54-62. [74] 
 
Kaur R, Gupta K. Endocrine dysfunction and recurrent spontaneous abortion: An overview. Int J Appl Basic Med 
Res 2016; 6: 79-83. 
Kazerooni T, Ghaffarpasand F, Asadi N, Dehkhoda Z, Dehghankhalili M, Kazerooni Y. Correlation between 
thrombophilia and recurr ent pregnancy loss in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome: a comparative study. J 
Chin Med Assoc 2013; 76: 282- 288. 
Ke RW. Endocrine basis for recurrent pregnancy loss. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2014; 41: 103- 112. 
Lata K, Dutta P, Sridhar S, Rohilla M , Srinivasan A, Prashad GR, Shah VN, Bhansali A. Thyroid autoimmunity and 
obstetric outcomes in women with recurrent miscarriage: a case -control study. Endocr Connect 2013; 2: 118- 124. 
Lazarus J, Brown RS, Daumerie C, Hubalewska- Dydejczyk A, Negro R, Vaidya B. 2014 European thyroid association 
guidelines for the management of subclinical hypothyroidism in pregnancy and in children. Eur Thyroid J 2014; 3: 
76-94. 
Lee GS, Park JC, Rhee JH, Kim JI. Etiologic characteristics and index pregnancy outcomes of recurre nt pregnancy 
losses in Korean women. Obstet Gynecol Sci 2016; 59: 379- 387. 
Li TC, Spuijbroek MD, Tuckerman E, Anstie B, Loxley M, Laird S. Endocrinological and endometrial factors in 
recurrent miscarriage. Bjog 2000; 107: 1471- 1479. 
Li W, Ma N, Laird SM, Led ger WL, Li TC. The relationship between serum prolactin concentration and pregnancy 
outcome in women with unexplained recurrent miscarriage. J Obstet Gynaecol 2013; 33: 285- 288. 
Liddell HS, Sowden K, Farquhar CM. Recurrent miscarriage: screening for polycystic ovaries and subsequent pregnancy outcome. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 1997;
37: 402-406. 
Marai I, Carp H, Shai S, Shabo R, Fishman G, Shoenfeld Y. Autoantibody panel screening in recurrent miscarriages. Am J Reprod Immunol 2004;
51: 235- 240. 
Maryam K, Bou zari Z, Basirat Z, Kashifard M, Zadeh MZ. The comparison of insulin resistance frequency in patients 
with recurrent early pregnancy loss to normal individuals. BMC Res Notes 2012; 5: 133. 
Moini A, Tadayon S, Tehranian A, Yeganeh LM, Akhoond MR, Yazdi RS. As sociation of thrombophilia and polycystic 
ovarian syndrome in women with history of recurrent pregnancy loss. Gynecol Endocrinol 2012; 28: 590- 593. 
Nardo LG, Rai R, Backos M, El -Gaddal S, Regan L. High serum luteinizing hormone and testosterone concentratio ns 
do not predict pregnancy outcome in women with recurrent miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2002; 77: 348- 352. 
Nelen WL, Blom HJ, Steegers EA, den Heijer M, Eskes TK. Hyperhomocysteinemia and recurrent early pregnancy 
loss: a meta- analysis. Fertil Steril 2000; 74: 1196- 1199. 
Ogasawara M, Kajiura S, Katano K, Aoyama T, Aoki K. Are serum progesterone levels predictive of recurrent miscarriage in future pregnancies? Fertil Steril 1997;
68: 806- 809. 
Okon MA, Laird SM, Tuckerman EM, Li TC. Serum androgen levels in women who have recurrent miscarriages and 
their correlation with markers of endometrial function. Fertil Steril 1998; 69: 682- 690. 
Ota K, Dambaeva S, Han AR, Beaman K, Gilman -Sachs A, Kwak -Kim J. Vitamin D deficiency may be a risk factor for 
recurrent pregnancy losses by increasing cellular immunity and autoimmunity. Hum Reprod 2014; 29: 208- 219. 
Ota K, Dambaeva S, Kim MW, Han AR, Fukui A, Gilman -Sachs A, Beaman K, Kwak -Kim J. 1,25 -Dihydroxy -vitamin 
D3 regulates NK -cell cytotoxicity, cytokine secretion, and degran ulation in women with recurrent pregnancy 
losses. Eur J Immunol 2015; 45: 3188- 3199. 
Palomba S, Santagni S, La Sala GB. Progesterone administration for luteal phase deficiency in human reproduction: an old or new issue? J Ovarian Res 2015;
8: 77. 
Pils S, Pro mberger R, Springer S, Joura E, Ott J. Decreased Ovarian Reserve Predicts Inexplicability of Recurrent 
Miscarriage? A Retrospective Analysis. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0161606. 
Prakash A, Li TC, Laird S, Nargund G, Ledger WL. Absence of follicular phase defect in women with recurrent 
miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2006; 85: 1784- 1790. 
Puri M, Kaur L, Walia GK, Mukhopadhhyay R, Sachdeva MP, Trivedi SS, Ghosh PK, Saraswathy KN. MTHFR C677T polymorphism, folate, vitamin B12 and homocysteine in recurrent pregnancy losses: a case control study among North Indian women. J Perinat Med 2013;
41: 549- 554. 
Rai R, Backos M, Rushworth F, Regan L. Polycystic ovaries and recurrent miscarriage --a reappraisal. Hum Reprod 
2000; 15: 612- 615. 
Rao VR, Lakshmi A, Sadhnani MD. Prevalence of hy pothyroidism in recurrent pregnancy loss in first trimester. 
Indian J Med Sci 2008; 62: 357- 361. 
Regan L, Owen EJ, Jacobs HS. Hypersecretion of luteinising hormone, infertility, and miscarriage. Lancet 1990; 336: 
1141- 1144. [75] 
 
Romero ST, Sharshiner R, Stoddard GJ, Ware Branch D, Silver RM. Correlation of serum fructosamine and 
recurrent pregnancy loss: Case -control study. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2016; 42: 763- 768. 
Sagle M, Bishop K, Ridley N, Alexander FM, Michel M, Bonney RC, Beard RW, Franks S. Recurrent early mi scarriage 
and polycystic ovaries. Bmj 1988; 297: 1027- 1028. 
Shah D, Nagarajan N. Luteal insufficiency in first trimester. Indian J Endocrinol Metab 2013; 17: 44-49. 
Stagnaro -Green A, Abalovich M, Alexander E, Azizi F, Mestman J, Negro R, Nixon A, Pearce EN, Soldin OP, Sullivan 
S. Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the diagnosis and management of thyroid disease during 
pregnancy and postpartum. Thyroid 2011; 21: 1081- 1125. 
Steegers -Theunissen RP, Van Iersel CA, Peer PG, Nelen WL, Steegers EA. Hyperhomocysteinemia, pregnancy 
complications, and the timing of investigation. Obstet Gynecol 2004; 104: 336- 343. 
Stephenson MD. Frequency of factors associated with habitual abortion in 197 couples. Fertil Steril 1996; 66: 24-
29. 
Thangaratinam S, Tan A, Knox E, Kilby MD, Franklyn J, Coomarasamy A. Association between thyroid 
autoantibodies and miscarriage and preterm birth: meta- analysis of evidence. Bmj 2011; 342: d2616. 
Ticconi C, Giuliani E, Veglia M, Pietropolli A, Piccione E, Di Simone N. Thyroid autoimmu nity and recurrent 
miscarriage. Am J Reprod Immunol 2011; 66: 452- 459. 
Triggianese P, Perricone C, Perricone R, De Carolis C. Prolactin and natural killer cells: evaluating the neuroendocrine -immune axis in women with primary infertility and recurrent spont aneous abortion. Am J Reprod 
Immunol 2015;
73: 56-65. 
Trout SW, Seifer DB. Do women with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss have higher day 3 serum FSH and estradiol values? Fertil Steril 2000;
74: 335- 337. 
Tulppala M, Bjorses UM, Stenman UH, Wahlstrom T, Ylikorkala O. Luteal phase defect in habitual abortion: progesterone in saliva. 
Fertil Steril 1991; 56: 41-44. 
van den Boogaard E, Vissenberg R, Land JA, van Wely M, van der Post JA, Goddijn M, Bisschop PH. Significance of (sub)clinical thyroid dysfunction and thyroid autoimmunity before conception and in early pregnancy: a 
systematic review. 
Hum Reprod Update 2011; 17: 605- 619. 
van Dijk MM, Vissenberg R, Bisschop PH, Dawood F, van Wely M, Goddijn M, Farquharson RG. Is subclinical hypothyroidism associated wi th lower live birth rates in women who have experienced unexplained recurrent 
miscarriage? 
Reprod Biomed Online 2016; 33: 745- 751. 
Vissenberg R, Manders VD, Mastenbroek S, Fliers E, Afink GB, Ris- Stalpers C, Goddijn M, Bisschop PH. 
Pathophysiological aspect s of thyroid hormone disorders/thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies and reproduction. 
Hum Reprod Update 2015; 21: 378- 387. 
Wang LQ, Yan XT, Yan CF, Zhang XW, Hui LY, Xue M, Yu XW. Women with Recurrent Miscarriage Have Decreased 
Expression of 25 -Hydroxyvitamin D3-1alpha -Hydroxylase by the Fetal -Maternal Interface. PLoS One 2016; 11: 
e0165589. 
Wang Y, Zhao H, Li Y, Zhang J, Tan J, Liu Y. Relationship between recurrent miscarriage and insulin resistance. 
Gynecol Obstet Invest 2011; 72: 245- 251. 
Watson H, Kiddy DS, H amilton -Fairley D, Scanlon MJ, Barnard C, Collins WP, Bonney RC, Franks S. Hypersecretion 
of luteinizing hormone and ovarian steroids in women with recurrent early miscarriage. Hum Reprod 1993; 8: 829-
833. 
Wilcken B, Bamforth F, Li Z, Zhu H, Ritvanen A, Ren lund M, Stoll C, Alembik Y, Dott B, Czeizel AE et al. Geographical 
and ethnic variation of the 677C>T allele of 5,10 methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR): findings from 
over 7000 newborns from 16 areas world wide. J Med Genet 2003; 40: 619- 625. 
Yan X , Wang L, Yan C, Zhang X, Hui L, Sheng Q, Xue M, Yu X. Decreased expression of the vitamin D receptor in 
women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Arch Biochem Biophys 2016; 606: 128- 133. 
Zammiti W, Mtiraoui N, Mahjoub T. Lack of consistent association between e ndothelial nitric oxide synthase gene 
polymorphisms, homocysteine levels and recurrent pregnancy loss in tunisian women. Am J Reprod Immunol 
2008; 59: 139- 145. 
Zolghadri J, Tavana Z, Kazerooni T, Soveid M, Taghieh M. Relationship between abnormal glucose to lerance test 
and history of previous recurrent miscarriages, and beneficial effect of metformin in these patients: a prospective clinical study. Fertil Steril 2008;
90: 727- 730. 
 [76] 
 
8. Anatomical investigations 
KEY QUESTION: WHAT IS THE VALUE OF ANATOMICAL INV ESTIGATIONS IN THE D IAGNOSIS OF 
RPL? 
8.1 CONGENITAL UTERINE MALFORMATIONS 
Evidence 
An association between congenital uterine malformations and recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) has been 
well documented, but the exact prevalence in this population has not bee n clearly defined ( Saravelos 
et al. , 2008 ). Potentially relevant congenital Müllerian tract malformations include septate uterus, 
bicorporeal uterus with n ormal cervix (AFS bicornuate uterus), bicorporeal uterus with double cervix 
(AFS didelphic uterus) and hemi -uterus (AFS unicornuate uterus) . The prevalence of uterine 
malformations is higher in women having a history of RPL (13.3 %; 95% CI 8.9 -20) than in t he 
general/fertile population (5.5 %; 95% CI 3.5 -8.5). The prevalence of uterine malformations diagnosed 
with optimal test was similar in women with three or more losses (15.4 %; 95% CI 10.3 - 23) compared 
to women wi th two or more losses (10.9 %; 95% CI 3.6 -33.3) (Saravelos et al. , 2008 , Chan et al. , 2011b ). 
Recent systematic reviews have also reported a hig her prevalence of miscarriage in women with 
congenital uterine malformations compared to controls ( Chan et al. , 2011a , Venetis et al. , 2014 ). In a 
meta -analysis of comparative studies, women with septate uterus (RR 2.65, 95% CI 1.39 -5.09, based on 
6 studies, I²=93%) and bicornuate uterus (RR 2.32, 95% CI 1.05 -5.13, I²=87%) had an increased 
probability of fir st-trimeste r PL, compared to their controls. Women with arcuate uterus (RR 2.27, 95% 
CI 0.64 -7.96, based in 4 studies, I²=0%), septate uterus (RR 2.95, 95% CI 1. 51-5.77 , based on 5 studies, 
I²=39%) and bicornuate uterus (RR 2.90 , 95% CI 1. 56-5.41, based on 4 studies, I²=0%) had an increased 
probability of second -trimested PL, compared to their controls (Venetis et al. , 2014 ). 
Diagnosis of congenital uterine malformations 
Based on the higher prevalence of uterine malformations in women with RPL, diagnostic imaging of the 
uterus can be considered in women with RPL (primary or secondary) ( Jaslow and Kutteh, 2013 ). 
Imaging for detection of uterine malformations has been performed with a range of different techniques, all with different potential and limitations for diagnosing the various types of 
malformations . An ESH RE consensus for diagnosis of congenital uterine malformations was recently 
published (Grimbizis et al. , 2016
). 
In the review by Saravelos, combined hystero scopy and laparoscopy have been considered the gold 
standard in diagnosing uterine malformations, because they allow for a direct visualization of the internal and external contour of the uterus (Saravelos et al. , 2008
). The main disadvantage of 
hysteroscopy is the invasiveness of the procedure, although nowadays it can be performed in an office 
setting under local anesthetics . 
Sonohysterography (or hysteros onography) (SHG) appears a safe procedure which provides more 
information about uterine abnormalities than hysterosalpingography (HSG) or ultrasound ( US) alone 
(Tur-Kaspa et al. , 2006 ). SHG is accurate in diagnosing and classifying congenital uterine malformations 
(Ventolini et al. , 2004 , Valenzano et al. , 2006 ). In addition , SHG has a higher sensitivity and specificity [77] 
 
than HSG or diagnostic hysteroscopy to diagnose uterine malformations in general ( Ludwin et al. , 2011 ). 
SHG uses the introduction of fluid (saline or contrast ) into the uterine cavity to enhance US imaging 
studies, which could be uncomfortable for women . The diagnosis of septate uterus by SH G eliminates 
the need to perform laparoscopy prior to hysteroscopic metroplasty (Ludwin et al. , 2011 ). 
Three- dimensional US allows visualization of the inter nal and external contour of the uterus, has high 
sensitivity and specificity, and it is non -invasive (Saravelos et al. , 2008 , Caliskan et al. , 2010 ). It appears 
to be very accurate for the diagnosis and classification of congenital uterine malformations and may 
conveniently become the only mandatory step in the assessment of the uterine cavity in women with 
a history of RPL , although further studies are required for confirmation (Ghi et al. , 2009 ). 
Two -dimensional US and hysterosalpingography (HSG) are non -invasive and widely available. Two -
dimensional US has a low sensitivity, but a high specificity for diagnosis of malformations. HSG has a 
good sensitivity for diagnosing more pronounced uterine malformations , but it is limited in 
differentiating between the ty pes of malformations ( Saravelos et al. , 2008 ). Overall, 2D transvaginal 
ultrasound (TV -US) and HSG are suboptimal to diagnose uterine malformations, based on a poor 
accuracy and limited potential in classifying malformations, especially when used in isolation ( Saravelos 
et al. , 2008 ). We found no data on diff erences between contrasts (gel and saline) used during 
ultrasound. 
Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI) has been proposed as an optimal test that allows a simultaneous 
assessment of the cavity and fundus of the uterus, although controversy exist in whether MR I can 
replace combined hysteroscopy and laparoscopy (Chan et al. , 2011b ). The accuracy and practicality of 
MRI has not yet been determined for the diagnosis of uterine malformations ( Oppelt et al. , 2007 , 
Saravelos et al. , 2008 ). MRI can be used to extend the e xamination to the abdomen, which could be 
helpful in the detecting renal malformations that are frequently associated with uterine malformations 
(Oppelt et al. , 2007, Hall-Craggs et al. , 2013 ). 
Sono -Embryoscopy and Uterine Doppler US have been suggested for the investigation of uterine 
malformations in women with RPL, but there is not enough evidence to support these techniques in 
the routine investigation of RPL (Frates et al. , 1996 , Ferreira et al. , 2007, Robberecht et al. , 2012 ). 
Cervical weakness is a recognized cause of second -trimester pregnancy loss , but the true incidence is 
unknown, since the diagnosis is essentially a clinical one (Kassanos et al. , 2001 , Harger, 2002, Liddell 
and Lo, 2008 ). The diagnosis is usually based on a history of second -trimester miscarriage preceded by 
spontaneous rupture of membranes or painless cervical dilatation. There is currently no objective test able to identify women with cervical weakness in the non- pregnant state. 
8.2 ACQUIRED UTERINE MALFORMATIONS 
Acquired uterine malformations ( submucous myomas, endometrial polyps and uterine adhesions ) have 
been found prevalent in women that suffered pregnancy loss, but the clinical relevance is unclear 
(Hooker et al. , 2014 ). 
In a study of Jaslow, a cquired defects were found in 113 women with RPL (12.9%), congenital defects 
in 61 women (7.0%), and 5 women (0.6% ) had both congenital and acquired defects (Jaslow and Kutteh, 
2013 ). Saravelos and colleagues reported fibroids in 8.2% (79/966) of women with RPL (Saravelos et al. , 
2011 ). [78] 
 
Diagnosis of acquired uterine malformations 
Although the relevance of acquired uterine malformations in RPL is unclear, these malformation s can 
be diagnosed with imaging techniques used in the detection of congenital malformations. 
2D US is not a sensitive method to detect uterine adhesions . When suspected, a hysteroscopy has to 
be performed ( Bohlmann et al. , 2010 ) 
Submucosal fibroids and endometrial polyps can be detected with 3D US, SHG , 2D US , or HSG . There is 
no strong evidence on which technique is preferred . Hysteroscopy is considered the gold standard 
(Makris et al. , 2007 ). 
Recommendations 
All women with RPL should have an assessment of the 
uterine anatomy. Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
The preferred techni que to evaluate the uterus is 
transvaginal 3D US, which has a high sensitivity and 
specificity, and can distinguish between septate uterus and 
bicorporeal uterus with normal cervix (former AFS 
bicornuate uterus ). Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
Sonohysterography (SHG) is more accurate than HSG in 
diagnosing uterine malformations. It can be used to 
evaluate uterine morphology when 3D US is not available, or 
when tubal patency has to be investigated. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
If a Müllerian uterine malformation is diagnosed , further 
investigation (including investigation of the kidneys and 
urinary tract ) should be considered . Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
MRI is not recommended as first line option for the 
assessment of uterine malformations in women with RPL, but 
can be used where 3D US i s not available. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
Justificat ion 
From the evidence, it can be concluded that congenital uterine malformations are more prevalent in 
women with RPL, as compared to controls. However, the exact contribution that congenital uterine 
malformations make to RPL remains unclear; the reported variability in the prevalence reflects the 
differences in the diagnostic criteria and techniques, and the lack of homogeneity in the definition of [79] 
 
RPL. For acquired uterine malformations, there is no convincin g evidence that these malformations are 
associated with or contribute to RPL. 
 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Congenital uterine 
malformations Yes Suggested some 
malformations / Surgical trials in 
case of a 
septate uterus 
Acquired uterine 
malformations Unclear Unclear / Unclear 
 
The recommendation of uterine assessment in all women with RPL is consistent with the Thessaloniki 
ESHRE/ESGE consensus on diagnosis of female genital malformations , which classifies women with RPL 
as ‘high risk’ for the presence of a female genital anomaly ( Grimbizis et al. , 2016 ). Transvaginal 3D 
Ultrasound was reported to have the highest sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing congenital 
malformations. Based on the higher costs and the absence of a diagnosti c benefit compared to 3D US, 
MRI is not recommended as a first line option, but it can be used in the absence of 3D US , and for 
surgical planning . Apart from availability, local expertise could be relevant in selecting the diagnostic 
approach, as most tech niques are highly dependent on operator skills. 
Data from well -controlled prospective trials are needed to clarify the role of congenital uterine 
malformations in RPL and predict live birth rates per type of congenital uterine abnormality. Executing 
such studies is further complicated by difficulties to recruit a high number of eligible patients in a short 
period of time. 
In a study of 202 women with uterine malformations (not RPL), 36% of the women had associated 
abnormalities, mostly renal, but also card iac, skeleton and neurological abnormalities were detected 
(Oppelt et al. , 2007 ). Another recent study suggest ultrasound for screening and MRI or CT (computed 
tomography) scan for confirmation of congenital malformations of the kidneys and upper urinary trac t 
(Ramanathan et al. , 2016 ). Based on the high prevalence, further investigations should be considered 
in women with uterine malformations. 
References 
Bohlmann MK, von Wolff M, Luedders DW, Beuter -Winkler P, Diedrich K, Hornemann A, Strowitzki T. 
Hysteroscopic findings in women with two and with more than two first -trimester miscarriages are not 
significantly different. Reprod Biomed Online 2010; 21: 230- 236. 
Caliskan E, Ozkan S, Cakiroglu Y, Sarisoy HT, Corakci A, Ozeren S. Diagnostic accuracy of real- time 3D sonography 
in the diagnosis of congenital Mullerian anomalies in high -risk patients with respect to the phase of the mens trual 
cycle. J Clin Ultrasound 2010; 38: 123- 127. 
Chan YY, Jayaprakasan K, Tan A, Thornton JG, Coomarasamy A, Raine -Fenning NJ. Reproductive outcomes in 
women with congenital uterine anomalies: a systematic review. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2011a; 38: 371- 382. 
Chan YY, Jayaprakasan K, Zamora J, Thornton JG, Raine -Fenning N, Coomarasamy A. The prevalence of congenital 
uterine anomalies in unselected and high -risk populations: a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update 2011b; 17: 
761- 771. 
Ferreira AM, Pires CR, Moro n AF, Araujo Junior E, Traina E, Mattar R. Doppler assessment of uterine blood flow in 
recurrent pregnancy loss. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2007; 98: 115-119. [80] 
 
Frates MC, Doubilet PM, Brown DL, Benson CB, DiSalvo DN, Laing FC, Berck DJ, Hill JA. Role of Doppler 
ultrasonography in the prediction of pregnancy outcome in women with recurrent spontaneous abortion. J 
Ultrasound Med 1996; 15: 557- 562. 
Ghi T, Casadio P, Kuleva M, Perrone AM, Savelli L, Giunchi S, Meriggiola MC, Gubbini G, Pilu G, Pelusi C et al. 
Accuracy of three -dimensional ultrasound in diagnosis and classification of congenital uterine anomalies. Fertil 
Steril 2009; 92: 808- 813. 
Grimbizis GF, Di Spiezio Sardo A, Saravelos SH, Gordts S, Exacoustos C, Van Schoubroeck D, Bermejo C, Amso NN, 
Nargund G, Timme rman D et al. The Thessaloniki ESHRE/ESGE consensus on diagnosis of female genital 
anomalies. Hum Reprod 2016; 31: 2-7. and Gynecol Surg 2016;2013: 2011- 2016. 
Hall-Craggs MA, Kirkham A, Creighton SM. Renal and urological abnormalities occurring with Mulleri an anomalies. 
J Pediatr Urol 2013; 9: 27-32. 
Harger JH. Cerclage and cervical insufficiency: an evidence -based analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2002; 100: 1313- 1327. 
Hooker AB, Lemmers M, Thurkow AL, Heymans MW, Opmeer BC, Brolmann HA, Mol BW, Huirne JA. Systematic review and meta -analysis of intrauterine adhesions after miscarriage: prevalence, risk factors and long -term 
reproductive outcome. Hum Reprod Update 2014;
20: 262- 278. 
Jaslow CR, Kutteh WH. Effect of prior birth and miscarriage frequency on the prevalence o f acquired and 
congenital uterine anomalies in women with recurrent miscarriage: a cross -sectional study. Fertil Steril 2013; 99: 
1916- 1922.e1911. 
Kassanos D, Salamalekis E, Vitoratos N, Panayotopoulos N, Loghis C, Creatsas C. The value of transvaginal ultrasonography in diagnosis and management of cervical incompetence. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 2001;
28: 266-
268. 
Liddell HS, Lo C. Laparoscopic cervical cerclage: a series in women with a history of second trimester miscarriage. 
J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2008; 15: 342- 345. 
Ludwin A, Ludwin I, Banas T, Knafel A, Miedzyblocki M, Basta A. Diagnostic accuracy of sonohysterography, 
hysterosalpingography and diagnostic hysteroscopy in diagnosis of arcuate, septate and bicornuate uterus. J 
Obstet Gynaecol Res 2011; 37: 178-186. 
Makris N, Kalmantis K, Skartados N, Papadimitriou A, Mantzaris G, Antsaklis A. Three -dimensional 
hysterosonography versus hysteroscopy for the detection of intracavitary uterine abnormalities. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2007;
97: 6-9. 
Oppelt P, von Have M , Paulsen M, Strissel PL, Strick R, Brucker S, Wallwiener D, Beckmann MW. Female genital 
malformations and their associated abnormalities. Fertil Steril 2007; 87: 335- 342. 
Ramanathan S, Kumar D, Khanna M, Al Heidous M, Sheikh A, Virmani V, Palaniappan Y. Mu lti-modality imaging 
review of congenital abnormalities of kidney and upper urinary tract. World J Radiol 2016; 8: 132- 141. 
Robberecht C, Pexsters A, Deprest J, Fryns JP, D'Hooghe T, Vermeesch JR. Cytogenetic and morphological analysis 
of early products of conception following hystero- embryoscopy from couples with recurrent pregnancy loss. 
Prenat Diagn 2012; 32: 933- 942. 
Saravelos SH, Cocksedge KA, Li TC. Prevalence and diagnosis of congenital uterine anomalies in women with 
reproductive failure: a critical appraisal. Hum Reprod Update 2008; 14: 415- 429. 
Saravelos SH, Yan J, Rehmani H, Li TC. The prevalence and impact of fibroids and their treatment on the outcome 
of pregnancy in women with recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2011; 26: 3274- 3279. 
Tur-Kaspa I, Gal M, Hartman M, Hartman J, Hartman A. A prospective evaluation of uterine abnormalities by saline 
infusion sonohysterography in 1,009 women with infertility or abnormal uterine bleeding. Fertil Steril 2006; 86: 
1731- 1735. 
Valenzano MM, Mistrangelo E, Lijoi D, Fortunato T, Lantieri PB, Risso D, Costantini S, Ragni N. Transvaginal 
sonohysterographic evaluation of uterine malformations. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2006; 124: 246- 249. 
Venetis CA, Papadopoulos SP, Campo R, Gordts S, Tarlatzis BC, Grimbizis GF. Clinical implications of congenital 
uterine anomalies: a meta -analysis of comparative studies. Reprod Biomed Online 2014; 29: 665- 683. 
Ventolini G, Zhang M, Gruber J. Hysteroscopy in the evaluation of patients with recurrent pregnancy loss: a cohort study i n a primary care population. Surg Endosc 2004;
18: 1782- 1784. 
 
 [81] 
 
9. Male factors 
Recurrent pregnancy loss has been considered an issue stemming exclusively from female causes until 
very recently. If a man achieved a pregnancy, his gametes were deemed normal and any loss of the 
pregnancy was believed to be from female anomalies , ranging from genetic, endocrinologic or 
anatomical factors to autoimmune disease s. Although together, these factors only account for an 
estimated 50-60% of RPL, leaving 40 -50% of RPL remaining unexplained . Possible male factors have not 
been satisfactorily addressed or taken into account in these numbers . 
KEY QUESTION: DOES THE QUALITY OF THE MALE GAMETE S CONTRIBUTE TO RPL? 
Evidence 
The effects of male semen quality, occupational expos ure, and lifestyle on RPL were examined based 
on semen analyses and detailed questionnaires from 68 RPL couples and 63 randomly selected healthy controls (Ruixue et al. , 2013
). Semen from men in the RPL group had significantly reduced viability, 
normal morphology and total progressive sperm motility and a higher mean percentage of DNA damaged sperm compared with those of controls. Furthermore, the risk of RPL wa s significantly 
increased when smoking, drinking and occupational exposure to environmental factors were 
superimposed (OR 11.965 ; 95% CI 1.49 -95.62). It was concluded that in couples with RPL, male factors 
such as sperm quality, occupational e xposure, and lifestyle (smoking, alcohol consumption and soft 
drugs ) should be assessed in addition to female factors (
Anifandis et al. , 2014, Jensen et al. , 2014 , Pacey 
et al. , 2014 , Showell et al. , 2014 ). 
Several smaller studies have compared sperm parameters of couples with RPL to healthy (fertile) 
controls. Overall, these studies found no differences in sperm volume (7 studies) or sperm count (2 
studies) (Sbrac ia et al. , 1996, Gopalkrishnan et al. , 2000 , Bhattacharya, 2008 , Brahem et al. , 2011, Imam 
et al. , 2011 , Talebi et al. , 2012, Zhang et al. , 2012 , Khadem et al. , 2014 ). The percentage of motile sperm 
and percentage of sperm with normal morphology were reported to be lower in RPL men in some studies, while others found no difference. Three studies consistently reported highe r DNA 
fragmentation in RPL men. Some studies have suggested a difference in sperm parameters between 
RPL couples that achieve a successful pregnancy and live birth rate, and couples that experienced an 
additional pregnancy loss, or failed to achieve pregna ncy. One study reported differences in sperm 
concentration and motility between successful and unsuccessful couples (
Sbracia et al. , 1996 ), while 
another study reported differences in abnormal sperm chromatin integrity. A lower sperm 
concentration was only reported in infertile RPL couples, while a lower percentage of normal 
morphology was detected in RPL couples who experienced pregnancy loss (Zhang et al. , 2012 ) 
Following the lack of a consistent association between conventional semen parameters and RPL, the 
majority of recent studies addressing male factors and RPL h ave focused on male genetic defects. These 
range from markers of Y chromosomal deletions, chromatin integrity and DNA damage. The few studies 
on chromosomal anomalies were poorly powered and overall indicated no relationship with miscarriage (Bernardini et al. , 2004 , Carp et al. , 2006 , Bronet et al. , 201 2
). Similarly, Y chromosome 
microdeletions were not associated with increased miscarriage rates in RPL couples (Kaare et al. , 2008 , 
Wettasinghe et al. , 2010, Pereza et al. , 2013 ). Sperm DNA shows more promise. Of the systematic [82] 
 
reviews with meta -analysis, Robinson and colleagues interrogated 16 cohort studies (2969 couples) of 
which 14 were prospective (Robinson et al. , 2012 ). In 15 out of 16 included studies, sperm DNA damage 
was assessed in couple s undergoing IVF or ICSI, while one study focused on spontaneous conception. 
The meta -analysis showed a significant increase in miscarriage rates in men with high sperm DNA 
damage compared with those with low sperm DNA damage (RR 2.16; 95% CI 1.54 -3.03). A subgroup 
analysis showed that the miscarriage association is stronge st for the TUNEL assay (RR 3.94; 95% CI 2.45 -
6.32) (Robinson et al. , 2012 ). Similarly, Z hao and colleagues performed a systematic review in 2014 also 
including 16 cohort studies (3106 couples) showing that sperm DNA fragmentation had a detrimental 
effect on clinical outcomes (pregnancy and miscarriage) after IVF/ICSI ( Zhao et al. , 2014 ). The studies 
used different sperm DNA damage test assays, endpoints were for different treatment types 
(IVF/ICSI/IUI), different aspects of DNA damage were measured and different thresholds for DNA damage were used. Further, female inclusion and exclusion criteria were imposed and the definitions 
of miscarriage were not always coherent . Given a significantly increased RR despite these numerous 
confounding factors, bot h Robinson and Jing Zhao concluded that sperm DNA damage testing should 
be offered to couples following even a single miscarriage after fertility treatment (
Robinson et al. , 2012 , 
Zhao et al. , 2014 ). Two recent studies have also reported significantly increased sperm DNA 
fragmentation with couples who have experienced RPL after natural conception ( Zidi-Jrah et al. , 2016 , 
Carlini et al. , 2017 ). 
The main cause of DNA damage is oxidative stress and this see ms to be exacerbated by smoking, obesity 
and excessive exercise (Aitken et al. , 2009 , Hsu et al. , 2009 , Du Plessis et al. , 2010 ). Clinicians could 
advise male partners of couples presenting with RPL of these connections and suggest ways to prevent 
sperm DNA damage caused by unhealthy lifestyles ( Sharma et al. , 2013, Showell et al. , 2014 , Wright et 
al., 2014 ). 
Another possible male cause of pregnancy loss is the introduction of surgically retrieved, immature sperm to be used with intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). There are only two well -powered studies 
comparing pregnancy loss following ICS I with testicular sperm compared with epididymal sperm. In a 
chart review of 1121 men with obstructive azoospermia who underwent ICSI with surgically retrieved 
sperm, miscarriage rates did not differ between epididymal and testicular sperm (17.6% versu s18.4%) 
(Kamal et al. , 2010
). This supported a previous study by Nicopoullos who had reported no difference in 
miscarriage rates between similar groups (Nicopoullos et al. , 2004 ). However, the cause of azoospermia 
rather than the source of sperm led to differences as in a study of 108 consecutive couples where the 
miscarriage rate was 28% for obstructive azoospermia, and 40% for non -obstructive azoospermia 
(Pasqualotto et al. , 2002 ). 
Recommendation s 
In the male pa rtner, it is suggested to assess life style factors 
(smoking, alcohol consumption, exercise pattern, and body 
weight). GPP 
 
Assessing sperm DNA fragmentation in couples with RPL can 
be considered for explanatory purposes, based on indirect 
evidence. Cond itional ⊕⊕ [83] 
 
Justificat ion 
 Association Contributing 
factor Prognosis Treatment 
Sperm DNA damage Moderate Probably , but no 
prospective 
studies to 
confirm Unclear No treatment 
has been 
studied 
 
There is a moderate body of evidence indicating associations between R PL and poor quality sperm; 
particularly sperm with elevated DNA fragmentation. These associations are independent of female 
factors . 
Since there is also clear evidence that sperm DNA damage is caused by unhealthy lifestyles (such as 
smoking, obesity and excessive exercise), clinicians could make couples aware of these risks. 
Prospective studies with appropriate controls (matched for age, fertility status and lifestyle) are needed 
to elucidate these trends further. 
From the literature searched on male factors and RPL few studies were retrieved, therefore, the search 
was extended to include studies on single miscarriage. 
References 
Aitken RJ, De Iuliis GN, McLachlan RI. Biological and clinical significance of DNA damage in the male germ line. Int 
J Androl 2009; 32: 46-56. 
Anifandis G, Bounartzi T, Messini CI, Dafopoulos K, Sotiriou S, Messinis IE. The impact of cigarette smoking and 
alcohol consumption on sperm parameters and sperm DNA fragmentation (SDF) measured by Halo sperm((R)). 
Arch Gynecol Obstet 2014; 290: 777- 782. 
Bernardini LM, Costa M, Bottazzi C, Gianaroli L, Magli MC, Venturini PL, Francioso R, Conte N, Ragni N. Sperm 
aneuploidy and recurrent pregnancy loss. Reprod Biomed Online 2004; 9: 312- 320. 
Bhattacharya SM. Association of various sperm parameters with unexplained repeated early pregnancy loss --
which is most important? Int Urol Nephrol 2008; 40: 391- 395. 
Brahem S, Mehdi M, Landolsi H, Mougou S, Elghezal H, Saad A. Semen parameters and sperm DNA fragmentation as causes of recurrent pregnancy loss. Urology 2011;
78: 792- 796. 
Bronet F, Martinez E, Gaytan M, Linan A, Cernuda D, Ariza M, Nogales M, Pacheco A, San Celestino M, Garcia -
Velasco JA. Sperm DNA fragmentation index does not correlate with the sperm or embryo aneuploidy rate in 
recurrent miscarriage or implantation failure patients. Hum Reprod 2012; 27: 1922- 1929. 
Carlini T, Paoli D, Pelloni M, Faja F, Dal Lago A, Lombardo F, Lenzi A, Gandini L. Sperm DNA fragmentation in Italian 
couples with recurrent pregnanc y loss. Reprod Biomed Online 2017; 34: 58-65. 
Carp H, Guetta E, Dorf H, Soriano D, Barkai G, Schiff E. Embryonic karyotype in recurrent miscarriage with parental karyotypic aberrations. Fertil Steril 2006;
85: 446- 450. 
Du Plessis SS, Cabler S, McAlister DA, Sabanegh E, Agarwal A. The effect of obesity on sperm disorders and male infertility. Nat Rev Urol 2010;
7: 153- 161. 
Gopalkrishnan K, Padwal V, Meherji PK, Gokral JS, Shah R, Juneja HS. Poor quality of sperm as it affects repeated early pregnancy loss. Arch Androl 2000;
45: 111- 117. 
Hsu PC, Chang HY, Guo YL, Liu YC, Shih TS. Effect of smoking on blood lead levels in workers and role of reactive oxygen species in lead -induced sperm chromatin DNA damage. Fertil Steril 2009;
91: 1096- 1103. 
Imam SN, Shamsi MB, Kum ar K, Deka D, Dada R. Idiopathic recurrent pregnancy loss: role of paternal factors; a 
pilot study. J Reprod Infertil 2011; 12: 267- 276. [84] 
 
Jensen TK, Gottschau M, Madsen JO, Andersson AM, Lassen TH, Skakkebaek NE, Swan SH, Priskorn L, Juul A, 
Jorgensen N. Hab itual alcohol consumption associated with reduced semen quality and changes in reproductive 
hormones; a cross -sectional study among 1221 young Danish men. BMJ Open 2014; 4: e005462. 
Kaare M, Painter JN, Ulander VM, Kaaja R, Aittomaki K. Sex chromosome characteristics and recurrent miscarriage. 
Fertil Steril 2008; 90: 2328- 2333. 
Kamal A, Fahmy I, Mansour R, Serour G, Aboulghar M, Ramos L, Kremer J. Does the outcome of ICSI in cases of obstructive azoospermia depend on the origin of the retrieved spermatozoa or the cause of obstruction? A 
comparative analysis. Fertil Steril 2010;
94: 2135- 2140. 
Khadem N, Poorhoseyni A, Jalali M, Akbary A, Heydari ST. Sperm DNA fragmentation in couples with unexplained 
recurrent spontaneous abortions. Andrologia 2014; 46: 126- 130. 
Nicopoullos JD, Gilling -Smith C, Almeida PA, Norman -Taylor J, Grace I, Ramsay JW. Use of surgical sperm retrieval 
in azoospermic men: a meta -analysis. Fertil Steril 2004; 82: 691-701. 
Pacey AA, Povey AC, Clyma JA, McNamee R, Moore HD, Baillie H, Cherry NM, Participating Centres of Chaps UK. 
Modifiable and non -modifiable risk factors for poor sperm morphology. Hum Reprod 2014; 29: 1629- 1636. 
Pasqualotto FF, Rossi -Ferragut LM, Rocha CC, Iaconelli A, Jr., Borges E, Jr. Outcome of in vitro fertilization and 
intra cytoplasmic injection of epididymal and testicular sperm obtained from patients with obstructive and 
nonobstructive azoospermia. J Urol 2002; 167: 1753- 1756. 
Pereza N, Crnjar K, Buretic -Tomljanovic A, Volk M, Kapovic M, Peterlin B, Ostojic S. Y chromosome a zoospermia 
factor region microdeletions are not associated with idiopathic recurrent spontaneous abortion in a Slovenian 
population: association study and literature review. Fertil Steril 2013; 99: 1663- 1667. 
Robinson L, Gallos ID, Conner SJ, Rajkhowa M, Mi ller D, Lewis S, Kirkman -Brown J, Coomarasamy A. The effect of 
sperm DNA fragmentation on miscarriage rates: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Hum Reprod 2012; 27: 
2908- 2917. 
Ruixue W, Hongli Z, Zhihong Z, Rulin D, Dongfeng G, Ruizhi L. The impact of s emen quality, occupational exposure 
to environmental factors and lifestyle on recurrent pregnancy loss. J Assist Reprod Genet 2013; 30: 1513- 1518. 
Sbracia S, Cozza G, Grasso JA, Mastrone M, Scarpellini F. Semen parameters and sperm morphology in men in unex plained recurrent spontaneous abortion, before and during a 3 year follow -up period. Hum Reprod 1996;
11: 
117- 120. 
Sharma R, Biedenharn KR, Fedor JM, Agarwal A. Lifestyle factors and reproductive health: taking control of your 
fertility. Reprod Biol Endocri nol 2013; 11: 66. 
Showell MG, Mackenzie -Proctor R, Brown J, Yazdani A, Stankiewicz MT, Hart RJ. Antioxidants for male subfertility. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014 : Cd007411. 
Talebi AR, Vahidi S, Aflatoonian A, Ghasemi N, Ghasemzadeh J, Firoozabadi RD, Moei n MR. Cytochemical 
evaluation of sperm chromatin and DNA integrity in couples with unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortions. Andrologia 2012;
44 Suppl 1: 462-470. 
Wettasinghe TK, Jayasekara RW, Dissanayake VH. Y chromosome microdeletions are not associat ed with 
spontaneous recurrent pregnancy loss in a Sinhalese population in Sri Lanka. Hum Reprod 2010; 25: 3152- 3156. 
Wright C, Milne S, Leeson H. Sperm DNA damage caused by oxidative stress: modifiable clinical, lifestyle and nutritional factors in male inf ertility. Reprod Biomed Online 2014;
28: 684- 703. 
Zhang L, Wang L, Zhang X, Xu G, Zhang W, Wang K, Wang Q, Qiu Y, Li J, Gai L. Sperm chromatin integrity may 
predict future fertility for unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion patients. Int J Androl 2012; 35: 752- 757. 
Zhao J, Zhang Q, Wang Y, Li Y. Whether sperm deoxyribonucleic acid fragmentation has an effect on pregnancy and miscarriage after in vitro fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Fertil Steril 2014;
102: 998- 1005 e1008. 
Zidi-Jrah I, Hajlaoui A, Mougou -Zerelli S, Kammoun M, Meniaoui I, Sallem A, Brahem S, Fekih M, Bibi M, Saad A et 
al. Relationship between sperm aneuploidy, sperm DNA integrity, chromatin packaging, traditional semen 
parameters, and r ecurrent pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2016; 105: 58-64. 
 [85] 
 
Part E: Prognosis and treatment 
 
10. Assessing prognosis of a couple 
with RPL 
KEY QUESTION: WHAT IS THE VALUE OF INFORMATION ON MEDI CAL AND FAMILY HISTO RY IN 
ESTABLISHING THE PROGNOSIS OF RPL? 
Several studies were identified that have evaluated the impact of medical and family history on the 
prognosis in RPL couples The chance of a live birth, time to live birth and the risk of a pregnancy loss in 
the next pregnancy are considered relevant outcomes for prognosis in RPL. 
In the absence of any interventions proven to ameliorate the chances of a live birth in couples with 
unexplained RPL, investigators have attempted to develop prognostic tools, based on the identified 
factors affecting prognosis. Althoug h not an intervention as such, informing couples confronted with 
RPL about their individual prognosis in a next pregnancy and in the long term is an essential part of the 
management of couples and allows the couples to decide for or against further pregnan cy attempts 
(Lund et al. , 2012 ). 
10.1 FACTORS AFFECTING PRO GNOSIS 
Evidence 
Reproductive history 
The impact of the number of prior pregnancy losses for the chanc e of live birth has been investigated 
in a number of cohort studies. The authors consistently find that the number of prior pregnancy losses 
is an important prognostic factor for chance of live birth in both the first pregnancy after referral and 
in the lo ng term ( Parazzini et al. , 1988 , Knudsen et al. , 1991 , Quenby and Farquharson, 1993 , Brigham 
et al. , 1999 , Bhattacharya et al. , 2010, Lund et al., 2012, Kolte et al. , 2014 , Greenberg et al. , 2015 , Kling 
et al. , 2016 ). 
In a nested c ohort study of 251 women with two or more miscarriages from the ALIFE trial, it was 
demonstrated that the number of prior miscarriages was a determinant both for time to live birth and 
cumulative incidence of live birth. Follow- up was limited to 24 months after enrolment in the trial 
(Kaandorp et al. , 2014 ). 
One retrospective cohort study of 587 women with unexplained RPL (≥3 PLs) following spontaneous 
concepti on showed that among the 499 women who subsequently became pregnant, the relative risk 
of live birth in the first pregnancy after referral was the same for miscarriages and non-visualized 
pregnancy losses (Kolte et al. , 2014 ). This suggests that the type of pregnancy loss is less important for 
chance of live birth , but needs corroboration in independent cohorts. [86] 
 
For secondary unexplained RPL, a recent cohort study suggested that only consecutive pregnancy losses 
after the birth influenced the subsequent prognosis, while the number of losses prior to the birth did 
not affect the prognosis in the next pregnancy (Egerup et al. , 2016 ). 
In a multicenter study on 777 patients, subsequent pregnancy success rate was found to be significantly 
associated with pregnancy loss history (i.e. time (in years) between first and last misc arriage prior to 
assessment ) and subfertility index (i.e. the product of the number of PLs and the pregnancy loss 
history ), suggesting an effect of the time needed to conceive ( Cauchi et al. , 1995 ). In this study, the 
maternal age was only borderline significant associated with the subsequent pregnancy success rate, 
but only if treated as a dichotomous variable (< 30 years or ≥ 30 years). The number of spontaneous 
pregnancy losses was significantly associated with the subsequent pregnancy success rate. 
Sex of firstborn 
In secondary RPL, the sex of the firstborn may be important for prognosis. In a study of 358 Danish 
women with unexplained secondary RPL compared to the Danish general population, sex ratios were 
shown to be significantly skewed in the RPL population: sex ratio (boy /girl) of the children born prior to 
secondary RPL was 1.49 compared to 1.05 in the general population. The sex -ratio of live born children 
in the first pregnancy after referral was 0.76, and thus the sex ratio significantly changed from firstborn 
(more boys) to the first pregnancy after referral (more girls) in couples with secondary RPL (Nielsen et 
al., 2010 ). In an Irish cohort study of 85 women with secondary RPL, sex -ratios prior to secondary RPL 
was 1.66, but there were no significant differences in chances of live birth according to sex of the firstborn (
Ooi et al. , 2011 ). In a study of 170 women with secondary RPL, another observational study 
reported a skewed sex ratio for first stillborn children, but not live born children (Li et al. , 2014 ). 
Family history 
A number of studies have reported that sporadic or recurrent ( ≥2) pregnancy loss is more common 
among RPL patients’ first- degree relatives than controls, approximately a doubled incidence or per 
pregnancy loss rate (Alexa nder et al. , 1988 , Johnson et al. , 1988 , Christiansen et al. , 1990 , Ho et al. , 
1991 , Zhang et al. , 2010 , Kolte et al. , 2011 ). While this may suggest a familial or hereditary component 
to RPL, none of the abovementioned studies investigate d whether affected family members are 
important for the prognosis of an individual patient. Furthermore, it should be remembered that 
studies evaluating risk of pregnancy loss among patients’ relatives may be subject to information bias, 
especially if info rmation on relatives’ pregnancy losses is derived from the patients. In families where 
one person suffers from RPL, there may be more openness about reproductive history than in other 
families. 
10.2 PROGNOSTIC TOOLS 
Evidence 
In a descriptive cohort study, prognosis was evaluated in 987 women with primary or secondary RPL 
referred to a tertiary center in Denmark (Lund et al. , 2012 ). Five years after the first consu ltation, 66.7% 
(95% CI 63.7 -69.7) had achieved a live birth, increasing to 71.1% (95% CI 68.0 -74.2) after 15 years. There 
was a significantly decreased chance of at least one subsequent live birth with increasing maternal age; 
of women aged 40 years or old er, 41.7% (95% CI 29.8 -56.1) achieved a live birth within 5 years 
compared to 81.3% (95% CI 69.2 -90.7) of women aged 20 –24 ye ars. There was also a significant 
decrease in chance of a live birth by increasing number of miscarriages bef ore first consultation ranging [87] 
 
from 71.9% (95% CI 67.5- 76.1) in women with 3 miscarriages to 50.2% (95% CI 40.5 -60.8) in women 
with 6 or more previous miscarriages. There was no evidence of an interaction between maternal age 
and the number of previous miscarriages. 
Another lo ngitudinal study prospectively collected data of 716 RPL patients (325 idiopathic) attending 
a referral clinic in Liverpool over a 10 -year period (Brigham et al. , 1999 ). Of the patients achieving a 
further pregnancy, 167/222 (75%) had a successful outcome with survival beyond 24 weeks . There was 
no statistically significant difference in outcome between primary (77%) and secondary loser s (74%). 
From a survival curve, it was shown that the most perilous time for women with idiopathic RPL was 
between 6 and 8 weeks’ gestation. By 8 weeks’ gestation, if a fetal heartbeat had been identified, the 
chances of a successful outcome in a subsequent pr egnancy were 98%, climbing to 99.4% at 10 weeks’ 
gestation. Previous miscarriage histo ry and age of the patient signi ficantly affected the chances of a 
successful outcome, age being slightly more signific ant than previous number of miscarriages. 
Recommend ation 
The GDG recommends to base prognosis on the number of 
preceding pregnancy losses and female age. Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
 
Prognostic tools (Lund, Brigham ) can be used to provide an 
estimate of subsequent chance of live birth in couples with 
unexplained RPL. GPP 
Justification 
The number of pregnancy losses before referral for RPL is of prognostic importance for future chance 
of a live birth. Although the studies are of high quality and consistent, evidence on the prognostic 
potential of reproductive history can only be obtained by observational studies, which is reflected in 
the low evidence level. The GDG concludes that a thorough reproductive history should be taken in 
couples presenting with RPL and stresses that number of preceding pregnancy losses and femal e age 
provide the best available prognostic information. 
The studies of Lund and Brigham show that RPL couples have a good prognosis for a next live birth, especially if female age and the number of previous miscarriages are low. Information from the studi es 
(summarized in the graphs and tables below) can be used by clinicians to estimate the chance of a live 
birth in a next pregnancy in couples with RPL. 
Unproven therapeutic interventions for unexplained RPL should only be applie d in a research setting 
with relying on reasonable pathophysiological hypothese s. 
 [88] 
 
Additional information : 
Effect of female age and number of previous pregnancy losses on live birth in RPL 
Figure 1: Kaplan -Meier plot showing percentage of women 
in the recurrent miscarriage coho rt who have had at least 
one live birth after first consultation by age at first 
consultation. (Lund et al. , 2012 ) (reproduced with 
permission). Figure 2: Kapla n-Meier plot showing percentage of women in 
the recurrent miscarriage cohort who have had at least one 
live birth after first consultation by number of miscarriages 
before first consultation (Lund et al. , 2012 ) (reproduced with 
permission). 

Table 1: Hazard Ratio (95% CI) of Achieving a Live Birth After Referral According to Age at First 
Consultation and Number of Previous Miscarriages (Lund et al. , 2012 ) (reproduced with permission). 
 
Table 2: Predicted percentage success rate of subsequent pregnancy according to age and previous 
miscarriage history (Brigham et al. , 1999 ) (reproduced with permission). 
[89] 
 
References 
Alexander SA, Latinne D, Drebruyere M, Dupont E, Gottli eb W, Thomas K. Belgian experience with repeat 
immunisation in recurrent spontaneous abortions. In Beard RW and Sharp F (eds) Early Pregnancy Loss: 
Mechanisms and Treatment . 1988. Springer Verlag, London, UK, pp. 355- 363. 
Bhattacharya S, Townend J, Bhattac harya S. Recurrent miscarriage: Are three miscarriages one too many? Analysis 
of a Scottish population -based database of 151,021 pregnancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2010; 150: 24-
27. 
Brigham SA, Conlon C, Farquharson RG. A longitudinal study of pr egnancy outcome following idiopathic recurrent 
miscarriage. Hum Reprod 1999; 14: 2868- 2871. 
Cauchi MN, Coulam CB, Cowchock S, Ho HN, Gatenby P, Johnson PM, Lubs ML, McIntyre JA, Ramsden GH, Smith 
JB et al. Predictive factors in recurrent spontaneous aborter s--a multicenter study. Am J Reprod Immunol 1995; 33: 
165- 170. 
Christiansen OB, Mathiesen O, Lauritsen JG, Grunnet N. Idiopathic recurrent spontaneous abortion. Evidence of 
a familial predisposition. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1990; 69: 597- 601. 
Egerup P, Kol te AM, Larsen EC, Krog M, Nielsen HS, Christiansen OB. Recurrent pregnancy loss: what is the impact 
of consecutive versus non -consecutive losses? Hum Reprod 2016; 31: 2428- 2434. 
Greenberg T, Tzivian L, Harlev A, Serjienko R, Mazor M, Bashiri A. Index pregnancy versus post -index pregnancy 
in patients with recurrent pregnancy loss. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2015; 28: 63-67. 
Ho HN, Gill TJ, 3rd, Hsieh CY, Yang YS, Lee TY. The prevalence of recurrent spontaneous abortions, cancer, and congenital anomalies in th e families of couples with recurrent spontaneous abortions or gestational trophoblastic 
tumors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;
165: 461- 466. 
Johnson PM, Chia KV, Risk JM, Barnes RM, Woodrow JC. Immunological and immunogenetic investigation of 
recurrent spontaneo us abortion. Dis Markers 1988; 6: 163- 171. 
Kaandorp SP, van Mens TE, Middeldorp S, Hutten BA, Hof MH, van der Post JA, van der Veen F, Goddijn M. Time 
to conception and time to live birth in women with unexplained recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2014; 29: 
1146- 1152. 
Kling C, Magez J, Hedderich J, von Otte S, Kabelitz D. Two -year outcome after recurrent first trimester 
miscarriages: prognostic value of the past obstetric history. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2016; 293: 1113- 1123. 
Knudsen UB, Hansen V, Juul S, Secher N J. Prognosis of a new pregnancy following previous spontaneous abortions. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1991; 39: 31-36. 
Kolte AM, Nielsen HS, Moltke I, Degn B, Pedersen B, Sunde L, Nielsen FC, Christiansen OB. A genome -wide scan in 
affected sibling pair s with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage suggests genetic linkage. Mol Hum Reprod 2011; 17: 
379- 385. 
Kolte AM, van Oppenraaij RH, Quenby S, Farquharson RG, Stephenson M, Goddijn M, Christiansen OB. Non -
visualized pregnancy losses are prognostically important for unexplained recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 
2014; 29: 931- 937. 
Li J, Liu L, Liu B, Saravelos S, Li T. Recurrent miscarriage and birth sex ratio. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 
2014; 176: 55-59. 
Lund M, Kamper -Jorgensen M, Nielsen HS, Lidegaard O, An dersen AM, Christiansen OB. Prognosis for live birth in 
women with recurrent miscarriage: what is the best measure of success? Obstet Gynecol 2012; 119: 37-43. 
Nielsen HS, Steffensen R, Lund M, Egestad L, Mortensen LH, Andersen AM, Lidegaard O, Christiansen OB. 
Frequency and impact of obstetric complications prior and subsequent to unexplained secondary recurrent 
miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2010; 25: 1543- 1552. 
Ooi PV, Russell N, O'Donoghue K. Secondary recurrent miscarriage is associated with previous male birth . J Reprod 
Immunol 2011; 88: 38-41. 
Parazzini F, Acaia B, Ricciardiello O, Fedele L, Liati P, Candiani GB. Short- term reproductive prognosis when no 
cause can be found for recurrent miscarriage. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1988; 95: 654- 658. 
Quenby SM, Farquharson RG. Predicting recurring miscarriage: what is important? Obstet Gynecol 1993; 82: 132-
138. 
Zhang BY, Wei YS, Niu JM, Li Y, Miao ZL, Wang ZN. Risk factors for unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion in 
a population from southern China. Int J Gynaecol Obst et 2010; 108: 135- 138. [90] 

11. Treatment for RPL with genetic 
background 
KEY QUESTION: WHICH THERAPEUTIC IN TERVENTIONS SHOULD B E OFFERED TO COUPLES WITH 
RPL DUE TO GENETIC/C HROMOSOMAL CAUSES TO INCREASE LIVE BIRTH RATE? 
Evidence (see also summary of findings ta ble 1). 
A number of interventions and treatments have been explored for couples with RPL due to 
genetic/chromosomal causes. Genetic counselling, including a family history the outcomes following 
further attempts to conceive, and any relevant prenatal diag nostic tests should be offered to all couples 
with RPL with a known parental karyotyp e abnormality. 
11.1 PREIMPLANTATION GENETIC TESTING (PGT) FOR UNEXPLAINED RPL 
Preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT -A) (previously preimplantation genetic s creening 
[PGS] or preimplantation diagnosis of aneuploidy [PGD -A]), where an IVF cycle creates embryos which 
are biopsied and screened for chromosomal anomalies prior to implantation , has been proposed as a 
potential treatment for RPL. The data from publis hed studies is limited by the PG S (PGT -A) technique 
used, as the vast majority have employed FISH with an embryo biopsy at Day 3, which only looks at a 
specific number of chromosomes at an early stage of embryo development where mosaicism is higher. 
Whole genome techniques such as a rray-CGH or Next Generation Sequencing (NGS ) with a biopsy taken 
at blastocyst stage, looking at all chromosomes, are recognized to be more accurate screening 
techniques. To date only one study has explored the use of the array-CGH technique , but it only 
included 40 women with RPL and focused on the va lue of morphokinetic analysis ( Basile et al. , 2014 ). 
A systematic reviews looking at PGS (PGT-A) for those couples with no known chromosomal 
abnormality concluded that there is no improvement in live birth rate with PGS (PGT-A), however FISH 
was used, the numbers were relatively small and the end points different (Musters et al. , 2011 ). Two 
recent studies of the same group compared PGS (PGT-A) and expectant management (EM) .Clinical 
outcomes improved in RPL couples undergoing IVF and PGS (PGT-A) compared with couples who 
received expectant manage ment . Among all attempts at PGS (PGT-A) or EM among couples with RPL, 
clinical outcomes (pregnancy rate, live birth rate, clinical mis carriage rate ) were similar. Median time 
to pregnancy was 6.5 months in the PGS (PGT-A) group and 3.0 months in the EM group . However those 
couples whose intended PGS (PGT-A) was cancelled had a lower live birth rate and higher clinical 
miscarriage rate as opposed to those who underwent PGS (PGT-A) despite similar maternal age 
(Murugappan et al. , 2016 ). In addition, IVF/PGS (PGT-A) was not a cost -effective s trategy for increasing 
live birth (Murugappan et al. , 2015 ). 
11.2 PREIMPLANTATION GENETIC TESTING F OR RPL WITH GENETIC BACKGR OUND 
Preimplantation genetic testing for monogenic/single gene defects (PGT- M) or chromosomal structural 
rearrangements (PGT -SR), previously PGD , is an established alternative to invasive prenatal diagnosis 
and as such may avoid termination of pregnancy in couples with a high risk of transmitting genetic [91] 
 
disorders such as various monogenic diseases and for structural chromosome abnormalities, the latter 
being found in the RPL population. 
A systematic review was conducted on PGD (PGT -SR) for couples with carrier status of a structural 
chromosomal abnormality and RPL . The reviewers concluded that there is no improvement in live birth 
rate with PG D (PGT -SR) (Franssen et al. , 2011 ), but no RC Ts were found, the now invalid technique of 
FISH was used and the numbers were relatively small. 
Recent data on PGD (PGT -SR) versus expectant management for couples with translocations reports a 
live birth rate of 37.8% on the first pregnancy after PGD (PGT-SR) and 53.8% on the first natural 
pregnancy after ascertainment of the carrier status (OR 0.52, 95% CI 0.22 -1.23). PGD (PGT -SR) reduced 
the miscarriage rate, but cumulative live birth rate (OR 1.10; 95% CI 0.45- 2.70) and time to pregnancy 
(12.4 mo nths versus 11.4 months) were similar between both groups (Ikuma et al. , 2015 ). 
In a cohort study , it was found that 76.9% (206/268) of couples with a translocation opted for PGD 
(PGT -SR) following genetic counselling (De Krom et al. , 2015 ). 
Some studies have suggested that miscarriag e rates may be lower using PGD (PGT -SR) (Ikuma et al. , 
2015 ) whilst others have shown that even with natural conception miscarriage rates do not differ from 
non-carrier couples (Dong et al. , 2014 ). 
Recommendation s 
All couples with results of an abnormal fetal or parental 
karyotype should receive genetic counselling . GPP 
 
All couples with results of an abnormal fetal or parental 
karyotype may be informed about the possible treatment 
options available including their advantages and 
disadvantag es. GPP 
Justification 
The limited evidence for preimplantation genetic testing in couples with RPL shows no clear benefit of 
treatment. The overall quality of the evidence is very low (see also summary of findings table 1). 
Therefore, the GDG strongly recommends that all couples with abnormal genetic results from 
pregnancy tissue testing or parental karyotypes should be offered genetic counselling to discuss likely 
prognosis and further diagnostic options. Couples may also receive information on the treatment 
options so they can make an informed decision on treatment. Clinicians are encouraged to elaborate 
on the advantages and disadvantages of PG T, depending on the techniques used ( Brezina et al. , 2016 ). 
In addition , couples should be informed that PGT-SR could reduce the miscarriage rate, but will not 
improve live birth rate or time to pregnancy. Finally, PG T is not permitted in some countries. 
Further good quality trials with modern technology and methodology are therefore needed to look at 
the value of PG T for couples with RPL due to chromosomal abnormalities. [92] 
 
A recent study reported a higher percentage of aneuploidy in blastocysts and a higher incidence of IVF 
cycles with no embryo transfer in couples with unexplained RPL with diminished ovarian reserve, 
compared to those with normal ovarian reserve (Shahine et al. , 2016 ). 
References 
Basile N, Nogales Mdel C, Bronet F, Florensa M, Riqueiros M, Rodrigo L, Garcia -Velasco J, Meseguer M. Increasing 
the probability of selecting chromosomally normal embryos by time -lapse morphokinetics analysis. Fertil Steril 
2014; 101: 699- 704. 
Brez ina PR, Anchan R, Kearns WG. Preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy: what technology should you 
use and what are the differences? J Assist Reprod Genet 2016; 33: 823- 832. 
De Krom G, Arens YH, Coonen E, Van Ravenswaaij -Arts CM, Meijer -Hoogeveen M, Ev ers JL, Van Golde RJ, De Die -
Smulders CE. Recurrent miscarriage in translocation carriers: no differences in clinical characteristics between 
couples who accept and couples who decline PGD. Hum Reprod 2015; 30: 484- 489. 
Dong Y, Li LL, Wang RX, Yu XW, Yun X, Liu RZ. Reproductive outcomes in recurrent pregnancy loss associated with 
a parental carrier of chromosome abnormalities or polymorphisms. Genet Mol Res 2014; 13: 2849- 2856. 
Franssen MT, Musters AM, van der Veen F, Repping S, Leschot NJ, Bossuyt PM, Goddijn M, Korevaar JC. 
Reproductive outcome after PGD in couples with recurrent miscarriage carrying a structural chromosome 
abnormality: a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update 2011; 17: 467- 475. 
Ikuma S, Sato T, Sugiura- Ogasawara M, Nagayoshi M, Tanaka A, Taked a S. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis and 
Natural Conception: A Comparison of Live Birth Rates in Patients with Recurrent Pregnancy Loss Associated with 
Translocation. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0129958. 
Murugappan G, Ohno MS, Lathi RB. Cost -effectiveness analysi s of preimplantation genetic screening and in vitro 
fertilization versus expectant management in patients with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 
2015; 103: 1215- 1220. 
Murugappan G, Shahine LK, Perfetto CO, Hickok LR, Lathi RB. Intent to tr eat analysis of in vitro fertilization and 
preimplantation genetic screening versus expectant management in patients with recurrent pregnancy loss. Hum 
Reprod 2016; 31: 1668- 1674. 
Musters AM, Repping S, Korevaar JC, Mastenbroek S, Limpens J, van der Veen F, Goddijn M. Pregnancy outcome 
after preimplantation genetic screening or natural conception in couples with unexplained recurrent miscarriage: 
a systematic review of the best available evidence. Fertil Steril 2011; 95: 2153- 2157, 2157.e2151- 2153. 
Shahine LK , Marshall L, Lamb JD, Hickok LR. Higher rates of aneuploidy in blastocysts and higher risk of no embryo 
transfer in recurrent pregnancy loss patients with diminished ovarian reserve undergoing in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 2016;
106: 1124- 1128. 
 
 [93] 
 
12. Treatment for RPL and 
Thrombophilia 
In some women with thrombophilia , anticoagulant treatment is prescribed with the aim to prevent 
venous thromboembolism, according to evidence -based clinical guidelines (Bates et al. , 2012 ). 
In women with thrombophilia and RPL, treatment is presumed to prevent placental thrombosis 
(antithrombotic agents including aspirin and anticoagulants) and/or by suppress the immune syste m 
(immunological treatments) , which is suggested to increase the chance of a successful pregnancy 
outcome. 
Antithrombotic agents investigated as treatment for RPL are aspirin and/or heparin (either 
unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular weight hepa rin (LMWH) ). 
KEY QUESTION: WHICH THERAPEUTIC IN TERVENTIONS SHOULD B E OFFERED TO COUPLES WITH 
RPL AND THROMBOPHILI A TO INCREASE THE CH ANCE OF A LIVE BIRTH ? 
12.1 TREATMENT FOR WOMEN W ITH RPL AND HEREDITARY THROMBOPHILIA 
Evidence (see also summary of finding s table 2). 
Anticoagulants 
A recent systematic review reported no benefit of low molecular weight heparin ( LMWH ) for prevention 
of pregnancy loss in women with hereditary thrombophilia and prior late (≥10 weeks) pregnancy loss 
(LBR LMWH v ersu s no LMWH: RR 0.81; 95% CI 0. 38-1.72; 5 RCTs ; n=308 ) or recurrent early (< 10 weeks) 
pregnancy loss (LBR LMWH v ersu s no LMWH: RR 0.97; 95% CI 0.80 -1.19; 2 RCTs ; n=66) (Skeith et al. , 
2016 ). 
A Cochrane review on anticoagulant treatment for women with RPL with or without hereditary 
thro mbophilia combined nine RCTs including 122 8 women. The reviewers reported no significant effect 
of treatment (aspirin, LMWH, LMWH + aspirin) compared to placebo . The risk ratio for live birth was 
0.94 (95% CI 0.80- 1.11 ; n=256) in the comparison of aspirin v ersu s placebo, 1.23 (95% CI 0.84 -1.81; 
n=453 ; studies at high risk of bias included) for LMWH versus no treatment, and 1.01 (95% CI 0 .87-1.16 ; 
n=322) for LMWH and aspirin compared to no treatment. In the comparison of LMWH v ersu s aspirin 
the risk ratio for live birth was 1.08 (95% CI 0.93 -1.26 ; n=239), in the comparison of LMWH and aspirin 
versus aspirin alone it was 1.11 (95% CI 0.94 -1.30 ; n=327) (de Jong et al. , 2014 ). 
Steroids 
No studies regarding steroids for hereditary thrombophilia and RPL have been found . 
Intravenous immunoglobulins 
No studies regarding treatm ent with Intravenous immunoglobulins (IvIg) for hereditary thrombophilia 
and RPL were retrieved. [94] 
 
Folic acid and vitamins 
Most studies on treatment with folic acid and vitamins have focused on R PL women with a mutation in 
the MTHFR gene and/or hyperhomocys teinemia. One study showed that treatment with L -methyl 
folate, vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 could reduce the homocystein e levels, and even normalize them in 
76% of patients. The impact on the next pregnancy was however not discussed ( Glueck et al. , 2015 ). 
Another study reported that 22 out of 25 women with RPL initiated a pregnancy after normalization of 
their homocystein e levels; 20 pregnancies resulted in a liv e birth, of which four were preterm and two 
had non- severe fetal growth retardation. No malformations, bleeding in the mother, or 
thromboembolic complications were reported. 
Recommendation 
For women with hereditary thrombophilia and a history of 
RPL, we s uggest not to use antithrombotic prophylaxis 
unless in the context of research , or if indicated for VTE 
prevention . Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification 
We found no evidence of a beneficial effect of anticoagulant treatment in women with hereditary 
thrombophil ia (see also summary of findings table 2). An international RCT is currently recruiting which 
will provide much needed data on the topic (ALIFE2 trial/ trialreg nr NTR 3361). 
12.2 TREATMENT FOR WOMEN W ITH RPL AND ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYN DROME (APS ) 
Evidence (see also summary of findings table 3- 5). 
Anticoagulants 
A benefit of heparin ( UFH or LMWH ) and aspirin, as compared to aspirin alone, with regard to first 
trimester losses was reported in the review of Ziakas summarizing five RCTs of 398 women with RPL 
and APS (OR 0.39; 95% CI 0.24- 0.65; NNT 4) (Ziakas et al. , 2010 ). Based on similar studies, Mak reported 
overall live birth rates of 74.27% (127/171) and 55.83 % (91/163) in women who received the heparin 
(UFH or LMWH)/aspirin combination and aspirin alone, respectively (based on 5 RCTs; RR 1.301; 95% 
CI 1.040- 1.62; NNT= 5.6) (Mak et al. , 2010 ). The observed benefit of LMWH and aspirin as compared to 
aspirin alone did not reach statistical significance for RPL ( OR 0.70; 95% CI 0.34- 1.45; n=186; 2 RCTs), 
and was absent when the analysis was limited to studies that included late pregnancy losses (OR 2.28; 
95% CI 0.43- 12.13; n=150; 2 RCTs) (Ziakas et al. , 2010 ). It should be noted that there is significant risk 
of bias in the incl uded studies. 
In women with APS, almost no data are available to support the use of aspirin only to prevent recurrent pregnancy loss . The pooled results of 3 very small trials (total number of 71 participants) showed no 
effect of aspirin only compared with no treatment ( RR of pregnancy loss 1.05, 95% CI 0.66 -1.68) , but 
from the confidence interval it can be concluded that neither benefit nor harm can be ruled out 
(Empson et al. , 2005
). 
A Bayesian network analysis (i.e. indirect evidence from the theoretical comparisons of results of 
various small studies) showed no statistically significant effect of any treatment (aspirin, LMWH, LMWH [95] 
 
+ aspirin, UFH + aspirin) c ompared to placebo in 543 women with RPL and APS based on the results of 
six studies (Zhang et al. , 2015 ). 
These studies overrule the Cochrane review on the t opic, which has not been updated since 2005 
(Empson et al. , 2005 ). 
For thrombosis prophylaxis, LMWH is preferred over UFH, because of a lower risk of osteopor osis and 
heparin -induced thrombocytopenia (Bates et al. , 2012 ). In clinical practice, women with APS and RPL 
are prescribed LMWH, but it should be realized that the evidence for efficacy of LMWH in RPL is absent. 
Steroids 
Steroids (prednisone) ha ve been evaluated as treatment for women with RPL and presence of 
antiphospholipid antibodies. In two RCTs, no evidence was found for a benefit of prednisone combined 
with aspirin in comparison to placebo or aspirin only in reducing pregnancy loss in women with RPL (RR 
0.85; 95% CI 0.53 -1.36 ; n=122) (Empson et al. , 2005 ). In addition , no benefit was found for prednisone 
combined with aspirin compared to heparin/aspirin (RR 1.17; 95% CI 0.47 -2.93; one RCT; n=45). 
Furthermore, several adverse outcomes were reported associated with prednisone; there was a 
significant increase in p remature delivery, neonatal intensive care unit admission, rate of pre -eclampsia 
and hypertension, risk of gestational diabetes and birth weight was significantly lower ( Empson et al. , 
2005 ). 
Intravenous immunoglobulin 
Based on three RCTs, a review concluded that treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin ( IvIg) did 
not reduce the chance of pregnancy loss in women with RPL and antiphospholipid antibodies (RR 1.47 ; 
95% CI 0.52- 4.14; n=138) (Empson et al. , 2005 ). 
In 24 patients with SLE and RPL, pregnancy outcomes were compared between women who received 
high dose IvIg and those who received prednisone and NSAIDs. IvIg was superior to prednisone with 
regard to LBR (100% v ersu s 75%), number of miscarriages (0 versu s 3) and preterm delivery (25% versu s 
55.6%). Furthermore, there was evidence of a clinical response; a signif icant decrease in the l upus 
activity index -pregnancy (LAI -P) was reported in the IvIg treated patients, but not the prednisone group, 
when comparing measurement at the end versus the beginning of the pregnancy ( Perricone et al. , 
2008 ). 
Recommendation s 
For women who fulfill the laboratory criteria of APS and a 
history of three or more pregnancy losses, we suggest 
administration with low-dose aspirin (75 to 1 00 mg/day) 
starting before conception , and a prophylactic dose heparin 
(UFH or LMWH) starting at date of a positive pregnancy test , 
over no treatment. Conditional ⊕ 
 
The GDG suggests offering anticoagulant treatment for 
women with two pregnancy losses and APS, only in the 
context of clinical research. GPP [96] 
 
Justification 
Although several reviews have been published, the overall quality of evidence for live birth rate and 
miscarriage rate is low to very low (see also summary of findings table 3) . The exi sting evidence suggests 
that a combination of heparin (more for UFH than for LMWH) and aspirin improves LBR in women with 
APS and RPL (three or more PLs, no evidence for two or more PLs). It should be noted that there is 
significant risk of bias in the inc luded studies. Furthermore, there appears to be large clinical 
heterogeneity in study population between studies; in the UFH studies that showed an effect of the intervention, the live birth rate in the comparator arm was around 44%, whereas in the LMWH studies 
that showed no effect, the live birth rate was close to 80% ( Middeldorp, 2014
). There is no evidence of 
effect of aspirin only when compared to place bo. The GDG group recommends to further study the 
effectiveness of treatment for APS and clinical criteria for treatment of APS (e.g. female age, number 
of pregnancy losses, consecutive or non -consecutive losses). 
The recommendations for treatment of women with RPL and hereditary thrombophilia or APS are 
consistent with the recommendations from the American College of Chest Physicians (Bates et al. , 
2012 ). 
The GDG decided not to formulate any recommendations for the other interventions described , except 
for a research recommendation on hydroxychloroquine , which has been found safe and effective for 
preventing obstetric complications in women with APS, but has no t been investigated in women with 
RPL and APS. 
Additional information 
In most of the included studies, U FH/LMWH combined with low- dose aspirin treatment was started as 
soon as pregnancy was confirmed (6 weeks’ gestation), except for Kutteh and colleagues w ho started 
aspirin before conception, and added heparin treatment after fetal heart activity (6.7 weeks) (Kutteh, 
1996 ). Although not stated in all studies, as pirin/heparin treatment was continued until 35 weeks’ 
gestation or delivery (Farquharson et al. , 2002 , Laskin et al. , 2009 ). Other studies provided less details 
on when treatment was discontinued. 
Administration of low- dose aspirin (75 to 100 mg/day) starting before conception , with a prophylactic 
dose of heparin (UFH or LMWH) starting at the date of a positive pregnancy test until delivery is 
recommended . 
References 
Bates SM, Greer IA, Middeldorp S, Veenstra DL, Prabulos AM, Vandvik PO, American College of Chest P. VTE, 
thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 
9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence -Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 2012; 141: e691S -
736S. 
de Jong PG, Kaandorp S, Di Nisio M, Goddijn M, Middeldorp S. Aspirin and/or heparin f or women with unexplained 
recurrent miscarriage with or without inherited thrombophilia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 7: Cd004734. 
Empson M, Lassere M, Craig J, Scott J. Prevention of recurrent miscarriage for women with antiphospholipid antibody or lup us anticoagulant. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005
: Cd002859. 
Farquharson RG, Quenby S, Greaves M. Antiphospholipid syndrome in pregnancy: a randomized, controlled trial 
of treatment. Obstet Gynecol 2002; 100: 408- 413. 
Glueck CJ, Smith D, Gandhi N, Hemachand ra K, Shah P, Wang P. Treatable high homocysteine alone or in concert 
with five other thrombophilias in 1014 patients with thrombotic events. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 2015; 26: 736-
742. [97] 
 
Kutteh WH. Antiphospholipid antibody -associated recurrent pregnancy lo ss: treatment with heparin and low -
dose aspirin is superior to low -dose aspirin alone. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996; 174: 1584- 1589. 
Laskin CA, Spitzer KA, Clark CA, Crowther MR, Ginsberg JS, Hawker GA, Kingdom JC, Barrett J, Gent M. Low 
molecular weight hepari n and aspirin for recurrent pregnancy loss: results from the randomized, controlled 
HepASA Trial. J Rheumatol 2009; 36: 279- 287. 
Mak A, Cheung MW, Cheak AA, Ho RC. Combination of heparin and aspirin is superior to aspirin alone in enhancing live births in p atients with recurrent pregnancy loss and positive anti -phospholipid antibodies: a meta- analysis of 
randomized controlled trials and meta -regression. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2010;
49: 281- 288. 
Middeldorp S. Anticoagulation in pregnancy complications. Hematolo gy Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 
2014; 2014: 393- 399. 
Perricone R, De Carolis C, Kroegler B, Greco E, Giacomelli R, Cipriani P, Fontana L, Perricone C. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in pregnant patients affected with systemic lupus erythematosus and recu rrent 
spontaneous abortion. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2008;
47: 646-651. 
Skeith L, Carrier M, Kaaja R, Martinelli I, Petroff D, Schleussner E, Laskin CA, Rodger MA. A meta -analysis of low -
molecular -weight heparin to prevent pregnancy loss in women with inherite d thrombophilia. Blood 2016; 127: 
1650- 1655. 
Zhang T, Ye X, Zhu T, Xiao X, Liu Y, Wei X, Liu Y, Wu C, Guan R, Li X et al. Antithrombotic Treatment for Recurrent 
Miscarriage: Bayesian Network Meta- Analysis and Systematic Review. Medicine (Baltimore) 2015; 94: e1732. 
Ziakas PD, Pavlou M, Voulgarelis M. Heparin treatment in antiphospholipid syndrome with recurrent pregnancy loss: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2010;
115: 1256- 1262. 
 
 [98] 
 
13. Treatment for RPL with 
immunological background 
KEY QU ESTION: WHICH THERAPEUTIC IN TERVENTIONS SHOULD B E OFFERED TO COUPLES WITH 
RPL WITH SUSPICION O F IMMUNOLOGICAL BACK GROUND TO INCREASE L IVE BIRTH RATE? 
Evidence 
As discussed in chapter 6, no immunological biomarkers have been definitively documented to caus e 
RPL. There is quite strong evidence that presence of some autoantibodies (anticardiolipin antibodies 
and antithyroid antibodies) negatively affects the future live birth rate in women with or without RPL. 
(Nielsen and Christiansen, 2005 , Thangaratinam et al. , 2011 ); whereas the impact of other 
autoantibodies such as antinuclear antibodies is more co ntroversial. 
In contrast, we found insufficient documentation for the impact of natural killer abnormalities and cytokine abnormalities in the blood or endometrium in RPL. It is therefore questionable to select 
patients to specific treatments due to the presence or absence of specific immune biomarkers outside 
clinical trials. 
Unfortunately, very few high quality controlled trials have been undertaken in women with RPL selected 
due to the presence of immune biomarkers. 
The majority of studies in this ca tegory comprise trials of anticoagulation therapies in women with 
antiphospholipid antibodies, which in these studies are considered thrombophilia factors rather than immunological biomarkers. There trials are considered in chapter 12.2. Trials attempting to treat 
women with RPL with antithyroid antibodies with levothyroxine are discussed in chapter 1 4.1. 
In the overwhelming number of trials testing other treatment options: lymphocyte immunization, intravenous immunoglobulin infusions, prednisone etc. patie nts were not selected due to the presence 
of specific immune factors and they are discussed in chapter 17 (unexplained RPL) . A few trials have 
tested intravenous immunoglobulin in women with RPL with various autoantibodies or NK cell 
aberrations (Stricker and Winger, 2005 ) or NK cell/cytokine aberrations (Winger and Reed, 2008
, 
Moraru et al. , 2012 ) but these trials are only of moderate/low quality, primarily because they were not 
placebo -controlled and thus not blinded. Two good placebo -controlled trials have te sted prednisone in 
patients selected due to presence of auto - or alloantibodies ( Laskin et al. , 1997 ) or endometrial NK cell 
abnormalities (Tang et al. , 2013 ). However, since the importance of these immune biomarkers is 
uncertain, we have chosen to include these trials in chapter 1 7 where they can be put into the best 
context 
Conclusion 
No immunological biomarker, except for high -titer antiphospholipid antibodies (see chapter 1 2) can be 
used for selecting couples with RPL for specific treatments. [99] 
 
References 
Laskin CA, Bombardier C, Hannah ME, Mandel FP, Ritchie JW, Farewell V, Farine D, Spitzer K, Fielding L, Soloninka 
CA et al. Prednisone and aspirin in women with autoantibodies and unexplained recurrent fetal loss. N Engl J Med 
1997; 337: 148- 153. 
Moraru M, Carbone J, Alecsandru D, Castill o-Rama M, Garcia -Segovia A, Gil J, Alonso B, Aguaron A, Ramos -Medina 
R, Martinez de Maria J et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment increased live birth rate in a Spanish cohort 
of women with recurrent reproductive failure and expanded CD56(+) cells. A m J Reprod Immunol 2012; 68: 75-84. 
Nielsen HS, Christiansen OB. Prognostic impact of anticardiolipin antibodies in women with recurrent miscarriage 
negative for the lupus anticoagulant. Hum Reprod 2005; 20: 1720- 1728. 
Stricker RB, Winger EE. Update on treat ment of immunologic abortion with low -dose intravenous 
immunoglobulin. Am J Reprod Immunol 2005; 54: 390- 396. 
Tang AW, Alfirevic Z, Turner MA, Drury JA, Small R, Quenby S. A feasibility trial of screening women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage for high uterine natural killer cell density and randomizing to prednisolone or placebo when 
pregnant. Hum Reprod 2013;
28: 1743- 1752. 
Thangaratinam S, Tan A, Knox E, Kilby MD, Franklyn J, Coomarasamy A. Association between thyroid autoantibodies and miscarriage an d preterm birth: meta- analysis of evidence. Bmj 2011;
342: d2616. 
Winger EE, Reed JL. Treatment with tumor necrosis factor inhibitors and intravenous immunoglobulin improves live birth rates in women with recurrent spontaneous abortion. Am J Reprod Immunol 2008;
60: 8-16. 
 
 [100] 
 
14. Treatment of RPL with metabolic 
or endocrinologic abnormalities 
KEY QUESTION: WHICH THERAPEUTIC IN TERVENTIONS SHOULD B E OFFERED TO COUPLES WITH 
RPL AND METABOLIC OR HORMONAL ABNORMALIT IES TO INCREASE LIVE BIRTH RATE? 
14.1 TREATMENT FOR THYROID ABNORMALITI ES ASSOCIATED WITH RPL 
Evidence (see also summary of findings table 6) 
Overt hypothyroidism 
Hypothyroidism in pregnancy is associated with adverse pregnancy complications (increased risk of 
premature birth, low birth weight, and misca rriage) as well as detrimental effects on fetal 
neurocognitive development. Treatment is indicated to avoid maternal hypothyroidism wherever 
possible (Stagnaro -Green et al. , 2011 ). In addition, pregnancy presents a series of physiological changes 
which increase T4 requirements, therefore it is needed to increa se the daily dose (Khan et al. , 2017 ). 
TSH levels should be compared to local trimester -specific reference ranges, or recommended upper 
limits: e.g. first trimester, 2.5 mU/l; second trimester, 3.0 mU/l; third trimester, 3.5 mU/l (Lazarus et al. , 
2014 ). 
Subclinical hypothyroidism 
Conflicting advices have appeared with regard to levothyroxine treatment in women with RPL a nd 
subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) . 
The European Thyroid Associatio n Guidelines for the Management of Subclinical Hypothyroidism in 
Pregnancy and in Children, SCH arising before conception or during gestation should be treated with 
levothyroxine (Lazarus et al. , 2014 ), based on two studies showing that levothyroxine treatment 
decreased the occurrence of adverse events in the mother and fetus and reduc ed miscarriage rate s 
[based on (Negro et al. , 2010 ) and (Lepoutre et al. , 2012 )]. The American Thyroid Association 
recommends levothyroxine treatment for pregnant women with SCH (TSH above trimester specific 
ranges ) and TPO Ab, or SCH (with TSH levels above 10.0mU/L), and recommends to consider treatment 
for pregnant women with TSH concentrations >2.5 mU/L and T POAb, or TSH >10.0 mU/L . Levothyroxine 
treatment is not recommended for TPOAb negative women with normal TSH (Alexander et al. , 2017 ). 
In an observational cohort study of women with recurrent early pregnancy loss (≥2 pregnancy losses 
<10 weeks), the impact of subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) and the effect of levothyroxine treatment 
were assessed. Subclinical hypothyroidism, i .e. TSH >2.5 mIU/ l with a normal free thyroxine or free 
thyroxine index, was detected in 19 % (n=55) of the patients. In the study, the cumulative live birth rate 
was compared in patients treated before 2008 (when SCH was not treated) and after 2008, when SCH 
patients received levothyroxine treatment pre- pregnancy to maintain TSH ≤2.5 mIU/ l. The p er-
pregnancy LBR for SCH treated (n=24) versus untreated (n=15) women was 22 /46 (48%) versus 12 /23 
(52%), respectively (Bernardi et al. , 2013 ). The cumulati ve LBR was 71% (17/24) and 67% (10/15), 
respectively. The authors did not find a statistically significant difference in the subsequent live -birth 
rate when comparing women with SCH and euthyroid women, or treated and untreated SCH. [101] 
 
In addition, levothyrox ine therapy during pregnancy might carry the potential risk of adverse child 
neurodevelopment outcomes, since high maternal free thyroxine concentrations during pregnancy are 
recently be reported to be associated with lower child IQ and lower grey matter a nd cortex volume 
(Korevaar et al. , 2016 ). 
In conclusion, the effect of levothyroxine for women with subclinical hypothyroidism and RPL is only 
assessed in o ne observational study . There is a need for further investigation of the potential treatment 
effect and risks of levo thyroxine supplementation by means of large RCT s. 
Thyroid auto -immunity 
There are no studies evaluating the effect of treatment on the preg nancy outcomes in women with RPL 
and thyroid auto -immunity. Indirect evidence on p regnancy outcomes, including miscarriage rate, after 
levothyroxine treatment in euthyroid women with thyroid autoimmunity has been summarized in two 
meta -analys es (Thangaratinam et al. , 2011 , Vissenberg et al. , 2012 ). A reduction in the risk of 
miscarriage with le vothyroxine treatment was reported (RR 0.52; 95% CI 0.22 -1.15) based on two RCTs 
of women with thyroid autoantibodies , TSH within the reference ranges of 0.27 –4.2 mIU/ L, but no 
history of RPL (Negro et al. , 2005 , Negro et al. , 2006 , Vissenberg et al. , 2012 ). 
In a case -control study thyroid autoimmu nity, prevalence of subclinical hypothyroidism and maternal 
and fetal complications were assessed in 100 healthy pregnant women and 100 pregnant women with 
a history of RPL, of which 31% showed thyroid autoimmunity (thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb+) 
>34 U/ml). All women with TPOAb+ received levothyroxine therapy. The authors found no difference 
in prevalence of miscarriage between hypothyroid and euthyroid individuals in TPOAb+ women (all 
receiving levothyroxine ) and suggested treatment for a ll TPOAb+ RP L women (Lata et al. , 2013 ). 
The published studies so far did not have an adequate sample size and overall, the studies were too small to draw robust conclusions . A potential treatment effect of levothyroxine needs further study by 
means of large RCTs. 
Recommendations 
Overt hypothyroidism arising before conception or during 
early gestation should be treated with levothyroxine in 
women with RPL . Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
There is conflicting evidence regarding treatment effect of 
levothyroxine for women with subclinical hypothyroidism 
and RPL . Treatment of women with SCH may reduce the risk 
of miscarriage, but the potential benefit of treatment should 
be balanced against the ri sks. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
If women with subclinical hypothyroidism and RPL are 
pregnant again, TSH level should be checked in early 
gestation (7-9 weeks AD), and hypothyroidism should be 
treated with levothyroxine . GPP [102] 

If women with thyroid autoimmunity and RPL are pregnant 
again, TSH level should be checked in early gestation ( 7-9 
weeks AD), and hypothyroidism should be treated with 
levothyroxine . GPP 
 
There is insufficient evidence to support treatment with 
levothyroxine in euthyroid women with thyroi d antibodies 
and RPL outside a clinical trial. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification 
If hypothyroidism is identified in women with RPL, treatment with levothyroxine is recommended based 
on existing guidelines and possible maternal and fetal complications assoc iated with untreated 
hypothyroidism during pregnancy. For women with subclinical hypothyroidism and RPL, treatment with 
levothyroxine is insufficiently evidence- based and it should be further investigated. Moreover, recent 
evidence of thyroid hormone treat ment in pregnant women with SCH reported reduced miscarriage 
rates (OR 0.62; 95% CI 0.48- 0.82), but higher odds of preterm delivery (OR 1.60; 95% CI 1.14 -2.24), 
gestational diabetes (OR 1.37; 95% CI 1.05 -1.79) and pre -eclampsia (OR 1.61; 95% CI 1.10 -2.37) 
(Maraka et al. , 2017 ). 
The GDG advises that women with a thyroid abnormality be treated and/ or referred to a specialist in 
endocrinology or internal medicine , depending on the clinical setting and local protocols. 
There is no convincing evidence on the efficacy of levothyroxine treatment for increasing the chance of 
a live birth in women with a history of RPL and thyroid autoimmunity (normal TSH and TPOAb+). Results 
of ongoing trials should be awaited (TABLET trial, T4 life trial) . 
14.2 PROGESTERONE OR HUMAN CHORIONIC GONA DOTROPHIN (HCG) (FOR LUTEAL 
PHASE INSUFFICIENCY ) 
Evidence (see also summary of evidence table 15 and 7) . 
Progesterone is indispensable for t he establishment and maintenance of pregnancy and thus, luteal 
phase insufficiency has been suggested a causative factor in RPL. However, testing for luteal phase 
insufficiency is not routinely performed or recommended based on limited evidence on tests to use of 
the relevance thereof (see chapter 7 ). 
The effect of progesterone, both vaginal and oral, has been studied in women with unexplained RPL, and although study conclusions vary significantly, the guideline development group recommends not 
to prescribe progesterone in women with unexplained RPL based on the recently published PROMISE 
trial (Coomarasamy et al. , 2015
) (see chapter 17). 
The effect of vag inal progesterone treatment (100– 200 mg every 12 hours starting 3 days after the LH 
surge) was recently evaluated in a cohort of women with RPL and abnormally elevated levels of nCyclinE 
(Stephenson et al. , 2017 ). Of 116 women with RPL, 59 (51%) had abnormally elevated levels (in the [103] 
 
luteal phase) of nCyclinE , a marker of endometrial development, on the endometrial biopsy. Vaginal 
progesterone administratio n resulted in a normalization of nCyclinE expression in 84% of 25 women 
undergoing a repeat endometrial biopsy. Pregnancy success in women with abnormal n -CyclinE who 
were treated with vaginal micronized progesterone starting in the early luteal phase was 69% (57/83) 
compared with 51% (19/37) in women with normal nCyclinE who were not treated with vaginal 
progesterone (OR = 2.1; 95% CI 1.0 -4.4). The study was not randomized. 
Studies on human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) for improving the LBR in women with RPL have been 
recently summarized in a Cochrane review (Morley et al. , 2013 ). The results demonstrated a significant 
benefit in using hCG to prevent RPL (RR 0.51; 95% CI 0.32- 0.81; five RCTs) , but power of the meta -
analysis was limited due to the small number of studies and methodological and clinical heterogeneity. None of the studies reported any adverse effects from the use of hCG. 
Recommendation s 
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of 
progesterone to improve live birth rate in women with RPL 
and luteal phase insufficiency. Conditional ⊕⊕⊕ 
 
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of hCG 
to improve live birth rate in women with RPL and luteal phase 
insufficiency. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification 
Based on the absence of evidence in women with RPL and luteal phase insufficiency and the 
recommendation that luteal phase insufficiency should not be tested in women with RPL, the G DG 
recommends against progesterone in women with RPL and luteal phase insufficiency , consistent with 
the recommendation in women with unexplained RPL. 
Results on hCG as a treatment for RPL show a positive effect of treatment on miscarriage rate. However, studies are considered t oo limited to recommend the use of hCG in women with RPL and luteal phase 
insufficiency. 
14.3 METFORMIN / INSULIN 
Evidence 
Metformin is a low- risk and effective oral hypoglycemic agent for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, and 
considered s afe and effective for gestational diabetes. 
Several studies on metformin found that it is eff ective in i mprov ing pregnancy outcomes in women with 
PCOS or insulin resistance. In patients with PCOS, metformin was found to significantly reduce the rate 
of mis carriage (Jakubowicz et al. , 2002, Khattab et al. , 2006 , Wang et al. , 2011 , Al-Biate, 2015 ). [104] 
 
Based on these results, it could be suggested that treatment with metformin increases the chance of a 
live birth in women with PCOS and a history of recurrent pregnancy loss. However, there are no studies 
focusing on women with RPL and PCOS. 
One of the only studies on metformin treatment for women with RPL and glucose metabolism defects is the small study of Zolghadri and colleagues . Metformin or pla cebo was administered to women with 
RPL and abnormal glucose tolerance test. The miscarriage rate was significantly reduced after 
metformin therapy compared to placebo in women without PCOS (15% vs. 55%). The results in women 
with PCOS and RPL were not sig nificant (small groups) ( Zolghadri et al. , 2008
). 
A recent meta -analysis on the risks of metformin during pregnancy concluded that exposure to 
metformin during the first trimester of pregnancy does not increase the risk of birth defects ( Andrade, 
2016 ). 
Recommendation 
There is insufficient evidence to recommend metformin 
supplementation in pregnancy to prevent PL in women with 
RPL and glucose metabolism defects . Conditional ⊕ 
 
Justification 
Indirect evidence could support the use of metformin treatment to increase the live birth rate in women 
with P COS, but in the absence of any substantial studie s in women with RPL and PCOS , the GDG decided 
metformin is not recommended. 
14.4 OVULATION INDUCTION 
Evidence 
The efficacy of controlled ovarian stimulation to increase the chance of a live birth in women with RPL 
(three or more consecutive first -trimeste r pregnancy losses) and a luteal phase defect was shown in a 
small study by Li and colleagues. They studied 21 subjects with unexplained RPL and retarded (>2 days 
behind chrono logical dating) endometrial development in the mid -luteal phase, as shown by LH -timed 
endometrial biopsy taken around day LH + 7, and histological dating . The women underwent at least 
one cycle of controlled ovarian stimulation by human menopausal gonadotropins (hMG). Out of 36 treatment cycles analyzed , 13 (33%) cycles from 12 subjec ts resulted in a pregnancy, of which two 
resulted in a miscarriage. In comparison, seven of 12 pregnancies in non- treatment cycles resulted in 
miscarriage (Li et al ., 2001
). 
Two other studies on ovulation induction as a treatment for RPL selected women with PCOS and RPL. In the study of Clifford and colleagues , 106 ovulatory women with a history of recurrent miscarriage, 
polycystic ovaries, and hypersecretion of lu teinizing hormone were randomly assigned to pituitary 
suppression with a luteinizing hormone releasing hormone analogue followed by low dose ovulation 
induction and luteal phase progesterone , or were allowed to ovulate spontaneously and then given 
luteal p hase progesterone alone or luteal phase placebo alone. There was no difference in conception [105] 
 
rate (80% vs 82%) or live birth rate (65% vs 76%) between the groups, nor was there a difference 
between the women given progesterone and those given placebo pessa ries (Clifford et al. , 1996 ). 
In the study by Johnson, ovulation was induced by clomiphene or pituitary suppression with buserelin 
followed by pure FSH in 4 2 women with PCOS and RPL. The miscarriage rate was 48% (11/23) for the 
clomiphene group compared with 9% (2/23) for the buserelin group. The authors concluded that 
pituitary suppression before induction of ovulation significantly reduces the risk of pregn ancy loss in 
women with PCOS and RPL (Johnson and Pearce, 1990 ). 
Conclusion 
Based on the study of Li, controlled ovarian stimulation by human menopausal gonado tropins could be 
beneficial for decreasing the chance of a next pregnancy loss in women with RPL diagnosed with luteal 
phase insufficiency ( Li et al. , 2001 ), howe ver the GDG decided that the evidence was to o limited to 
support recommending controlled ovarian stimulation in women with RPL but without PCOS . 
Based on a small study of women with RPL and PCOS, p ituitary suppression with buserelin before 
induction of o vulation in women with RPL and PCOS could be an option to reduce the risk of PL (Johnson 
and Pearce, 1990 ). 
14.5 BROMOCRIPTINE FOR RPL ASSOCIATED WITH HYP ERPRO LACTINEMIA 
Prolactin testing is only recommended in women with RPL if they have clinical symptoms (oligo -
amenorrhea) indicative of hyperprolactinemia. Patients with hyperprolactinemia who require medical 
therapy are typically treated with dopamine agonist therapy (bromocriptine or cabergoline). 
Evidence 
In a study by Hirahara, it was confirmed that also in women with RPL, bromocriptine effectively 
normalizes serum prolactin levels. Women with RPL and (occult) hyperprolactinemia were assigned to 
bromocripti ne (2.5– 5.0 mg/d, depending on individual response) from before conception until the end 
of the 9th week of gestation or no treatment. Twenty -one of the 24 women treated with bromocriptine 
conceived: 18 had a live birth (85.7%) and three miscarried (14.3%) , while in the non -treated group 21 
of 22 women conceived, 11 had a live birth (52.4%) and 10 miscarried (47.6%). In addition , serum 
prolactin levels during early pregnancy (5 –10 weeks of gestation) were significantly higher in women 
who miscarried (31.8 –55.3 ng/mL) than in women with successful pregnancies (4.6 –15.5 ng/mL) 
(Hirahara et al. , 1998 ). 
Recommendation 
Bromocriptine treatment can be considered in women with 
RPL and hyperprolactinemia to increase live birth rate. Conditional ⊕ 
 
Justification 
In women with RPL and hyperprolactinemia, bromocriptine treatment normalizes serum prolactin 
levels and it could be effective for increasing the chance of a live birth. However, this conclusion is 
based on a single small study, and hence should be confirmed. [106] 
 
14.6 VITAMIN D 
Evidence 
Vitamin D deficiency has been studied extensively in relation to obstetrical complications and was 
described as a risk factor for gestational diabetes, small for gestational age infants and preeclampsia in 
systematic reviews ( Aghajafari et al. , 2013 ). Furthermore, v itamin D deficiency during pregnancy 
adversely affects health, growth and development of the child ( McAree et al. , 2013). Even though 
vitamin D deficiency seems prevalent in women with RPL (47.4%, <30 ng/ml) ( Ota et al. , 2014 ), testing 
of vitamin D levels is not recommended w ith the aim of identifying cause or providing treatment options 
in women with RPL . 
There are no studies evaluating the effect of vitamin D supplementation on the chance of a live birth in 
the next pregnancy in women with RPL . One recent study concluded t hat vitamin D supplementation 
in women with RPL and vitamin D deficiency or insufficiency (n= 64) could reduce abnormalities of 
cellular immune responses observed in women with low vitamin D levels ( Chen et al. , 2016 ) 
Independent of RPL, concerns have been raised on the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency and 
insufficiency among pregnant women. Vitamin D status is affected by factors that regulate its 
production in the skin, including skin pigmentation, latitude, season, dressing codes, aging, sunscreen 
use and air pollution (De-Regil et al. , 2016 ). 
A recent review combining trials on vitamin D supplementation in pregnancy, which cumulatively 
involved more than 2000 pregnant women , reported that there were no adverse event s observed 
attributable to vitamin D supplementation (De-Regil et al. , 2016 , Wagner et al. , 2017 ). All trials started 
vitamin D supplementation after 20 weeks of gestation, and daily doses ranged from 200 to 2000 IU. 
Regarding the benefit of vitamin D supplementation on pregnancy related outcomes, evidence is scarce 
and inconsistent. Vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy seems to reduce the risk of preterm 
birth (three trials) and low birth weight (four trials). Miscarriage was not discussed (De-Regil et al. , 
2016 ). 
Recommendation 
Preconception counseling in w omen with RPL could include 
the general advice to consider prophylactic vitamin D 
supplementation . GPP 
Justification 
Based on the significant prevalence of vitamin D deficiency in women with RPL and the possibly associated obstetrical and fetal complica tions, prescribing vitamin D supplementation can be 
considered , even though evidence for the effectiveness is absent . With regard to harm, most experts 
agree that supplemental vitamin D is safe in dosages up to 4,000 IU per day during pregnancy or 
lactatio n, even though data on the safety of higher doses are lacking (2011 , Del Valle et al. , 2011
). 
 [107] 
 
14.7 TREA TMENT FOR HYPERHOMOC YSTEINEMIA 
There is inconsistent evidence for an association of elevated homocysteine ( Hcy) levels with RPL and 
assessment of Hcy levels is not recommended in women with RPL. However, studies have evaluated 
the effects of different trea tments on Hcy levels and pregnancy outcomes in women with RPL and HHcy. 
Evidence 
A first study showed that daily supplementation of 0.5 mg folic acid (for 2 months) in 49 women with a history of unexplained RPL substantially reduced homocysteine concentrat ions. The greatest decline in 
median fasting total plasma Hcy concentration ( -41%) was detected in women with the homozygous 
(T/T) MTHFR genotype ( Nelen et al., 1998
). 
The second study, a non- controlled pilot study, reported i mproved live birth rates (20 live births in 22 
pregnancies) in 25 women with RPL , HHcy and homozygous for the C677T mutation of the MTHFR gene 
after treatment with high -dose folic acid (15 mg daily , reduced to 5 mg after 3 months ) and vitamin B6 
(750 mg daily for 3 months ).(Quere et al., 2001 ). 
Another study reported benefit of treatment with L MWH (prophylactic dose of 2500 IU sc everyday) in 
concomitant with aspirin (5 mg/day) since fetal cardiac activity was observed by US and continuing up to 12 weeks of gestation with regard to pregnancy salvage in women with RPL and HHcy (
Chakraborty 
et al. , 2013 ). Pregnancy salvage was significantly higher after combined treatment in 76 women with 
HHcy as compared to 111 women with normal Hcy levels (84.2% versus 54.9%; OR 1.55; 95% CI 129 -
1.88) . 
Conclusion 
In the absence of consistent evidence for an association between HHcy and RPL, assessing Hcy levels is not routinely recommended. However, if HHcy is detected in women with RPL, treatments are available 
that can lower Hcy levels and possibly improve the chance of a live birth rate in the next pregnancy. 
References 
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 495: Vitamin D: Screening and supplementation during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 
2011; 118: 197- 198. 
Aghajafari F, Nagulesapillai T, Ronksley PE, Tough SC, O'Beirne M, Rabi DM. Association between maternal serum 
25-hydroxyvitamin D level and pregnancy and neonatal outcomes: systematic review and meta -analysis of 
observational studies. Bmj 2013; 346: f1169. 
Al-Biate MA. Effect of metformin on early pregnancy loss in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Taiwan J 
Obstet Gynecol 2015; 54: 266- 269. 
Alexander EK, Pearce EN, Brent GA, Brown RS, Chen H, Dosiou C, Grobman WA, Laurberg P, Lazarus JH, Mand el 
SJ et al. 2017 Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the Diagnosis and Management of Thyroid 
Disease During Pregnancy and the Postpartum. Thyroid 2017; 27: 315- 389. 
Andrade C. Major malformation risk, pregnancy outcomes, and neurodevelopment al outcomes associated with 
metformin use during pregnancy. J Clin Psychiatry 2016; 77: e411- 414. 
Bernardi LA, Cohen RN, Stephenson MD. Impact of subclinical hypothyroidism in women with recurrent early 
pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2013; 100: 1326- 1331. 
Chakraborty P, Banerjee S, Saha P, Nandi SS, Sharma S, Goswami SK, Chakravarty B, Kabir SN. Aspirin and low -
molecular weight heparin combination therapy effectively prevents recurrent miscarriage in hyperhomocysteinemic women. PLoS One 2013;
8: e74155. 
Chen X, Yin B, Lian RC, Zhang T, Zhang HZ, Diao LH, Li YY, Huang CY, Liang DS, Zeng Y. Modulatory effects of vitamin 
D on peripheral cellular immunity in patients with recurrent miscarriage. Am J Reprod Immunol 2016; 76: 432- 438. [108] 
 
Clifford K, Rai R, Watson H, Frank s S, Regan L. Does suppressing luteinising hormone secretion reduce the 
miscarriage rate? Results of a randomised controlled trial. Bmj 1996; 312: 1508- 1511. 
Coomarasamy A, Williams H, Truchanowicz E, Seed PT, Small R, Quenby S, Gupta P, Dawood F, Koot YE, Bender 
Atik R et al. A Randomized Trial of Progesterone in Women with Recurrent Miscarriages. N Engl J Med 2015; 373: 
2141- 2148. 
De-Regil LM, Palacios C, Lombardo LK, Pena -Rosas JP. Vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy. 
Cochrane Database Sys t Rev 2016 : CD008873. 
Del Valle HB, Yaktine AL, Taylor CL, Ross AC. Dietary reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D , 2011. National 
Academies Press. 
Hirahara F, Andoh N, Sawai K, Hirabuki T, Uemura T, Minaguchi H. Hyperprolactinemic recurrent miscarriage and results of randomized bromocriptine treatment trials. Fertil Steril 1998;
70: 246- 252. 
Jakubowicz DJ, Iuorno MJ, Jakubowicz S, Roberts KA, Nestler JE. Effects of metformin on early pregnancy loss in the polycystic ovary syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Me tab 2002;
87: 524- 529. 
Johnson P, Pearce JM. Recurrent spontaneous abortion and polycystic ovarian disease: comparison of two regimens to induce ovulation. Bmj 1990;
300: 154- 156. 
Khan I, Okosieme OE, Lazarus JH. Current challenges in the pharmacological man agement of thyroid dysfunction 
in pregnancy. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 2017; 10: 97-109. 
Khattab S, Mohsen IA, Foutouh IA, Ramadan A, Moaz M, Al -Inany H. Metformin reduces abortion in pregnant 
women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Gynecol Endocrinol 2006; 22: 680- 684. 
Korevaar TI, Muetzel R, Medici M, Chaker L, Jaddoe VW, de Rijke YB, Steegers EA, Visser TJ, White T, Tiemeier H 
et al. Association of maternal thyroid function during early pregnancy with offspring IQ and brain morphology in 
childhood: a populat ion-based prospective cohort study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2016; 4: 35-43. 
Lata K, Dutta P, Sridhar S, Rohilla M, Srinivasan A, Prashad GR, Shah VN, Bhansali A. Thyroid autoimmunity and obstetric outcomes in women with recurrent miscarriage: a case -control study. Endocr Connect 2013;
2: 118- 124. 
Lazarus J, Brown RS, Daumerie C, Hubalewska- Dydejczyk A, Negro R, Vaidya B. 2014 European thyroid association 
guidelines for the management of subclinical hypothyroidism in pregnancy and in children. Eur Thyroid J 2014; 3: 
76-94. 
Lepoutre T, Debieve F, Gruson D, Daumerie C. Reduction of miscarriages through universal screening and treatment of thyroid autoimmune diseases. Gynecol Obstet Invest 2012;
74: 265- 273. 
Li TC, Ding SH, Anstie B, Tuckerman E, Wood K, Laird S. Use of human menopausal gonadotropins in the treatment 
of endometrial defects associated with recurrent miscarriage: preliminary report. Fertil Steril 2001; 75: 434- 437. 
Maraka S, Mwangi R, McCoy RG, Yao X, Sangaralingham LR, Singh Ospina NM, O'Keeffe DT, De Ycaza AE, 
Rodriguez -Gutierrez R, Coddington CC, 3rd et al. Thyroid hormone treatment among pregnant women with 
subclinical hypothyroidism: US national assessment. Bmj 2017; 356: i6865. 
McAree T, Jacobs B, Manickavasagar T, Sivalokanathan S, Brennan L, Ba ssett P, Rainbow S, Blair M. Vitamin D 
deficiency in pregnancy - still a public health issue. Matern Child Nutr 2013; 9: 23-30. 
Morley LC, Simpson N, Tang T. Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) for preventing miscarriage. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2013; 1: Cd008611. 
Negro R, Formoso G, Mangieri T, Pezzarossa A, Dazzi D, Hassan H. Levothyroxine treatment in euthyroid pregnant women with autoimmune thyroid disease: effects on obstetrical complications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006;
91: 
2587- 2591. 
Negro R, Mangi eri T, Coppola L, Presicce G, Casavola EC, Gismondi R, Locorotondo G, Caroli P, Pezzarossa A, Dazzi 
D et al. Levothyroxine treatment in thyroid peroxidase antibody -positive women undergoing assisted 
reproduction technologies: a prospective study. Hum Repro d 2005; 20: 1529- 1533. 
Negro R, Schwartz A, Gismondi R, Tinelli A, Mangieri T, Stagnaro -Green A. Universal screening versus case finding 
for detection and treatment of thyroid hormonal dysfunction during pregnancy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010; 95: 
1699- 1707 . 
Nelen WL, Blom HJ, Thomas CM, Steegers EA, Boers GH, Eskes TK. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 
polymorphism affects the change in homocysteine and folate concentrations resulting from low dose folic acid 
supplementation in women with unexplained recu rrent miscarriages. J Nutr 1998; 128: 1336- 1341. 
Ota K, Dambaeva S, Han AR, Beaman K, Gilman -Sachs A, Kwak -Kim J. Vitamin D deficiency may be a risk factor for 
recurrent pregnancy losses by increasing cellular immunity and autoimmunity. Hum Reprod 2014; 29: 208- 219. [109] 
 
Quere I, Mercier E, Bellet H, Janbon C, Mares P, Gris JC. Vitamin supplementation and pregnancy outcome in 
women with recurrent early pregnancy loss and hyperhomocysteinemia. Fertil Steril 2001; 75: 823- 825. 
Stagnaro -Green A, Abalovich M, Alexander E, Azizi F, Mestman J, Negro R, Nixon A, Pearce EN, Soldin OP, Sullivan 
S. Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the diagnosis and management of thyroid disease during pregnancy and postpartum. Thyroid 2011;
21: 1081- 1125. 
Stephenson MD, McQue en D, Winter M, Kliman HJ. Luteal start vaginal micronized progesterone improves 
pregnancy success in women with recurrent pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2017; 107: 684- 690 e682. 
Thangaratinam S, Tan A, Knox E, Kilby MD, Franklyn J, Coomarasamy A. Associatio n between thyroid 
autoantibodies and miscarriage and preterm birth: meta- analysis of evidence. Bmj 2011; 342: d2616. 
Vissenberg R, van den Boogaard E, van Wely M, van der Post JA, Fliers E, Bisschop PH, Goddijn M. Treatment of 
thyroid disorders before conce ption and in early pregnancy: a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update 2012; 18: 
360- 373. 
Wagner CL, Hollis BW, Kotsa K, Fakhoury H, Karras SN. Vitamin D administration during pregnancy as prevention for pregnancy, neonatal and postnatal complications. Rev En docr Metab Disord 2017. 
Wang Y, Zhao H, Li Y, Zhang J, Tan J, Liu Y. Relationship between recurrent miscarriage and insulin resistance. Gynecol Obstet Invest 2011;
72: 245- 251. 
Zolghadri J, Tavana Z, Kazerooni T, Soveid M, Taghieh M. Relationship between ab normal glucose tolerance test 
and history of previous recurrent miscarriages, and beneficial effect of metformin in these patients: a prospective 
clinical study. Fertil Steril 2008; 90: 727- 730. 
 
 [110] 
 
15. Treatment for uterine 
abnormalities in RPL 
KEY QUESTION: WHICH THERAPEUTIC IN TERVENTIONS SHOULD B E OFFERED TO WOMEN WITH 
RPL AND UTERINE ABNO RMALITIES TO INCREAS E LIVE BIRTH RATES? 
3D ultrasound is recommended for the detection of Müllerian uterine malformations that are 
associated with RPL. With 3D ultrasound , several other uterine abnormalities can be seen. This chapter 
will explore treatment options for Müllerian uterine malformations that can improve the chances of a 
live birth in women with RPL, but we will also elaborate briefly on treatment options for o ther 
abnormali ties. 
15.1 CONGENITAL UTERINE MALFORMATIONS 
Evidence 
Reconstructive surgery is a treatment option for congenital uterine malformations , but it depends on 
the type and the severity of the malformation . 
Septate uterus 
For a septate uterus, hys teroscopic metroplasty has become the indicated treatment of choice ( Valle 
and Ekpo, 2013 ). Older studies have discussed abdominal metroplasty, but based on lower morbidity, 
ease of the procedure and the reduc ed risk of intrauterine adhesions, hysteroscopic metroplasty is the 
preferred option, and widely applied (Grimbizis et al. , 2001 , Valli et al. , 2004, Mollo et al. , 2011 ). 
A Cochrane review on the topic found no RCTs evaluating hysteroscopic metroplasty with expectant 
management in women with RPL (Kowalik et al. , 2011, Rikken et al. , 2017 ). Another meta -analysis (not 
specific for RPL) reported a sig nificantly decreased risk of pregnancy loss in women who underwent 
hysteroscopic septotomy as compared to women who did not undergo treatment (RR 0.37; 95% CI 
0.25- 0.55; I2 = 0%; five studies) (Venetis et al. , 2014 ). 
One recent prospective study reported pregnancy outcomes in women with RPL (≥ 2 PLs) and uterine 
malformations. Of the 124 women with a septate uterus, 109 underwent surgery. In women that 
achieved pregnancy, 78 of 96 (81.3%) women treated with surgery and 8 of 13 (61.5%) women without 
surgery delivered a live born at the first pregnancy after examination (Sugiura -Ogasawara et al. , 2015 ). 
There were no significant differences in preterm birth, low birth weight or caesarean section. Another 
prospective study reported a higher rate of pregnancies in women with RPL and septate uterus 
undergoing hysteroscopic resection (n=46) as compared to those that elected expectant management 
(n=32) (80.4% vs 56.3%; p<0.005). The miscarriage rate was 21.6% and 50.0 %, respectively for surgery 
and EM (p<0.005) (Pang et al. , 2011 ). 
Non-controlled and observational studies have suggested a beneficial effect of surgery (Homer et al., 
2000 ) but are biased by comparing miscarriage rates before and after treatment. Furthermore, most 
of them describe women with RPL as a small subgroup. One of the largest study on 63 women with RPL 
and septate uterus reported a decrease in the misc arriage rate from 90% to 10 -20% after surgery ( Porcu [111] 
 
et al. , 2000 ). A few studies have also reported on the live birth rate, and found an increase after surger y 
(Choe and Baggish, 1992 , Valli et al. , 2004 , Giacomucci et al. , 2011 , Ghahiry et al. , 2014 ). 
Although a reduction in the miscarriage rate in 72 women with RPL and septate uterus was reported in 
the study of Venturoli, they also reported on pr egnancies and deliveries. They found that surgery had 
a negative impact on fertility, with only 52% becoming pregnant in the first year after surgery. For those 
becoming pregnant, they found a reduction in the miscarriage rate ( Venturoli et al. , 2002 ). 
Hysteroscopic treatment of a symptomatic septate uterus can be accomplished via various methods 
including hysteroscopic scissors, and electrosurgical electro des fitted through the hysteroscop e (or 
resectoscop e), which are the most common used methods. There is no evidence to elect one method 
over the others ( Colac urci et al. , 2007, Valle and Ekpo, 2013 ) 
Other uterine malformations 
For hemi -uterus (former AFS unicornuate uterus) , uterine reconstruction is not feasible (Jaslow, 2014 ). 
However, in cases of hemi -uterus with rudimentary hor n and cavity, laparoscopic removal of the 
rudimentary horn should be considered to avoid “ectopic” pregnancy in this cavity and, in some cases, 
hematocavity (obstructive symptoms). 
Metroplasty (transabdominal or laparoscopically ) is the only option for a bicornuate uterus (Papp et al. , 
2006 , Alborzi et al. , 2015 ). Surgery however showed no benefit for having a live born in women with a 
bicornuate uterus , but tended to decrease the preterm birth rate and the low birth weight in women 
with RPL (Sugiura -Ogasawara et al. , 2015 ). Overall, there is no strong evidence in favor of metroplasty 
in women having RPL and a bicornuate uterus (Bailey et al. , 2015 ). 
In wom en with RPL and bicorporeal uterus and double cervix (former AFS didelphic uterus ), 
laparoscopic unification of the uterus has been described, but the efficacy for improving live birth rate, 
is unclear as the data are based on few studies and few patients (Alborzi et al. , 2009 , Jaslow, 2014 , 
Alborzi et al., 2015 ). 
We found no evidence supporting any recommendations on treatment of T -shaped uterus or bicorporal 
septate uterus in women with RPL. 
Recommendation s 
Whether hysteroscopic septum resection has beneficial 
effects (improving live birth rates, an d decreasing 
miscarriage rates, without doing harm), should be evaluated 
in the context of surgical trials in women with RPL and 
septate uterus . Conditional ⊕ 
 
Metroplasty is not recommended for bicorporeal uterus 
with normal cervix (former AFS bicornu ate uterus ) and RPL. Strong ⊕ 
 [112] 
 
Uterine reconstruction is not recommended for hemi-uterus 
(former AFS unicornuate uterus ) and RPL . Strong ⊕ 
 
There is insuffic ient evidence in favor of metroplasty in 
women with bicorporeal uterus and double cervix (f ormer 
AFS didelphic uterus ) and RPL. Conditional ⊕ 
 
Justification 
Women with (untreated) congenital uterine malformations have significantly impaired pregnancy 
outcome (see also chapter 8) (Grimbizis et al. , 2001 ). 
For women with RPL and septate uterus, observational studies suggest a benefit of treatme nt in 
reducing the miscarriage rate . This was also the conclusion of a recent meta -analysis of uterine 
malformations (not specific for RPL): women who underwent hysteroscopic septum resection had a 
significantly decreased probability of spontaneous miscarriage compared with women who did not 
undergo treatment (RR 0.37; 95% CI 0.25 - 0.55; heterogeneity I² 0%; 6 datasets) (Venetis et al. , 2014 ). 
However, the ef fect on fertility (i.e. the chance of becoming pregnant after surgery) is unclear. 
Therefore, the GDG decided to formulate a recommendation f or more research on the topic. 
For Müllerian malformations other than septate uterus, there are currently no high quality studies t o 
support surgery for improving the live birth rate or decreasing the miscarriage rate. Existing studies are 
difficult to summarize as they use different diagnostic criteria, various techniques, different endpoints , 
and a wide range of therapeutic options (transabdominal, hysteroscopic metroplasty by using 
monopolar, bipolar, loop, or scissors). 
To establish the value of metroplasty for bicorporeal uterus with normal cervix (former AFS bicornuate 
uterus ) conclusively, controlled trials co mparing women after surgery with matched controls 
undergoing expectant management are needed. Furthermore, the risk of subfertility after surgery should be clarified. F or other Müllerian malformations , good quality randomized trials with carefully 
classifi ed patients are urgently needed (Sugiura -Ogasawara et al. , 2013
). 
Additional information 
In the event of irreparable anatomic uterine abnormalities and RPL, IVF with transfer of embryos to an 
appropriately selected gestational carrier (surrogacy) can be an option . 
More information on the ESHRE/ESGE classification system of female genital tract congenital 
malformations (Grimbizis et al. , 2013 ) is available on the ESHRE website ( www.eshre.eu/guidelines ) 
15.2 ACQUIRED INTRAUTERINE MALFORMATIONS 
Although not clearly associated with RPL, acquired intrauterine malformations are detected in women 
with RPL when performing recommended pelvic ultrasound for the detection of congenital 
malformations , and studies have evaluated whether treatment of the acquired intra uterine 
malformations affects the miscarriage rate and the chance of a live birth. [113] 
 
In a recent RCT in women with normal transvaginal ultrasound and subfertility , there was no evidence 
for improved pregnancy outcomes when performing routine hysteroscopy (i ncluding surgical 
correction of acquired intrauterine malformations ) before IVF treatment as compared to immediate 
IVF (RR 1.06; 95% CI 0.93 -1.20) (Smit et al. , 2016). 
Endometrial polyps 
Endometrial polyps are found in women with RPL, but there is no clear evidence of an association with 
pregnancy loss. Although there are no adequate studies showing benefit for polypectomy in RPL, 
hysteroscopic removal can be c onsidered for large r polyps (> 1 cm) in women with RPL without any 
other known cause ( Lieng et al. , 2010 , Salim et al. , 2011, Jaslow, 2014 ). The size- limit is derived from 
the observation that a significant proportion (27%) of endometrial polyps regressed spontaneously 
within one year, and that this was specifically seen in smaller polyps (<1 cm) (Lieng et al. , 2009 ). 
Fibroids 
There are no studies on the effect of treatment of fibroids on the miscarriage rate in women with RPL. 
In subfertile women with submucosal fibroids, myomectomy did not significantly improve live birth rate 
or miscarriage rate, as compared to controls with fibroids that did not have myomectomy (based on two observational studies) (Pritts et al. , 2009
). Pregnancy rates, live birth rates and miscarriag e rates 
after myomectomy were similar to those in infertile patients without fibroids, indicating a benefit for surgery (based on three studies). A more recent study reported a benefit of myomectomy with regard 
to miscarriage rate in women with infertility or RPL and submucosal fibroids (
Roy et al. , 2010 ). The AAGL 
practice guidelines concluded that at least in selected patients, submucous myomectomy may reduce the risk of spontaneous abortion (
Jaslow, 2014 ). 
With regard to subserosal and intramural fibroids, these are not considered likely factors contributing 
to RPL (Jaslow, 2014 ). For intram ural fibroids (i.e. fibroids that do not distort the uterine cavity), 
myomectomy did not significantly improve live birth rate or miscarriage rate, as compared to controls 
with fibroids that did not have myomectomy ( Pritts et al. , 2009 ). Furthermore, women with fibroids not 
distorting the uterine cavity can achieve hi gh live birth rates without inter vention (Saravelos et al. , 
2011 ). 
Recommendation s 
There is insufficient evidence supporting hysteroscopic 
removal of submu cosal fibroids or endometrial polyps in 
women with RPL. Conditional ⊕ 
 
Surgical removal of intramural fibroids is not recommended 
in women with RPL. There is insufficient evidence to 
recommend removing fibroids that distort the uterine 
cavity. Conditi onal ⊕ [114] 
 
Justification 
Clinical management of RPL in patients with endometrial polyps, submucosal or intramural fibroids is 
controversial, and there is no conclusive evidence that polyps or fibroids are associated with RPL and 
no conclusive evidence that surgical treatment reduces the risk of pregnancy loss. 
Hysteroscopic myomectomy for fibroids may be associated with postoperative complications that can affect future pregnancies, including the formation of intrauterine adhesions and the risk of uterine 
rupture during pregnancy ( Di Spiezio Sardo et al. , 2008
). Hence, myomectomy is not recommended. 
Intrauterine adhesions (IUA) (Asherman ’s syndrome) 
Intrauterine adhesions (IUA) are frequently detected in women with RPL, but t he relationship and 
impact of IUAs on long -term reproductive outcomes remain undetermined (Hooker et al. , 2014 ). 
Furthermore , women with RPL may be predisposed to developing intrauterine adhesions because of a 
previous dilatation and curettage ( Hooker et al. , 2014 , Jaslow, 2014 ). In reviews on the topic, surgical 
removal for adhesions is recommended for women having RPL (Kodaman and Arici, 2007 , Jaslow, 2014 ). 
In the absence of controlled trials, this conclusion is based on small observational studies comparing 
miscarriage rates before and after adhesiolysis . 
Recommendation 
There is insufficient evidence of benefit for surgical removal 
of intrauterine adhesions for pregnancy outcome. After 
hysteroscopic removal of intrauterine adhesions in women 
with RPL, precautions have to be taken to prevent 
recurrence of adhesions . Conditio nal ⊕ 
Justification 
The treatment of adhesions is surgical removal . Although small observational studies have shown that 
surgery may decrease miscarriage rates in women with RPL , the GDG decided to formulate a conditional 
recommendation based on the ab sence of conclusive data on benefit and harm. For severe adhesions, 
benefits with regard to pregnancy and pain symptoms may outweigh the potential harms of surgery In 
any case , uterine surgery is a known cause for adhesions, and treatment should attempt to prevent 
recurrence of adhesions. 
Additional information 
Non-surgical techniques for the removal of intrauterine adhesions (f.i. stem cell therapy) are being 
explored but need confirmation before being applied in routine practice ( Santamaria et al. , 2016 ). 
15.3 CERVICAL INSUFFICIENC Y 
Cervical weakness is believed to be a causing factor for pregnancy loss in women experiencing recurrent 
second trimester p regnancy loss, but this association is complicated by the absence of a consistent 
definition, or diagnostic criteria (Drakeley et al. , 1998 ). Cervical cerclag e has been used in the 
prevention of preterm birth in women with previous second trimester pregnancy loss or risk factors 
such as short cervix revealed at ultrasound examination. [115] 
 
Evidence 
A Cochrane review on cervical stitch (cerclage) for preventing preg nancy loss found no conclusive 
evidence that prophylactic cerclage reduces the risk of pregnancy loss or preterm delivery in women at 
risk of preterm birth or mid -trimester loss due to cervical weakness (based on 4 RCTs). Similarly, there 
was no evidence o f benefit for cerclage in women with evidence for short cervix on ultrasound (2 RCTs 
with limited number of patients) (Drakeley et al. , 2003 ). 
Another recent review on cerclage (not specifically on pregnancy loss) concluded that the actual groups 
that benefit of cerclage ar e limited, but include women with three prior adverse events, and those with 
a short cervix (<25 mm) who have had a prior preterm birth (Story and Shennan, 2014 ). 
With regard to the technical aspects, a review reported no difference i n the reproductive outcomes 
when the cerclage was performed before or durin g pregnancy. T here was also no difference between 
laparotomy and laparoscopy , except that m ost complications, in particular excessive intraoperative 
blood loss, were reported with laparotomy ( Tulandi et al. , 2014 ). In a recent trial , there was no 
difference in pregnancy or preterm delivery rates after single (n=14) or double cervical cerclage (n=19) 
in women with RPL a ssigned to cervical weakness , but the gestational duration was significantly longer 
after double cerclage ( Zolghadri et al. , 2014 ). 
In a retrospective stud y of 55 women with prior ultrasound -indicated cerclage (not necessarily RPL), 23 
underwent cervical surveillance in the next pregnancy and 57% did not require intervention for a short 
cervix. Of 23 women that received a history -indicated vaginal cerclage, six delivered preterm (<34 
weeks), which was significantly more than the women under surveillance. Eight women receiving an abdominal elective cerclage had good outcomes (Hall et al. , 2015
). 
Recommendation s 
Women with a hist ory of second -trimester PLs and 
suspected cervical weakness should be offered serial 
cervical sonographic surveillance. Strong ⊕⊕ 
 
In women with a singleton pregnancy and a history of 
recurrent second -trimester PL attributable to cervical 
weakness, a ce rclage could be considered. There is no 
evidence that this treatment increases perinatal survival. Conditional ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification 
Based on inconclusive evidence on the benefit , and taking into consideration the absence of a 
consistent definition or a sta ndardized diagnosis, and the possible harms associated with any surgery, 
the GDG is cautious in the reco mmendations on cerclage for RPL, but strong in recommending 
ultrasound surveillance. [116] 
 
References 
AAGL practice report: pract ice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of submucous leiomyomas. J Minim 
Invasive Gynecol 2012; 19: 152- 171. 
Alborzi S, Asadi N, Zolghadri J, Alborzi S, Alborzi M. Laparoscopic metroplasty in bicornuate and didelphic uteri. 
Fertil Steril 2009; 92: 352-355. 
Alborzi S, Asefjah H, Amini M, Vafaei H, Madadi G, Chubak N, Tavana Z. Laparoscopic metroplasty in bicornuate 
and didelphic uteri: feasibility and outcome. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2015; 291: 1167- 1171. 
Bailey AP, Jaslow CR, Kutteh WH. Minimally invasive surgical options for congenital and acquired uterine factors 
associated with recurrent pregnancy loss. Womens Health (Lond Engl) 2015; 11: 161- 167. 
Choe JK, Baggish MS. Hysteroscopic treatment of septate uterus with Neodymium -YAG laser. Fertil Steril 1992; 57: 
81-84. 
Colacurci N, De Franciscis P, Mollo A, Litta P, Perino A, Cobellis L, De Placido G. Small- diameter hysteroscopy with 
Versapoint versus resectoscopy with a unipolar knife for the treatment of septate uterus: a prospective 
randomized study. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2007; 14: 622- 627. 
Di Spiezio Sardo A, Mazzon I, Bramante S, Bettocchi S, Bifulco G, Guida M, Nappi C. Hysteroscopic myomectomy: 
a comprehensive review of surgical techniques. Hum Reprod Update 2008; 14: 101- 119. 
Drakeley AJ, Quenby S, Farq uharson RG. Mid -trimester loss --appraisal of a screening protocol. Hum Reprod 
1998; 13: 1975- 1980. 
Drakeley AJ, Roberts D, Alfirevic Z. Cervical stitch (cerclage) for preventing pregnancy loss in women. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2003 : CD003253. 
Ghahiry AA, Refaei Aliabadi E, Taherian AA, Najafian A, Ghasemi M. Effectiveness of hysteroscopic repair of uterine 
lesions in reproductive outcome. Int J Fertil Steril 2014; 8: 129-134. 
Giacomucci E, Bellavia E, Sandri F, Farina A, Scagliarini G. Term delivery rate after hysteroscopic metroplasty in patients with recurrent spontaneous abortion and T -shaped, arcuate and septate uterus. Gynecol Obstet Invest 
2011;
71: 183- 188. 
Grimbizis GF, Camus M, Tarlatzis BC, Bontis JN, Devroey P. Clinical implications of uterine mal formations and 
hysteroscopic treatment results. Hum Reprod Update 2001; 7: 161- 174. 
Grimbizis GF, Gordts S, Di Spiezio Sardo A, Brucker S, De Angelis C, Gergolet M, Li TC, Tanos V, Brolmann H, 
Gianaroli L et al. The ESHRE/ESGE consensus on the classificatio n of female genital tract congenital anomalies. 
Hum Reprod 2013; 28: 2032- 2044. and Gynecol Surg 2013;2010: 2199 -2212. 
Hall M, Vousden N, Carter J, Hezelgrave N, Shennan AH. Prevention of mid -trimester loss following full dilatation 
caesarean section: a pot ential role for transabdominal cervical cerclage. J Obstet Gynaecol 2015; 35: 98-99. 
Homer HA, Li TC, Cooke ID. The septate uterus: a review of management and reproductive outcome. Fertil Steril 
2000; 73: 1-14. 
Hooker AB, Lemmers M, Thurkow AL, Heymans MW, O pmeer BC, Brolmann HA, Mol BW, Huirne JA. Systematic 
review and meta -analysis of intrauterine adhesions after miscarriage: prevalence, risk factors and long -term 
reproductive outcome. Hum Reprod Update 2014; 20: 262- 278. 
Jaslow CR. Uterine factors. Obstet G ynecol Clin North Am 2014; 41: 57-86. 
Kodaman PH, Arici A. Intra -uterine adhesions and fertility outcome: how to optimize success? Curr Opin Obstet 
Gynecol 2007; 19: 207- 214. 
Kowalik CR, Goddijn M, Emanuel MH, Bongers MY, Spinder T, de Kruif JH, Mol Ben Will em J, Heineman Maas J. 
Metroplasty versus expectant management for women with recurrent miscarriage and a septate uterus Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews . 2011. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Lieng M, Istre O, Qvigstad E. Treatment of endometrial polyps: a systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 
2010; 89: 992- 1002. 
Lieng M, Istre O, Sandvik L, Qvigstad E. Prevalence, 1- year regression rate, and clinical significance of 
asymptomatic endometrial polyps: cross -sectional study. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2009; 16: 465- 471. 
Mollo A, Nazzaro G, Granata M, Clarizia R, Fiore E, Cadente C, Castaldo G, Conforti S, Locci M, De Placido G. 
Combined hysteroscopic findings and 3- dimensional reconstructed coronal view of the uterus to avoid 
laparoscopic assessment for inpatient hysteroscopic metroplasty: pilot study. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2011; 18: 
112- 117. [117] 
 
Pang LH, Li MJ, Li M, Xu H, Wei ZL. Not every subseptate uterus requires surgical correction to reduce poor 
reproductive outcome. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2011; 115: 260- 263. 
Papp Z, Mezei G, Gavai M, Hupuczi P, Urbancsek J. Reproductive performance after transabdominal metroplasty: 
a review of 157 consecutive cases. J Reprod Med 2006; 51: 544-552. 
Porcu G, Cravello L, D'Ercole C, Cohen D, Roger V, de Montgolfier R, Blanc B. Hysteroscopic metroplasty for septate 
uterus and repetitive abortions: reproductive outcome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2000; 88: 81-84. 
Pritts EA, Parker WH, Olive DL. Fibroids and infertility: an updated systematic review of the evidence. Fertil St eril 
2009; 91: 1215- 1223. 
Rikken JF, Kowalik CR, Emanuel MH, Mol BW, Van der Veen F, van Wely M, Goddijn M. Septum resection for 
women of reproductive age with a septate uterus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 1: CD008576. 
Roy KK, Singla S, Baruah J, Sharma JB, Kumar S, Singh N. Reproductive outcome following hysteroscopic 
myomectomy in patients with infertility and recurrent abortions. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2010; 282: 553- 560. 
Salim S, Won H, Nesbitt- Hawes E, Campbell N, Abbott J. Diagnosis and management of e ndometrial polyps: a 
critical review of the literature. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2011; 18: 569- 581. 
Santamaria X, Cabanillas S, Cervello I, Arbona C, Raga F, Ferro J, Palmero J, Remohi J, Pellicer A, Simon C. 
Autologous cell therapy with CD133+ bone marrow -derived stem cells for refractory Asherman's syndrome and 
endometrial atrophy: a pilot cohort study. Hum Reprod 2016; 31: 1087- 1096. 
Saravelos SH, Yan J, Rehmani H, Li TC. The prevalence and impact of fibroids and their treatment on the outcome of pregnancy in women with recurrent miscarriage. 
Hum Reprod 2011; 26: 3274- 3279. 
Smit JG, Kasius JC, Eijkemans MJ, Koks CA, van Golde R, Nap AW, Scheffer GJ, Manger PA, Hoek A, Schoot BC et 
al. Hysteroscopy before in -vitro fertilisation (inSIGHT): a multicentre, rando mised controlled trial. Lancet 
2016; 387: 2622- 2629. 
Story L, Shennan A. Cervical cerclage: an established intervention with neglected potential? Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2014;
176: 17-19. 
Sugiura- Ogasawara M, Lin BL, Aoki K, Maruyama T, Nakatsuka M, Ozawa N, Sugi T, Takeshita T, Nishida M. Does 
surgery improve live birth rates in patients with recurrent miscarriage caused by uterine anomalies? J Obstet 
Gynaecol 2015; 35: 155- 158. 
Sugiura- Ogasawara M, Ozaki Y, Suzumori N. Mullerian anomalies and recurr ent miscarriage. Curr Opin Obstet 
Gynecol 2013; 25: 293- 298. 
Tulandi T, Alghanaim N, Hakeem G, Tan X. Pre and post -conceptional abdominal cerclage by laparoscopy or 
laparotomy. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2014; 21: 987- 993. 
Valle RF, Ekpo GE. Hysteroscopic metr oplasty for the septate uterus: review and meta -analysis. J Minim Invasive 
Gynecol 2013; 20: 22-42. 
Valli E, Vaquero E, Lazzarin N, Caserta D, Marconi D, Zupi E. Hysteroscopic metroplasty improves gestational 
outcome in women with recurrent spontaneous abor tion. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 2004; 11: 240- 244. 
Venetis CA, Papadopoulos SP, Campo R, Gordts S, Tarlatzis BC, Grimbizis GF. Clinical implications of congenital uterine anomalies: a meta -analysis of comparative studies. Reprod Biomed Online 2014;
29: 665- 683. 
Venturoli S, Colombo FM, Vianello F, Seracchioli R, Possati G, Paradisi R. A study of hysteroscopic metroplasty in 141 women with a septate uterus. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2002;
266: 157- 159. 
Zolghadri J, Younesi M, Asadi N, Khosravi D, Behdin S, Tavana Z , Ghaffarpasand F. Double versus single cervical 
cerclage for patients with recurrent pregnancy loss: A randomized clinical trial Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology research . 2014, pp. 375 -380. 
 
 [118] 
 
16. Treatment for RPL with M ale 
factor 
KEY QUESTION: WHIC H THERAPEUTIC INTERV ENTIONS SHOULD BE OF FERED TO COUPLES WITH 
RPL DUE TO MALE FACT OR TO INCREASE LIVE BIRTH RATE? 
There is moderate evidence of associations between sperm DNA quality and miscarriage . Since there is 
also clear evidence that sperm DNA damag e is caused by unhealthy lifestyles and disease, male partners 
should be advised of these risks. 
Evidence (see also summary of findings table 8) 
Smoking cessation 
Cigarette smoke contains over 4,000 chemicals, many of which are oxidative; impairing sperm q uality 
and function ( Li et al. , 2011 ) and inducing strand breaks in sperm DNA ( Arabi, 2004 , Hsu et al. , 2009 ). 
Associations b etween smoking and reduced male fertility, heritable genomic damage and incidence of 
childhood cancer and impaired mental health of offspring has been well documented ( Aitken et al. , 
2009 ). There is no evidence on whether paternal smoking cessation has a beneficial effect on LBRs. 
Obesity 
Obesity is associated with impaired semen par ameters and sperm DNA damage ( Du Plessis et al. , 2010 ). 
In one study of 5 20 men, a positive correlation between body mass index and sperm DNA fragmentation 
was reported , with a 20% increase in sperm DNA damage in obese men (Chavarro et al. , 2010 ). Again, 
there is no evidence that paternal weight loss has an impact on LBR in RPL. 
Medications 
A range of prescribed drugs has deleterious effects on sperm quality (reviewed by ( Sharma et al. , 2013 ). 
For example, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, cort icosteroids, antibiotics, anti -inflammatories 
and even co deine can harm sperm function. Many of these effects are reversible so male partners of 
couples being investigated for RPL should have a full history taken so that these male risks may be 
identified and potentially deleterious medication avoided as part of a holistic approach for the couple. 
Varicocele repair 
Varicocele has an incidence of 40% in men presenting with infertility (Nagler et al. , 1997 ) and it leads 
to impaired semen quality and increased sperm DNA damage in comparison to healthy donors (Wright 
et al. , 2014 ). Evidence suggests that varicocelectomy could improve sperm DNA integrity in infertile 
patients, but there have not been any studies in RPL (Wang et al. , 2012 ). In a recent retrospective 
stud y, no significant difference in miscarriage rates were observed after ICSI in 169 men who had 
undergo ne varicocele repair when compared with 79 men with clinical varicocele ( Pasqualotto et al. , 
2012 ).Surgical intervention of varicocele, although it could improve sperm DNA quality , does not 
translate to a reduction in miscarriages ( Cho et al. , 2016, Pathak et al. , 2016 ). 
Sperm selection 
Some studies have shown that there is less sperm DNA fragmentation in sperm separated by post 
density centrifugation as compar ed to semen (Donnelly et al. , 2000 , Sakkas et al. , 2000 ). However, no [119] 
 
studies have been performed inv estigating whether sperm selection/preparation could improve LBR in 
couples with RPL. Therefore, this option should not be recommended to male partners. 
Nutrition and antioxidants 
A balanced diet, rich in carbohydrates, fiber , vegetable protein and water , is associated with healthy 
sperm (i.e. good motility, morphology and DNA quality) . Restricting intake of fats, especially trans -fats 
and sugars is also associ ated with good sperm quality. Natural antioxidants in the form of vitamins C 
and E and minerals l ike Selenium, Iron and Zinc decrease levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). 
However, as a small physiological level of ROS is necessary for normal sperm function ( Aitken et al. , 
2012 , Doshi et al. , 2012 ), men would be advised to test for seminal oxidative stress prior to embarking 
on additional dietary antioxidant supplementation. 
A Cochrane review of 34 s tudies has reported that men with poor semen quality showed improvement 
in sperm parameters following antioxidant therapy . In three studies reporting miscarriage, no 
significant difference was found in miscarriage rate between couples randomized to antioxi dant 
therapy compared to placebo (OR 1.74; 95% CI 0.40- 7.60) . Live birth rate was higher in couples 
randomized to treatment (OR 4.21; 95% CI 2.08 -8.51; 4 RCTs). However, these numbers are too small 
to be definitive and further research is needed ( Showell et al. , 2014 ). We found no studies assessing 
antioxidant therapy in couples with RPL. 
Recommendations 
Couples with RPL should be informed that smoking, alco hol 
consumption, obesity and excessive exercise could have a 
negative impact on their chances of a live birth, and 
therefore cessation of smoking, a normal body weight, 
limited alcohol consumption and a normal exercise pattern 
is recommended. GPP 
 
Sperm selection is not recommended as a treatment in 
couples with RPL . GPP 
 
Antioxidants for men have not been shown to improve the 
chance of a live birth . Conditional ⊕ 
 
Justification 
No relevant papers on treatment for miscarriage, or recurrent pregnancy loss associated with a male 
factor problem have been found . In the absence of any data in RPL, the GDG recommends against 
sperm selection in a GPP. 
Antioxidants for men are often used, but there is no evidence that antioxidants could be helpful in 
couple s with RPL. In a Cochrane review, antioxidants did improve live birth rate after ART in subfertile [120] 
 
men , but it did not significantly decrease the chance of a pregnancy loss (see also summary of findings 
table 8). Therefore, a conditional recommendation was formulated. 
References 
Aitken RJ, De Iuliis GN, McLachlan RI. Biological and clinical significance of DNA damage in the male germ line. Int 
J Androl 2009; 32: 46-56. 
Aitken RJ, Jones KT, Robertson SA. Reactive oxygen species a nd sperm function --in sickness and in health. J Androl 
2012; 33: 1096- 1106. 
Arabi M. Nicotinic infertility: assessing DNA and plasma membrane integrity of human spermatozoa. Andrologia 
2004; 36: 305- 310. 
Chavarro JE, Toth TL, Wright DL, Meeker JD, Hauser R. Body mass index in relation to semen quality, sperm DNA 
integrity, and serum reproductive hormone levels among men attending an infertility clinic. Fertil Steril 2010; 93: 
2222- 2231. 
Cho CL, Esteves SC, Agarwal A. Novel insights into the pathophysiology of varicocele and its association with 
reactive oxygen species and sperm DNA fragmentation. Asian J Androl 2016; 18: 186- 193. 
Donnelly ET, O'Connell M, McClure N, Lewis SE. Differences in nuclear DNA fragmentation and mitochondrial integrity of semen and prepared human spermatozoa. Hum Reprod 2000;
15: 1552- 1561. 
Doshi SB, Khullar K, Sharma RK, Agarwal A. Role of reactive nitrogen species in male infertility. Reprod Biol 
Endocrinol 2012; 10: 109. 
Du Plessis SS, Cabler S, McAlister DA, Sabanegh E, Agarwal A. The e ffect of obesity on sperm disorders and male 
infertility. Nat Rev Urol 2010; 7: 153- 161. 
Hsu PC, Chang HY, Guo YL, Liu YC, Shih TS. Effect of smoking on blood lead levels in workers and role of reactive oxygen species in lead -induced sperm chromatin DNA dam age. Fertil Steril 2009;
91: 1096- 1103. 
Li Y, Lin H, Li Y, Cao J. Association between socio -psycho -behavioral factors and male semen quality: systematic 
review and meta -analyses. Fertil Steril 2011; 95: 116- 123. 
Nagler HM, Luntz RK, Martinis FG. Varicocele. In Lipshultz LI and Howards S (eds) Infertility in the male Mosby-Year Book . 1997. Inc., , St Louis, USA, pp. 336 -359. 
Pasqualotto FF, Braga DP, Figueira RC, Setti AS, Iaconelli A, Jr., Borges E, Jr. Varicocelectomy does not impact 
pregnancy outcomes follo wing intracytoplasmic sperm injection procedures. J Androl 2012; 33: 239- 243. 
Pathak P, Chandrashekar A, Hakky TS, Pastuszak AW. Varicocele management in the era of in vitro fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Asian J Androl 2016;
18: 343- 348. 
Sakkas D, Manicardi GC, Tomlinson M, Mandrioli M, Bizzaro D, Bianchi PG, Bianchi U. The use of two density 
gradient centrifugation techniques and the swim -up method to separate spermatozoa with chromatin and 
nuclear DNA anomalies. Hum Reprod 2000; 15: 1112- 1116. 
Sharma R, Biedenharn KR, Fedor JM, Agarwal A. Lifestyle factors and reproductive health: taking control of your fertility. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2013;
11: 66. 
Showell MG, Mackenzie -Proctor R, Brown J, Yazdani A, Stankiewicz MT, Hart RJ. Antioxidants fo r male subfertility. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014 : Cd007411. 
Wang YJ, Zhang RQ, Lin YJ, Zhang RG, Zhang WL. Relationship between varicocele and sperm DNA damage and 
the effect of varicocele repair: a meta -analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 2012; 25: 307- 314. 
Wright C, Milne S, Leeson H. Sperm DNA damage caused by oxidative stress: modifiable clinical, lifestyle and nutritional factors in male infertility. Reprod Biomed Online 2014;
28: 684- 703. 

 [121] 
 
17. Treatment for unexplained RPL 
KEY QUESTION: WHICH THERAPEUTI C INTERVENTIONS SHOU LD BE OFFERED TO COUPLES WITH 
UNEXPLAINED RPL T O INCREASE LIVE BIRT H RATE? 
17.1 LYMPHOCYTE IMMUNIZATI ON THERAPY 
In the 1980s deliberate immunization of women with RPL with allogeneic lymphocytes (lymphocyte 
immunization therapy or LIT) became increasingly used after a randomized controlled trial suggested a 
beneficial effect of immunization with partner lymphocytes ( Mowbray et al. , 1985 ). The theory for using 
LIT was that women with RPL lack anti -paternal antibodies or blocking antibodies that protect the fetus 
against rejection , and the subsequent production of these antibodies after LIT was suggested to be 
beneficial (Beer et al. , 1981 ). In most of the randomized trials of LIT, patients were selected due to 
absence of anti -paternal cytotoxic or blocking antibodies in the blood; however, the clinical impact of 
such antibodies is unclear ( Lashley et al. , 2013 ), which weakens the scientific rationale for the therapy. 
Evidence (see also Summary of findings table 9) 
A Cochrane systematic review on the efficacy of LIT found an OR for live birth in treated patients to be 
1.23 (95% CI 0.89 -1.70) based on 12 randomized trials using paternal lymphocytes and 1. 39 (95% CI 
0.68- 2.82) based on three trials using third -party lymphocytes compared with placebo ( Wong et al. , 
2014 ). There was no significant benefit for LIT treatment on live birth rate neither with paternal, nor 
with third -party donor lymphocytes in women with RPL . 
Several of the included randomized controlled trials did not meet current criteria for methodological quality (uncertain/high risk of bias) and potential adverse effects were not adequately described. 
Treatment with allogeneic cells raises serious safety concerns and in transfusion practice great efforts 
are made to lymphocyte -deplete blood before used for transfusion. There is a substantial risk of 
neonatal alloim mune thrombocytopenia and production of red blood cell antibodies, which can result 
in erythroblastosis fetalis (Christiansen et al. , 1994
), some risks o f transferring infectious agents such 
as hepatitis and HIV and maybe an increased long term risk of hematological malignancies. 
However, injections with paternal lymphocytes before conception seems to be associated with a low risk of serious adverse event s as reported in a long -term follow -up study of immunized women with 
RPL or implantation failure (Kling et al. , 2006
). 
Recommendation 
Lymphocyte immunization therapy should not be used as 
treatment for unexplained RPL as it has no significant effect 
and there ma y be serious adverse effects . Strong ⊕⊕ 
Justification 
LIT should not be used in clinical practice since its scientific foundation is weak, its effect to prevent 
miscarriage is not established and proven and potential adverse effects have been described . If further [122] 
 
randomized controlled trials on LIT are carried out they should be conducted using strict 
methodological rigor and include long -term follow- up of mothers and babies. 
17.2 INTRAVENOUS IMMUNOGLO BULIN (IVIG) 
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IvIg) is known to reduce symptoms in many autoimmune and 
inflammatory diseases through a multitude of mechanisms including elimination of immune complexes, 
interactions with Fc -receptors, elimination of activated complement factors, interference with antigen 
presenta tion and neutralization of inflammatory cytokines. 
Evidence (see also Summary of findings table 10) 
A recent systematic review and meta -analysis of IvIg in RPL (Egerup et al. , 2015 ) included 11 RCTs and 
found in 531 patients a RR of 0.92 (95% CI 0.75 -1.12) for no live birth (= miscarriage) after IvIg. In women 
with secondary RPL, a subset that in previous randomized controlled trials seemed to benefit from IvIg 
(Hutton et al. , 2007 ), the RR for no live birth after IvIg was 0.77 ( 95% CI 0.58- 1.02), which can be 
translated into a borderline non -significant benefit of IvIg in secondary RPL. In women with primary 
RPL, the RR for no live birth after IvIg was 1.32 ( 95% CI 0.88 -1.98). A more recent meta -analysis reported 
a similar conclusion but also suggests that live birth rate was significantly improved in women with RPL 
if treatment was started before conception (RR 1.67 ; 95% CI 1.30 -2.14) , but not i f started after 
implantation (Wang et al. , 2016 ). 
A trial sequential analysis in the review concluded that even with meta -analys is, studies are 
underpowered for definitive conclusions about the efficacy of IvIg in RPL. Furthermore, the protocols used in the randomized trials were very heterogeneous with substantial variations betwee n IvIg 
dosages used and start of treatment before or during pregnancy. 
Moderate adverse events such as headache and skin rash were significantly more frequent in IvIg -
treated compared to placebo -treated patients but there was no difference in the incidence of serious 
adverse events. 
Recommendation 
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IvIg) is not recommended as a 
treatment of RPL. Strong ⊕⊕ 
Justification 
IvIg cannot be recommended for clinical use in women with either primary RPL or secondary RPL . 
Further randomized controlled trials should be carried out and given the results of meta -analys is, the 
focus should be on women with secondary RPL and on treatment started before conception. 
17.3 PREDNISOLONE 
Glucocorticoids exhibit a beneficial clinical effect in most autoimmune inflammatory diseases and are 
therefore a potential useful therapy in women with RPL with a suspected immune etiology. They have 
only been tested in two randomized placebo -controlled trials in women with RPL positive for specific 
immunological b iomarkers. [123] 
 
Evidence (see also Summary of findings table 11) 
An RCT including 150 women with unexplained RPL; showed that the rate of ongoing pregnancy beyond 
20 weeks was higher in 74 women receiving prednisolone (5 mg/day ) treatment compared to 76 
women receiving placebo ( RR 7.63 ; 95% CI 3.70- 15.70 ). Both the intervention and placebo group 
received empiric treatment with low dose aspirin and heparin ( Gomaa et al ., 2014 ). In a feasibility study, 
women with unexplained RPL and high uNK cell density were randomized when pregnant to 
prednisolone treatment (20 mg for 6 weeks, 10 mg for 1 week, 5 mg for 1 week) (n=20) or placebo 
(n=20). The live birth rate was 60% in the prednisolone group and 40% in the placebo group (RR 1.5; 
95% CI 0.8- 209.0). 
Laskin and colleagues carried out a placebo -controlled trial of prednisolone and low- dose aspirin to 
women with RPL and positivity for antiphospholipid, antinuclear, anti -DNA or anti -lymphocyte 
antibodies (Laskin et al. , 1997 ). A very high prednisolone dose (40 -50 mg/day was administered for the 
whole duration of pregnancy. In the treatment group, a 9% higher live birth rate was found, which was 
not significantly different from controls (OR 1.5; 95% CI 0.8 -2.6). However, the treated patients had a 
significantly higher risk of preterm birth (62% versus 12% , p<0.001) and higher risk s for diabetes and 
hypertension, which is well known to be associated with high and prolonged administration of 
prednisolone. 
Recommendation 
Glucocorticoids are not recommended as a treatment of 
unexplained RPL or RPL with selected immunological 
biomarker s. Strong ⊕⊕ 
Justification 
The evidence point s toward some beneficial effect of prednisolone in women with RPL selected due to 
positivity for selected biomarkers. However, based on adverse events associated with the use of 
prednisone, the GDG decided to recommend against treatment awaiting further studies. 
New randomized trials administering lower doses of prednisone (in order to reduce side effects) to RPL 
patients before pregnancy and in the first trimester should be carried out. Patients could be sele cted 
for such trials due to presence of biomarkers suggesting immune activation. Trials may also be 
conducted in women with unexplained RPL realizing that we still have no biomarkers that can identify 
patients with an immune etiology with sufficient specif icity. 
17.4 ANTICOAGULANT S 
Due to the evidence from randomized controlled trials that heparin and low- dose aspirin seem to be 
beneficial in the treatment of women with RPL and antiphospholipid antibodies, heparin and low -dose 
aspirin have been increasing administered to RPL women without antiphospholipid antibodies. 
Evidence (see also Summary of findings table 12) 
In a Cochrane review, live birth rate after anticoagulant (aspirin, heparin, or combination of aspirin and 
heparin) or placebo/no treatment or a nother anticoagulant in women with RPL with or without [124] 
 
hereditary thrombophilia. There were no significant benefits for any of the anticoagulants in 
comparison to placebo or no treatment (de Jong et al. , 2014 ). 
For the comparison of heparin versus placebo, three RCTs were publi shed after the inclusion deadline 
of the review ( Pasquier et al. , 2015 , Schleussner et al. , 2015 ). There was no benefit of heparin compared 
to placebo/multivitamins with regard to live birth rate . Two of these RCTs showed no benefit ( Pasquier 
et al. , 2015, Schleussner et al. , 2015 ), while the third study reported a decrease in miscarriage rate and 
an increase in LBR ( Shaaban et al. , 2016 ). 
Recommendation 
Heparin or low dose aspirin are not recommended, as there 
is evidence that they do not improve live birth rate in 
women with unexplained RPL . Strong ⊕⊕⊕ 
 
Justification 
Based on a meta -analys is and results of two subsequent large randomized controlled trials there is no 
evidence that heparin alone, aspirin alone, or heparin in combination with low- dose aspirin improves 
the live birth rate in unexplained RPL. 
17.5 FOLIC ACID 
Evidence 
Folic aci d in pregnancy is recommended for the prevention of neural tube defects and high- dose 
supplementation can reduce high plasma homocysteine levels that may be harmful in pregnancy. 
However, there has been performed no randomized controlled trials testing fol ic acid supplementation 
versus no folic acid supplementation in the prevention of pregnancy loss in women with RPL with or 
without hyper homocysteinemia. One randomized controlled trial found similar live birth rates in 
women with RPL and specific polymorphisms in the MTHFR gene supplemented with either folic acid 
or methyltetrahydrofolate during pregnancy ( Hekmatdoost et al. , 2015 ). 
High folic acid intake may have negative effects especially in elderly people with low B12 vitamin lev els 
and a study also suggested a higher frequency of insulin resistance in children born to mothers taking 
high dose folic acid ( Selhub and Rosenberg, 2016 ). Therefore, high -dose folic acid supplementation is 
only recommended for selected groups of women trying to conceive ( Yajnik et al. , 2008 ). 
Recommendation 
Low dose folic acid is routinely started preconceptional ly to 
prevent neural tube defects, but it has not been shown to 
prevent pregnancy loss in women with unexplained RPL. Stron g ⊕⊕ [125] 
 
Justification 
Based on the absence of evidence for a benefit, and possible harms, high- dose folic acid 
supplementation should not be used for women with RPL without hyperhomocystein emia or 
underlying conditions (diabetes, epilepsy) associated with increased risk of neural tube defects. 
17.6 PROGESTERONE 
Evidence (see also Summary of findings table 13) 
A Cochrane review summarized progesterone for treatment of miscarriage in all women and in women 
with previous miscarriage (RPL) (Haas and Ramsey, 2013 ). The Cochrane analysis pooled the results 
from four small trials that had substantive methodologic limitations none of the trials specified the 
method of con cealment of study -group assignments, and only two trials used a placebo for comparison. 
The miscarriage rate was lower in women with RPL receiving progesterone treatment, compared to 
placebo (OR 0.39; 95% CI 021- 0.72). 
A more recent double blind, placebo -controlled, randomized trial of oral dydrogesterone (given from 
the time that a live fetus was confirmed by ultrasound until 20 weeks of gestation) among 360 women 
with a RPL also showed a benefit of progesterone in reducing a subsequent risk of miscarriag e 
compared with placebo (RR 2.4; 95% CI 1.3- 5.9) (Kumar et al. , 2014 ). The main problem with this study 
is that treatment was initiated at a late stage of firs t trimester (mean gestational age 6.5 ± 1.1 weeks 
and 6.5 ± 1.2 weeks, for treatment and placebo group respectively), which is also reflected in very high live birth rates in both the treatment (93%) and the placebo (83%) groups. 
Recently, a multicenter , double blind, placebo -controlled, randomized trial investigated vaginal 
progesterone as a treatment to improve live births in women with unexplained RPL (Coomarasamy et 
al., 2015 ). Women were randomized to twice daily vaginal suppositories containing either 400 mg of 
micronized progesterone (n=398) or matched placebo (n=428) from a time soon after a positive urinary 
pregnancy test (up until 6 weeks) up throu gh 12 weeks of gestation. There was no difference in the rate 
of live births in the progesterone group (65.8%) compared to the placebo group (63.3%) (RR 1.04; 95% 
CI 0.94 -1.15). 
A recent meta -analysis combined 10 trials, including the trial s of Kumar and Coomarasamy, to a total 
of 802 women receiving progesterone and 784 receiving placebo. Women with RPL who were 
randomized to the intervention group had a lower risk of subsequent pregnancy loss (RR 0.72 ; 95% CI 
0.53- 0.97) and higher live birth rate (RR 1. 07; 95% CI 1.02 -1.15) compared with those who did not. 
Discrepancies in the conclusion of this meta -analysis with the largest included trial were explained by 
the differences in progesterone supplement, and the inclusion of seven trials published before 19 90 
when the quality standards for RCTs were lower (Saccone et al. , 2017 ). 
Recommendation 
Vaginal progesterone does not improve live birth rates in 
women wit h unexplained RPL Conditional ⊕⊕⊕ [126] 
 
Justification 
The Cochrane meta -analysis combined 4 small studies with high risk of bias and the results are 
overruled by the recent well performed RCTs on oral and vaginal progesterone ( Kumar et al. , 2014 , 
Coomarasamy et al. , 2015 ). A recent meta -analysis, including the recent trials showed a benefit of 
progesterone on miscarriage rate and live birth rate (Saccone et al. , 2017 ). However, the meta -analysis 
is flawed by the quality of the older included studies, and hence, we decided to base the 
recommendation on the included and recent high quality trials. Vaginal progesterone during early 
pregnancy has no beneficial effect in women with unexplained RPL. There is some evidence that oral 
dydrogesterone initiated when fetal heart action can be confirmed may be effective. Furthermore, as 
progesterone is important during implantation of the embryo, benefit from supplementation may be 
realized if progesterone is administered from the luteal phase, rather than after a positive pr egnancy 
test. More trials are needed to evaluate oral progesterone and administration of progesterone from 
the luteal phase. 
17.7 INTRALIPID THERAPY 
Intravenous lipid emulsions (such as Intralipid) were initially developed to boost nutrition after surgery 
and in premature babies. In recent years, Intralipid has emerged as a treatment for poisoning by local 
anesthetics and various other drugs. 
Evidence 
Clark and colleagues reported that infusions of Intralipid reduced the fetal resorption rate in specific 
mice matings (Clark, 1994 ). Roussev and colleagues reported that NK cell cytotoxicity declined after 
Intralipid infusions to recurrent implantation failure patie nts (to the same level as after IvIg infusions) 
and they therefore extrapolated that Intralipid had a beneficial effect in RPL ( Roussev et al. , 2008 ). 
No ran domized controlled trial has so far tested Intralipid versus no treatment or placebo, but one trial 
found that the live birth rate in women with RPL after Intralipid treatment was similar (92%) to that 
after IvIg (88%) (p=0.415) (Meng et al. , 2015 ). 
No serious adverse effects has been reported after the use of low dose intralipid treatment in women 
with RPL ( Roussev et al. , 2008 , Meng et al. , 2015 ). However, a series of serious adverse effects has been 
reported after the use of higher doses of intravenous lipid e mulsions: acute kidney injury, cardiac arrest, 
acute lung injury, venous thromboembolism, fat embolism, fat overload syndrome, pancreatitis, allergic reactions and increased susceptibility to infection (
Hayes et al. , 2016 ). 
Recommendation 
There is insufficient evidence to recommend i ntralipid 
therapy for improving live birth rate in women with 
unexplained RPL. Strong ⊕ 
Justification 
There is no clinical ev idence at all to support the use of Intralipid therapy in the treatment of RPL . 
 [127] 
 
17.8 GRANULOCYTE COLONY -STIMULATING FACTOR (G-CSF) 
Evidence (see also Summary of findings table 14) 
Granulocyte -macrophage colony -stimulating factor (GM -CSF) and granulocyte colony -stimulating 
factor (G -CSF) are growth factors that may promote trophoblast growth and have been proposed to 
have anti -abortive effects based on animal studies. Although the mechanism is unknown, studies have 
been conducted in women with RPL and re current implantation failure. 
A recent review found two studies on G -CSF as treatment for RPL. Both studies (Scarpellini and Sbracia, 
2009 , Santjohanser et al. , 2013 ) found a beneficial effect of G -CSF on the outcome of subsequent 
pregnancy (Caval cante et al. , 2015 ). In the first included RCT, 68 women with a history of unexplained 
RPL who had previously been unsuccessfully treated with IvIg , were randomized to placebo (n=33) 
(saline) or recombinant G -CSF treatment (n=35) (a dose of 1 µg [ 100,000 IU]/kg/day of Filgrastim 
subcutaneously from the sixth day after ovulation until the onset of menstruation or the end of the 
ninth week of pregnancy) (Scarpellini and Sbracia, 2009 ). All women in the study became pregnant 
spontaneously within 3 months. The success rate was 82.8% in the treated group (29 live births in 35 
pregnancies) and 48.5% in the placebo group (16 in 33 pregnancies). The difference between the 
groups was statistically significant (OR 5.1 ; 95% CI 1.5- 18.4 ; p=0.0061). The second study, a 
retrospective cohort study , evaluated the effect of G -CSF in women with a history of RPL and infertility 
who underwent IVF/ICSI by comparing a group tre ated with G -CSF (49 women ), a group not treated 
with any medication (33 patients) and a group treated with other medications (45 women ). For the G -
CSF group a pregnancy rate of 47% and a live -birth rate of 32% was reported (Santjohanser et al. , 2013 ). 
The group who received other medications had a pregnancy rate of 27% (p=0.016) and a live birth rate 
of 14% (p=0.006), and the subgroup who received no medi cations had a pregnancy rate of 24% 
(p=0.016) and a live birth rate of 13% (p=0.016). There were several methodological problems in this 
study: it was retrospective, many women were treated in several IVF/ICSI cycles and there is no 
information about wheth er the pregnancy and live birth rates were calculated per cycle or per patient. 
Furthermore, prognostic variables were no equally distributed in the three groups. 
There are several ongoing randomized trials of G -CSF in women with recurrent implantation fai lure. 
One of these is completed but found no beneficial effect of uterine instillations with G -CSF on 
implantation and pregnancy rates after IVF (Barad et al. , 2014). 
Although promising, the use of G -CSF as a treatment for RPL needs to be confirmed in more trials of 
good quality in different populations before it can be recommended for use in clinical practice. A new 
phase II study is underway. 
Recommendation 
There is insufficient evidence to recommended G -CSF in 
women with unexplained RPL. Strong ⊕ 
Justification 
A single randomized controlled trial of good quality suggests a substantial benefit of G -CSF in RPL but it 
needs to be confirmed in other trials in different populations. [128] 
 
17.9 ENDOMETRIAL SCRATCHIN G 
Evidence 
Scratching of the endometrium in the luteal phase prior to an IVF/ICSI cycle has gained widespread use 
in women with recurrent implantation failure; the theory is that the procedure will liberate cytokines 
and chemo -attractants of importance for subsequent embryo implantation. In an editorial comment 
the editor -in-chief of Human Reproduction has recently challenged the evidence for using this 
procedure in any patient before awaiting results from more controlled trials (Evers, 2016 ). So far, no 
trial has been performed in women with RPL. 
Recommendation 
There is no evidence to recommended endo metrial 
scratching in women with unexplained RPL GPP 
Justification 
There is no evidence that endometrial scratching improves subsequent pregnancy outcome in women 
with RPL. Based on clinical expertise, the GDG decided to formulate this in a recommendatio n. 
References 
Barad DH, Yu Y, Kushnir VA, Shohat -Tal A, Lazzaroni E, Lee HJ, Gleicher N. A randomized clinical trial of endometrial 
perfusion with granulocyte colony -stimulating factor in in vitro fertilization cycles: impact on endometrial 
thickness and clinical pregnancy rates. Fertil Steril 2014; 101: 710- 715. 
Beer AE, Quebbeman JF, Ayers JW, Haines RF. Major histocompatibility complex antigens, maternal and paternal 
immune responses, and chronic habitual abortions in humans. A m J Obstet Gynecol 1981; 141: 987- 999. 
Cavalcante MB, Costa Fda S, Barini R, Araujo Junior E. Granulocyte colony -stimulating factor and reproductive 
medicine: A review. Iran J Reprod Med 2015; 13: 195- 202. 
Christiansen OB, Mathiesen O, Husth M, Lauritsen JG, Grunnet N. Placebo -controlled trial of active immunization 
with third party leukocytes in recurrent miscarriage. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1994; 73: 261- 268. 
Clark DA. Intralipid as treatment for recurrent unexplained abortion? Am J Reprod Immunol 1994; 32: 290- 293. 
Coomarasamy A, Williams H, Truchanowicz E, Seed PT, Small R, Quenby S, Gupta P, Dawood F, Koot YE, Bender Atik R et al. A Randomized Trial of Progesterone in Women with Recurrent Miscarriages. N Engl J Med 2015;
373: 
2141- 2148. 
de Jong PG, Kaandor p S, Di Nisio M, Goddijn M, Middeldorp S. Aspirin and/or heparin for women with unexplained 
recurrent miscarriage with or without inherited thrombophilia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 7: Cd004734. 
Egerup P, Lindschou J, Gluud C, Christiansen OB. The Eff ects of Intravenous Immunoglobulins in Women with 
Recurrent Miscarriages: A Systematic Review of Randomised Trials with Meta -Analyses and Trial Sequential 
Analyses Including Individual Patient Data. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0141588. 
Evers JL. A nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse: round 2. Hum Reprod 2016; 31: 1133- 1134. 
Gomaa MF, Elkholy AG, El -Said MM, Abdel -Salam NE. Combined oral prednisolone and heparin versus heparin: 
the effect on peripheral NK cells and clinical outcome in patients with unexplained r ecurrent miscarriage. A 
double -blind placebo randomized controlled trial. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2014; 290: 757- 762. 
Haas DM, Ramsey PS. Progestogen for preventing miscarriage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 10: Cd003511. 
Hayes BD, Gosselin S, Calello DP, Nac ca N, Rollins CJ, Abourbih D, Morris M, Nesbitt -Miller A, Morais JA, Lavergne 
V et al. Systematic review of clinical adverse events reported after acute intravenous lipid emulsion 
administration. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2016; 54: 365- 404. [129] 
 
Hekmatdoost A, Vahid F, Yari Z, Sadeghi M, Eini- Zinab H, Lakpour N, Arefi S. Methyltetrahydrofolate vs Folic Acid 
Supplementation in Idiopathic Recurrent Miscarriage with Respect to Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase 
C677T and A1298C Polymorphisms: A Randomized Controlled Tri al. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0143569. 
Hutton B, Sharma R, Fergusson D, Tinmouth A, Hebert P, Jamieson J, Walker M. Use of intravenous 
immunoglobulin for treatment of recurrent miscarriage: a systematic review. Bjog 2007; 114: 134- 142. 
Kling C, Steinmann J, Westph al E, Magez J, Kabelitz D. Adverse effects of intradermal allogeneic lymphocyte 
immunotherapy: acute reactions and role of autoimmunity. Hum Reprod 2006; 21: 429- 435. 
Kumar A, Begum N, Prasad S, Aggarwal S, Sharma S. Oral dydrogesterone treatment during ear ly pregnancy to 
prevent recurrent pregnancy loss and its role in modulation of cytokine production: a double -blind, randomized, 
parallel, placebo -controlled trial. Fertil Steril 2014; 102: 1357- 1363.e1353. 
Lashley EE, Meuleman T, Claas FH. Beneficial or har mful effect of antipaternal human leukocyte antibodies on 
pregnancy outcome? A systematic review and meta- analysis. Am J Reprod Immunol 2013; 70: 87-103. 
Laskin CA, Bombardier C, Hannah ME, Mandel FP, Ritchie JW, Farewell V, Farine D, Spitzer K, Fielding L, Soloninka 
CA et al. Prednisone and aspirin in women with autoantibodies and unexplained recurrent fetal loss. N Engl J Med 
1997; 337: 148- 153. 
Meng L, Lin J, Chen L, Wang Z, Liu M, Liu Y, Chen X, Zhu L, Chen H, Zhang J. Effectiveness and potential mechanis ms 
of intralipid in treating unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2015; 294: 29-39. 
Mowbray JF, Gibbings C, Liddell H, Reginald PW, Underwood JL, Beard RW. Controlled trial of treatment of recurrent spontaneous abortion by immunis ation with paternal cells. Lancet 1985;
1: 941- 943. 
Pasquier E, de Saint Martin L, Bohec C, Chauleur C, Bretelle F, Marhic G, Le Gal G, Debarge V, Lecomte F, Denoual -
Ziad C et al. Enoxaparin for prevention of unexplained recurrent miscarriage: a multicenter randomized double -
blind placebo -controlled trial. Blood 2015; 125: 2200- 2205. 
Roussev RG, Acacio B, Ng SC, Coulam CB. Duration of intralipid's suppressive effect on NK cell's functional activity. Am J Reprod Immunol 2008;
60: 258- 263. 
Saccone G, Schoen C, F ranasiak JM, Scott RT, Jr., Berghella V. Supplementation with progestogens in the first 
trimester of pregnancy to prevent miscarriage in women with unexplained recurrent miscarriage: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis of randomized, controlled trials. F ertil Steril 2017; 107: 430- 438 e433. 
Santjohanser C, Knieper C, Franz C, Hirv K, Meri O, Schleyer M, Wurfel W, Toth B. Granulocyte -colony stimulating 
factor as treatment option in patients with recurrent miscarriage. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz) 2013; 61: 159-
164. 
Scarpellini F, Sbracia M. Use of granulocyte colony -stimulating factor for the treatment of unexplained recurrent 
miscarriage: a randomised controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2009; 24: 2703- 2708. 
Schleussner E, Kamin G, Seliger G, Rogenhofer N, Ebner S, Toth B, Schenk M, Henes M, Bohlmann MK, Fischer T 
et al. Low-molecular -weight heparin for women with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss: a multicenter trial 
with a minimization randomization scheme. Ann Intern Med 2015; 162: 601- 609. 
Selhub J, Rosenberg I H. Excessive folic acid intake and relation to adverse health outcome. Biochimie 2016; 126: 
71-78. 
Shaaban OM, Abbas AM, Zahran KM, Fathalla MM, Anan MA, Salman SA. Low -Molecular -Weight Heparin for the 
Treatment of Unexplained Recurrent Miscarriage With Neg ative Antiphospholipid Antibodies. Clin Appl Thromb 
Hemost 2016 : 1076029616665167. 
Wang SW, Zhong SY, Lou LJ, Hu ZF, Sun HY, Zhu HY. The effect of intravenous immunoglobulin passive 
immunotherapy on unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion: a meta -analys is. Reprod Biomed Online 
2016; 33: 720- 736. 
Wong LF, Porter TF, Scott JR. Immunotherapy for recurrent miscarriage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 10: 
Cd000112. 
Yajnik CS, Deshpande SS, Jackson AA, Refsum H, Rao S, Fisher DJ, Bhat DS, Naik SS, Coyaji KJ, Jo glekar CV et al. 
Vitamin B12 and folate concentrations during pregnancy and insulin resistance in the offspring: the Pune Maternal 
Nutrition Study. Diabetologia 2008; 51: 29-38. 
 
 [130] 
 
18. Non-conventional treatments 
for RPL 
KEY QUESTION: WHICH THERAPEUTIC IN TERV ENTIONS COULD BE OFF ERED TO ALL COUPLES , 
IRRESPECTIVE OF A CA USE, TO INCREASE LIV E BIRTH RATES ? 
A range of treatments has been proposed for women with RPL, especially women with unexplained 
RPL, with the aim of increasing live birth rates. 
Evidence (see al so Summary of findings table 15) 
Chinese Herbal treatment 
A Cochrane review included nine RCTs (involving 861 women) on Traditional Chinese Medicine for 
improving live birth or pregnancy rate in couples with RPL . The reviewers concluded that the 
methodolo gical quality was too poor to comment on the efficacy of Traditional Chinese Medicine for 
RPL, based on small sample sizes an unclear risk of bias ( Li et al., 2016 ). Another older review came to 
a similar conclusion based on 41 studies (involving 3660 participants) comparing Chinese herbal 
medicine alone or in combination with conventional medicine, with placebo or conventional medicine 
(Yang et al. , 2013 ). Overall, it is unclear, based on the available studies - all conducted in China and with 
different compositions of herbs - whether Chinese Herbal treatment is effective, and in addition, data 
on safety are scarcely reported, which may evoke serious concerns. 
Acupuncture 
The effectiveness of acupuncture for improving the chance of a live birth in couples with RPL has been 
described in case reports ( Hullender Rubin et al. , 2013 ). How ever, we did not find any studies 
systematically evaluating acupuncture as a treatment for RPL. 
IVF/ICSI 
A detailed description on IVF/ ICSI combined with PGS can be found in chapter 10: treatment of RPL 
due to genetic/ chromosomal causes. To our knowledg e there are no studies evaluating IVF/ICSI 
(without PG T) in couples with RPL . 
Diet – antioxidants 
A narrative review summarized the basic science and clinical case reports for antioxidants to improve 
pregnancy outcome by reducing oxidative stress in the pl acenta based on a literature search ( Hovdenak 
and Haram, 2012 ). The authors concluded that whilst vitamin C may confer some benefit to pregnancy 
outcomes , vitamin E could be harmful. In the absence of well -designed and controlled studies, vitamin 
supplements or antioxidants cannot be recommended to improve pregnancy outcome in women with 
RPL, except where a specific deficiency has been detected. 
Other trea tments 
We found no studies on other therapies for couples with RPL, including homeopathy. Recently, 
bioresonans therapy and n aprotechnology have been suggested as treatment options for pregnancy 
loss, but there are no data available supporting their use in clinical practice. 
 [131] 
 
Recommendation 
If wo men with RPL ask about using multi vitamin 
supplements, they should be advised on multi vitamin 
supplements that are safe in pregnancy. GPP 
Justification 
Based on frequent questions from couples , it was decided to add a recommendation on vitamin 
supplements. As there is no conclusive evidence supporting the use of vitamin supplements, they are 
not recommended as treatment. However, based on the possible harms associated with some vitamin 
supplements (vit amin E , A), the GDG recommends advice on safe options. 
References 
Hovdenak N, Haram K. Influence of mineral and vitamin supplements on pregnancy outcome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol 2012; 164: 127- 132. 
Hullender Rubin L, Cantor D, Marx BL. Recurrent Pregnancy Loss and Traditional Chinese Medicine. Med Acupunct 
2013; 25: 232- 237. 
Li L, Dou L, Leung PC, Chung TKH, Wang CC. Chinese herbal medicines for unexplained recurrent miscarriage 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2016. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Yang GY, Luo H, Liao X, Liu JP. Chinese herbal medicine for the treatment of recurrent miscarriage: a systematic 
review of randomized clinical trials. BMC Complement Altern Med 2013; 13: 320. 
 
 [132] 
 
Annexes 
 
Annex 1: Guideline development gr oup 
Annex 2: Summary of findings tables 
Annex 3: Recommendations for research 
Annex 4: Abbreviations 
Annex 5: Methodology 
Annex 6: Stakeholder consultation 
Annex 7: Literature study: flowcharts, list of excluded studies 
Annex 8: Evidence tables [133] 
 
Annex 1: Guideline development group 
This guideline was developed by the ESHRE Early Pregnancy Guideline Development Group (GDG) . The 
GDG included gynecologists with expertise in reproductive medicine, miscarriage and recurrent 
miscarriage, thrombophilia, and male infertility. A representative of the Miscarriage Association (UK) 
was added to the GDG to represent the patient perspective. We aimed for an equal distribution in 
gender, region and expertise. 
Chair of the GDG 
Mari ëtte Goddijn Center for Reproductive M edicine, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam (The Netherlands) 
GDG members 
Ole Bjarne Christiansen Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aalborg University 
Hospital, Aalborg, (Denmark) 
Recurrent Pregnancy Loss Clinic, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen 
Unive rsity Hospital (Denmark) 
Janine Elson CARE Fertility Group , Nottingham (UK) 
Astrid Marie Kolte Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen 
(Denmark) 
Sheena Lewis Queen’s University Belfast (UK) 
Saskia Middeldorp Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam (The Netherlands) 
Willianne Nelen Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboudumc , 
Nijmegen (The Netherlands) 
Braulio Peramo Al Ain Fertility Clinic, Al Ain (United Arab Emirates) 
Siobhan Quenby Univers ity of Warwick, Warwick (UK) 
Patient representative 
Ruth Bender Atik Miscarriage Association (UK) 
Invited experts 
Peter Bisschop 
(Thyroid abnormalities) Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam (The Netherlands) 
Methodological support 
Nathalie Vermeul en European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology 
(Belgium) 
 [134] 
 
DECLARATIONS OF INTER EST 
 
All members of the guideline development group were asked to declare possible conflicts of interest 
by means of the disclosure forms (see ESHRE Manual for Gu ideline Development ). 
 
 Conflicts of Interest 
Mariette Goddijn None declared 
Ole Bjarne Christiansen Salary as specialty editor at European Journal of Obstetrics & 
Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 
Janine Elson Salary or position funding from CARE Fer tility 
Astrid Marie Kolte None declared 
Sheena Lewis Salary or position funding from SpermComet Ltd 
Saskia Middeldorp Research grants from GSK - BMS/Pfizer – Sanquin -Aspen - Daiichi 
Sankyo. Consulting fees from GSK - Bayer - BMS/Pfizer - Boehringer 
lngelheim – Daiichi Sankyo. Speaker's fees from GSK - Bayer - 
BMS/Pfizer - Boehringer lngelheim - Aspen - Daiichi Sankyo. 
Willianne Nelen None declared 
Braulio Peramo None declared 
Siobhan Quenby Speaker’s fees from Ferring 
Ruth Bender Atik None declare d 
Nathalie Vermeulen None declared 

 [135] 
 
Annex 2: Summary of findings tables 
EXPLANATIONS 
GRADE Working Group grades of evidence 
High quality: We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect 
Moderate quality: We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, 
but there is a possibility that it is substantially different 
Low quality: Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true e ffect may be substantially different from the estimate of the 
effect 
Very low quality: We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the 
estimate of effect 
CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio ; OR: Odds ratio 
 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS T ABLES 1 – 15 
 
1 PGT compared to no treatment for RPL 
Patient or population : Unexplained RPL (PG T-A) and RPL with known genetic abnormality (PGT-SR) 
Intervention : Preimplantation genetic testing ( PGT) 
Comparison : No treatment (expectant management) 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* 
(95% CI) Relative effect 
(95% CI) № of participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments 
Risk with no 
treatment Risk with PGT 
Live birth rate 
(PGT-A) 
(Musters et al., 2011 ) 421 
 per 1.000 not estimable 
354 per 1000** not estimable 442 
(12 observational 
studies) a ⊕ 
VERY LOW b,c,d,e 
Cumulative live birth 
rate (PG T-SR) 
(Ikuma et al., 2015 ) 654 
 per 1.000 675 
per 1.000 
(505 to 836) OR 1.10 
(0.54 to 2.70) 89 
(1 observational 
study) ⊕ 
VERY LOW f Single study 
Live birth rate 
(PGT-SR) 
(Franssen et al., 2011 ) 531 
per 1.000 not estimable 
349 per 1000** not estimable 595 
(25 observational 
studies) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,b,g 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the compar ison group and the relative 
effect of the i ntervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. cohort studies, as no RCTs comparing PGT with NC are available 
b. poor quality studies 
c. unclear from review 
d. no direct comparison available 
e. combination of very small s tudies 
f. one small study 
g. no meta -analysis due to high heterogeneity 
** observed event rate as anticipated absolute effect is not estimable 
 [136] 
 
2 Anticoagulant therapy compared to no treatment for RPL + hereditary thrombophilia 
Patient or populatio n: RPL + hereditary thrombophilia 
Intervention : anticoagulant therapy 
Comparison : no treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* (95% CI) Relative 
effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments 
Risk with no 
treatment/placebo Risk with 
anticoagulant 
therapy 
Live birth rate 
(LMWH vs no 
treatment) 
(Skeith et al. , 2016 ) 862 
per 1.000 836 
per 1.000 
(690 to 1.000) RR 0.97 
(0.80 to 1.19) 66 
(2 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW a early RPL + 
hereditary 
thrombophilia 
Live birth rate 
(LMWH vs no 
treatment ) 
(Skeith et al. , 2016 ) 590 
per 1.000 478 
per 1.000 
(224 to 1000) RR 0.81 
(0.38 to 1. 72) 308 
(5 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW a,b,c late loss + 
heriditary 
thrombophilia 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. optimal information size not met 
b. Every trial included had adequate random sequence generation, good alloca tion concealment and no selective reporting, and most trials 
clearly addressed incomplete outcome data. 
c. difference in direction of effect 

3 Anticoagulant therapy compared to no treatment/placebo for RPL + APS 
Patient or population : RPL + APS 
Intervention : Anticoagulant therapy 
Comparison : No treatment/placebo /other treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* (95% 
CI) 
Relative effect 
(95% CI) № of participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments 
Risk with no 
treatment/pla cebo Risk with 
Anticoagulant 
therapy 
Miscarriage rate 
(Heparin* + aspirin 
versus aspirin only) 
(Ziakas et al. , 2010 ) 357 per 
1.000 178 per 
1.000 
(117 to 265) OR 0.39 
(0.24 to 0.65) 398 
(5 RCTs) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,b,c 
Live birth rate 
(Heparin * + aspirin 
versus aspirin only) 
(Mak et al., 2010 ) 558 per 
1.000 726 per 
1.000 
(581 to 909) RR 1.301 
(1.040 to 1.629) 334 
(5 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW c,d 
Miscarriage rate 
(aspirin versus 
placebo/usual care) 
(Empson et al., 2005 ) 235 per 
1.000 244 per 
1.000 
(169 to 341) OR 1.05 
(0.66 to 1.68) 71 
(3 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW a,b 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention ( and its 95% CI). 
* unfractionated or LMW H 
a. selection and performance bias suspected b. Optimal information size not met 
c. studies compared to aspirin only (not placebo) 
d. mean J adad score 1.6 (range 0 -3) [137] 
 
4 Prednisolone compared to placebo/ othe r treatment for RPL + APS 
Patient or population : RPL + APS 
Intervention : Prednisolone (+ aspirin) 
Comparison : Placebo /other treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* 
(95% CI) 
Relative effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with 
placebo/no 
treatment Risk with 
Prednisolone 
Miscarriage rate 
(Prednisone and aspirin 
versus aspirin or 
placebo) 
(Empson et al., 2005 ) 324 
per 1.000 275 
per 1.000 
(171 to 440) RR 0.85 
(0.53 to 1.36) 122 
(2 RCTs) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,b,c,d 
Miscarriage rate 
(Prednisone and aspirin 
versus heparin and 
aspirin) 
(Empson et al., 2005 ) 269 
per 1.000 315 
per 1.000 
(127 to 789) RR 1.17 
(0.47 to 2.93) 45 
(1 RCT) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,c,d,e Single study 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. performance bias suspected 
b. no miscarriages in one of the 2 studies 
c. no direct comparison of prednisolon e with placebo 
d. optimal information size not met 
e. Single RCT 

5 IvIg compared to other treatment for RPL and antiphospholipid antibodies 
Patient or population : RPL and antiphospholipid antibodies 
Intervention : IvIg (± heparin + aspirin) 
Comparis on: other treatment : heparin* + aspirin or prednisone + aspirin. 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* 
(95% CI) 
Relative effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with 
placebo/no 
treatment Risk with IVI G 
Miscarriage rate 
(Empson et al., 2005 ) 175 per 
1.000 258 per 
1.000 
(91 to 726) RR 1.47 
(0.52 to 4.14) 138 
(3 RCTs) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,b,c,d 
*The risk i n the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
* unfractionated or LMW 
a. suspected bias in randomization and allocation concea lment 
b. difference in direction of effects, borderline heterogeneity 
c. no direct comparison of IVIG with placebo 
d. optimal information size not met 
 [138] 
 
6 Levothyroxine compared to placebo/no treatment for RPL 
Patient or population : RPL with hormon al/metabolic background 
Intervention : Levothyroxine 
Comparison : Placebo /no treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* 
(95% CI) 
Relative effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with 
placebo/no 
treatment Risk with 
Levothyroxine 
Subclinical hypothyroidism 
Cumulative live birth 
rate 
(Bernardi et al., 2013 ) 667 
per 1.000 708 
per 1.000 
(375 to 907) OR 1.21 
(0.30 to 4.87) 39 
(1 
observational 
study ) ⊕ 
VERY LOW b,c,d Single observational 
study 
Miscarriage rate 
(Negro et al., 2010 ) 206 
per 1.000 47 
per 1.000 
(10 to 210) RR 0.23 
(0.05 to 1.02) 77 
(1 
observational 
study ) ⊕⊕ 
LOW b,c Single observational 
study 
Thyroid autoantibodies with n ormal thyroid functi on (not RPL) 
Miscarriage rate 
(Vissenberg et al., 
2012 ) 241 
per 1.000 115 
per 1.000 
(60 to 221) RR 0.48 
(0.25 to 0.92) 160 
(2 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW a,b 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. Not RPL 
b. Optimal information size not met 
c. Single study 
d. About 70% of the women were treated for concomitant factors associated with REPL 

7 HCG compared to no treatment for RPL 
Patient or population : Couples with RPL 
Intervention : HCG 
Comparison : Placebo/ n o treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effe cts* 
(95% CI) 
Relative effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with 
placebo/no 
treatment Risk with HCG 
Miscarriage rate 
(1st trimester) 
(Morley et al., 2013 ) 291 
per 1.000 149 
per 1.000 
(93 to 236) RR 0.51 
(0.32 to 0.81) 302 
(5 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW a,b,c 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. for most studies selection, performance and reporting bias was detected 
b. exclusion of 2 studies significantly changed results (OR 0.74 ; 95%CI 0.44 - 1.23) 
c. optimal information size not met 
 
 [139] 
 
8 Antioxidants compared to placebo 
Patient or population : Couples with male subfertility (not RPL) 
Intervention : Antioxidants (Vitamin E, Zinc, combined antioxidants) 
Comparison : Placebo /no treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* (95% 
CI) Relati ve 
effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with 
placebo/no 
treatment Risk with 
Antioxidants 
Live birth rate 
(subfertile men) 
(Showell et al., 2014 ) 50 
per 1.000 181 
per 1.000 
(99 to 309) OR 4.21 
(2.08 to 8.51) 277 
(4 RCTs) ⊕ 
VERY LOW 
a,b,c 
Miscarriage rate 
(subfertile men) 
(Showell et al., 2014 ) 19 
per 1.000 33 
per 1.000 
(8 to 129) OR 1.74 
(0.40 to 7.60) 247 
(3 RCTs) ⊕ 
VERY LOW 
a,b,c 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and t he relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. performance and selection bias suspected 
b. analysis in subfertile men, not RPL 
c. optimal information size not met 

9 Immunotherapy (paternal - donor) compared to placebo for unexplained RPL 
Patient or population : Unexplained RPL 
Intervention : Immunotherapy (paternal - donor) 
Comparison : Placebo 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* (95% CI) 
Relative 
effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments 
Risk with placebo Risk with 
Immunotherapy 
(paternal - 
donor) 
Live birth rate 
(paternal lymphocytes) 
(Wong et al., 2014 ) 600 
per 1.000 649 
per 1.000 
(572 to 718) OR 1.23 
(0.89 to 
1.70) 641 
(12 RCTs) ⊕⊕⊕ 
MODERATE a,b,c 
Live birth rate 
(donor lymphocytes) 
(Wong et al., 2014 ) 596 
per 1.000 672 
per 1.000 
(500 to 806) OR 1. 39 
(0.68 to 
2.82) 156 
(3 RCTs) ⊕⊕⊕ 
MODERATE d,e 
*The risk in the intervention group (and it s 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. No explanation was provided 
b. Significant inconsistency across studies, with different effects 
c. Sample s ize should be sufficient 
d. Concerns on performance bias in one of the included studies ( Illeni 1994 ) 
e. Optimal information size not met 
 
 [140] 
 
10 Immunotherapy IvIg compared to usual treatment/placebo for unexplained RPL 
Patient or population : unexplain ed RPL 
Intervention : Immunotherapy I vIg 
Comparison : Usual treatment/placebo 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* (95% CI) 
Relative 
effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with usual 
treatment/placebo Risk with 
Immunotherapy 
IVIG 
No live birth 
(Egeru p et al., 2015 ) 425 per 1.000 391 per 1.000 
(319 to 476) RR 0.92 
(0.75 to 
1.12) 531 
(11 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW a,b,c 
No live birth 
Primary RPL only 
(Egerup et al., 2015 ) 278 per 1.000 367 per 1.000 
(244 to 550) RR 1.32 
(0.88 to 
1.98) 181 
(6 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW b,c,d 
No live birth 
Secondary RPL only 
(Egerup et al., 2015 ) 527 per 1.000 406 per 1.000 
(306 to 538) RR 0.77 
(0.58 to 
1.02) 221 
(6 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW b,c,d 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the interven tion (and its 95% CI). 
a. 10 out of 11 trials classified as 'high risk of bias' 
b. differences in direction of effect 
c. optimal effect size not met 
d. most trials classified as 'high risk of bias' 

11 Prednisolone compared to placebo/ other treat ment for unexplained RPL 
Patient or population : Unexplained RPL 
Intervention : Prednisolone 
Comparison : Placebo/ other treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* 
(95% CI) 
Relative effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with 
placebo/ other 
treatment Risk with 
prednisolone 
Ongoing Pregnancy 
rate 
(Gomaa et al., 2014 ) 92 per 1.000 703 per 
1.000 
(341 to 
1000 ) RR 7.63 
(3.70 to 
15.70 ) 150 
(1 RCT) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,b,c Single study 
Live birth rate 
(Tang et al., 2013 ) 400 per 1.000 600 per 
1.000 
(320 to 
1000) RR 1.5 
(0.8 to 209.0 ) 40 
(1 RCT) ⊕ 
VERY LOW b,c,d Single study 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. the control group used low dose aspirin and heparin, while the experimental group was treated with prednisolone combined with low dose 
aspirin and heparin 
b. Optimal information size not met 
c. Single study 
 d. RPL patients selected due to NK cell density ≥ 5% 
 
 [141] 
 
12 Anticoagulant compared to placebo/no treatment for unexplained RPL 
Patient or population : unexplained RPL 
Intervention : anticoagulant 
Comparison : placebo/no treatment /other treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* 
(95% C I) Relative 
effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with no/ 
other 
treatment Risk with 
anticoagulant 
Anticoagulant versus no treatment 
Live birth rate 
(aspirin) 
(de Jong et al., 2014 ) 700 per 1.000 658 per 1.000 
(560 to 777) RR 0.94 
(0.80 to 
1.11) 256 
(2 RCTs) ⊕⊕⊕ 
MODERATE a 
Live birth rate 
(LMWH) 
(de Jong et al., 2014 ) 784 per 1.000 964 per 1.000 
(658 to 1.000) RR 1.23 
(0.84 to 
1.81) 453 
(3 RCTs) ⊕⊕ 
LOW e,f 
Live birth rate 
(LMWH + aspirin) 
(de Jong et al., 2014 ) 702 per 1.000 709 per 1.000 
(611 to 814) RR 1.01 
(0.87 to 
1.16) 322 
(2 RCTs) ⊕⊕⊕ 
MODERATE a 
Live birth rate 
(LMWH ± aspirin ) 
(de Jong et al., 2014 ) 749 per 1.000 802 per 1.000 
(742 to 862) RR 1.07 
(0.99 to 
1.15) 793 
(5 RCTs) ⊕⊕⊕ 
MODERATE b 
Anticoagulant versus other treatment 
Live birth rate (LMWH 
vs aspirin) 
(de Jong et al., 2014 ) 681 per 1.000 790 per 1.000 
(633 to 987) RR 1.16 
(0.93 to 
1.45) 325 
(3 RCTs) ⊕ 
VERY LOW 
a,b,c,d 
Live birth rate 
(LMWH+aspirin vs 
aspirin) 
(de Jong et al., 2014 ) 609 per 1.000 677 per 1.000 
(573 to 792) RR 1.11 
(0.94 to 
1.30) 327 
(2 RCTs) ⊕⊕⊕ 
MODERATE a 
Live birth rate 
(LMWH+aspirin vs 
LMWH) 
(de Jong et al., 2014 ) 723 per 1.000 658 per 1.000 
(521 to 832) RR 0.91 
(0.72 to 
1.15) 126 
(1 RCT) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,g Single RCT 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and t he relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. Optimal information size not met 
b. Analysis includes studies assessed as high risk of bias 
c. Direction of effects, heterogeneity 
d. One study includes women with hereditary thrombophilia and RPL 
e. Two studies assessed as high risk of bias 
f. Heterogeneity 
g. Single RCT 
 [142] 
 
13 Progesterone compared to no treatment/placebo for unexplained RPL 
Patient or population : Unexplained RPL 
Intervention : Progesterone 
Comparison : No treatment/pl acebo 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* (95% 
CI) Relative 
effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with no 
treatment/plac
ebo Risk with 
Progesterone 
Miscarriage rate 
(Haas and Ramsey, 
2013 ) 376 
per 1.000 191 per 1.000 
(112 to 303) OR 0.39 
(0.21 to 0.72) 225 
(4 RCTs) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,b (women with previous 
miscarriage only) 
Miscarriage rate 
(Coomarasamy et al., 
2015 ) 334 
per 1.000 321 per 1.000 
(264 to 391) RR 0.96 
(0.79 to 1.17) 826 
(1 RCT) ⊕⊕ 
LOW b,c Single RCT 
Live birth rate 
(Coomarasamy et al., 
2015 ) 633 
per 1.000 659 per 1.000 
(595 to 728) RR 1.04 
(0.94 to 1.15) 826 
(1 RCT) ⊕⊕⊕ 
MODERATE b,c Single RCT 
Miscarriage rate 
(Saccone et al., 2017 ) 282 
per 1.000 203 per 1.000 
(149 to 273) RR 0.72 
(0.53 to 0.97 ) 1586 
(10 RCTs) ⊕⊕⊕ 
MODERATE d Review including 
(Coomarasamy et al., 
2015 ) 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the interven tion (and its 95% CI). 
a. 4 RCTs of very poor quality (as assessed by reviewers) 
b. Optimal information size not met 
c. Single RCT 
d. differences in direction of effect 

14 G-CSF compared to placebo for unexplained RPL 
Patient or population : unexplained RPL 
Setting : 
Intervention : G-CSF 
Comparison : placebo 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* 
(95% CI) Relative effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments 
Risk with 
placebo Risk with G -
CSF 
Live birth rate 
(Scarpellini and Sbracia, 
2009 ) 485 per 1.000 828 per 
1.000 
(585 to 945) OR 5.1 
(1.5 to 18.4) 68 
(1 RCT) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,b Single RCT 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. women with unexplained primary RM, all with at least 4 consecutive miscarriages and negative for all clinical investigations 
b. No explanation was provided 
 [143] 
 
15 Chinese Herbal medicine compared to placebo/no treatment for RPL 
Patient or population : RPL 
Intervention : Chinese Herbal medicine 
Comparison : Placebo /no treatment 
Outcomes Anticipated absolute effects* 
(95% CI) 
Relative 
effect 
(95% CI) № of 
participants 
(studies) Quality of the 
evidence 
(GRADE) Comments Risk with 
placebo/no 
treatment Risk with 
Chinese 
Herbal 
medicine 
Live birth rate 
(Chinese herbal 
medicines versus other 
pharmaceuticals) 
(Li et al., 2016 ) 475 per 1.000 499 per 
1.000 
(318 to 784) RR 1.05 
(0.67 to 1.65) 80 
(1 RCT) ⊕ 
VERY LOW b,c,d,e 
Live birth rate 
(Combined medicines 
versus other 
pharmaceuticals) 
(Li et al., 2016 ) 442 per 1.000 685 per 
1.000 
(504 to 928) RR 1.55 
(1.14 to 2.10) 601 
(6 RCTs) ⊕ 
VERY LOW a,c,f 
*The risk in the intervention group (and i ts 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative 
effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). 
a. High or unclear risk of bias in most studies (selection, performance, reporting) 
b. Single study 
c. Compar ison with conventional medicine, instead of placebo 
d. Optimal information size not met 
e. No explanation was provided 
f. Significant heterogeneity 
 
Reference s 
Bernardi LA, Cohen RN, Stephenson MD. Impact of subclinical hypo thyroidism in women with recurrent early 
pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2013; 100: 1326- 1331. 
Coomarasamy A, Williams H, Truchanowicz E, Seed PT, Small R, Quenby S, Gupta P, Dawood F, Koot YE, Bender 
Atik R et al. A Randomized Trial of Progesterone in Women with Recurrent Miscarriages. N Engl J Med 2015; 373: 
2141- 2148. 
de Jong PG, Kaandorp S, Di Nisio M, Goddijn M, Middeldorp S. Aspirin and/or heparin for women with unexplained recurrent miscarriage with or without inherited thrombophilia. Cochrane Database S yst Rev 2014;
7: Cd004734. 
Egerup P, Lindschou J, Gluud C, Christiansen OB. The Effects of Intravenous Immunoglobulins in Women with 
Recurrent Miscarriages: A Systematic Review of Randomised Trials with Meta -Analyses and Trial Sequential 
Analyses Including Individual Patient Data. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0141588. 
Empson M, Lassere M, Craig J, Scott J. Prevention of recurrent miscarriage for women with antiphospholipid 
antibody or lupus anticoagulant. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005 : Cd002859. 
Franssen MT, Musters AM, van der Veen F, Repping S, Leschot NJ, Bossuyt PM, Goddijn M, Korevaar JC. 
Reproductive outcome after PGD in couples with recurrent miscarriage carrying a structural chromosome 
abnormality: a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update 2011; 17: 467- 475. 
Goma a MF, Elkholy AG, El- Said MM, Abdel -Salam NE. Combined oral prednisolone and heparin versus heparin: 
the effect on peripheral NK cells and clinical outcome in patients with unexplained recurrent miscarriage. A 
double -blind placebo randomized controlled tri al. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2014; 290: 757- 762. 
Haas DM, Ramsey PS. Progestogen for preventing miscarriage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 10: Cd003511. 
Ikuma S, Sato T, Sugiura- Ogasawara M, Nagayoshi M, Tanaka A, Takeda S. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis an d 
Natural Conception: A Comparison of Live Birth Rates in Patients with Recurrent Pregnancy Loss Associated with 
Translocation. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0129958. [144] 
 
Li L, Dou L, Leung PC, Chung TKH, Wang CC. Chinese herbal medicines for unexplained recurrent miscar riage 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2016. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Mak A, Cheung MW, Cheak AA, Ho RC. Combination of heparin and aspirin is superior to aspirin alone in enhancing 
live births in patients with recurrent pregnancy loss and positive anti -phospholipid antibodies: a meta- analysis of 
randomized controlled trials and meta -regression. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2010; 49: 281- 288. 
Morley LC, Simpson N, Tang T. Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) for preventing miscarriage. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2013; 1: Cd008611. 
Musters AM, Repping S, Korevaar JC, Mastenbroek S, Limpens J, van der Veen F, Goddijn M. Pregnancy outcome after preimplantation genetic screening or natural conception in couples with unexplained recurrent misc arriage: 
a systematic review of the best available evidence. Fertil Steril 2011;
95: 2153- 2157, 2157.e2151- 2153. 
Negro R, Schwartz A, Gismondi R, Tinelli A, Mangieri T, Stagnaro -Green A. Universal screening versus case finding 
for detection and treatment of thyroid hormonal dysfunction during pregnancy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010; 95: 
1699- 1707. 
Saccone G, Schoen C, Franasiak JM, Scott RT, Jr., Berghella V. Supplementation with progestogens in the first trimester of pregnancy to prevent miscarriage in women with unexplained recurrent miscarriage: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Fertil Steril 2017;
107: 430- 438 e433. 
Scarpellini F, Sbracia M. Use of granulocyte colony -stimulating factor for the treatment of unexplained r ecurrent 
miscarriage: a randomised controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2009; 24: 2703- 2708. 
Showell MG, Mackenzie -Proctor R, Brown J, Yazdani A, Stankiewicz MT, Hart RJ. Antioxidants for male subfertility. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014 : Cd007411. 
Skeith L, Carri er M, Kaaja R, Martinelli I, Petroff D, Schleussner E, Laskin CA, Rodger MA. A meta- analysis of low -
molecular -weight heparin to prevent pregnancy loss in women with inherited thrombophilia. Blood 2016; 127: 
1650- 1655. 
Tang AW, Alfirevic Z, Turner MA, Drury JA, Small R, Quenby S. A feasibility trial of screening women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage for high uterine natural killer cell density and randomizing to prednisolone or placebo when 
pregnant. Hum Reprod 2013;
28: 1743- 1752. 
Vissenberg R, van den Boogaard E, van Wely M, van der Post JA, Fliers E, Bisschop PH, Goddijn M. Treatment of 
thyroid disorders before conception and in early pregnancy: a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update 2012; 18: 
360- 373. 
Wong LF, Porter TF, Scott JR. Immunotherapy for recurrent miscarriage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 10: 
Cd000112. 
Ziakas PD, Pavlou M, Voulgarelis M. Heparin treatment in antiphospholipid syndrome with recurrent pregnancy 
loss: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2010; 115: 1256- 1262. 
 
 [145] 
 
Annex 3: Recommendations for 
research in RPL 
From the literature and discussion of the available evidence, several topics were identified for which 
evidence is inconsistent, insufficient or non -existing. For the benefit of couples with RPL, the GDG 
recommends that future research , where possible in well -designed RCTs, should focus on these 
research gaps. 
Definition of RPL 
• Perform epidemiological studies on the effect of various RPL definitions on diagnosis , 
prognosis , or treatment . 
Organization of Care 
• Study the (emotional ) impact of RPL on men . 
• Develop a prognostic model to provide an individually based live birth prognosis. 
• Develop E -health tools for support to couples with RPL and staff . 
Genetics 
• Establish the value of using NGS f or PGD -A in couples with RPL . 
• The role of genetic analysis of pregnancy tissue needs to be clarified (prognostic modelling) . 
Thrombophilia 
• Stud y the effect of anticoagulant treatment for RPL women with hereditary thrombophilia 
• With regard to RPL and APS: 
o Study clinical criteria for diagnosis and treatment of APS (e.g. female age, number of 
pregnancy losses, consecutive or non -consecutive losses). 
• Assess the effectiveness of heparin treatment from comparison with placebo/no 
treatment 
• Compare the efficacy and safety of LMW H versus UFH. 
• How should heparin be administrated; start before conception ( antepartum ), start 
after fetal heartbeat, t hroughout whole pregnancy from positive pregnanc y test, up to 
36 weeks or later? 
• Evaluate the effect of h ydroxychloroquine in couples wi th RPL . Hydroxychloroquine has 
been safely used in APS pregnancies and lupus pregnancies for preventing obstetric complications. 
Immunology 
• Study the effect of moderate dosages of prednisolone in RPL (preferably in large controlled 
trials) . 
• Study the effec t of Iv Ig treatment in women with secondary RPL . 
• Study the effect of immunotherapy in subsets of women with RPL with specific HLA class II 
alleles (in RCTs) 
 [146] 
 
Metabolic factors 
• Study the effect of Levothyroxine treatment in women with RPL and identified t hyroid auto - 
immunity . 
• Study the effect of Levothyroxine treatment in women with RPL and identified subclinical 
hypothyroidism. 
Uterine m alformation s 
• Clarify the role of congenital uterine malformations in RPL and the associated live birth rates 
per type o f congenital uterine abnormality (preferably in well-controlled prospective trials) . 
• Evaluate whether hysteroscopic septum resection has beneficial effects in women with RPL 
(increasing live birth rates, and decreasing miscarriage rates, without doing har m). 
Male factor 
• In general, there is very little evidence on the role of the man in RPL couples . 
• Study t he impact of unhealthy lifestyle (such as obesity, poor diet and smoking) on RPL through 
sperm DNA damage (preferably in p rospective studies with approp riate controls , matched for 
age, fertility status and lifestyle). 
• Study the mechanisms of sperm DNA damage. 
• Study the effect of male lifestyle alterations with outcomes of both sperm DNA per se and RPL 
(in randomized controlled trials) . 
• Study the effect of antioxidant therapy for men on RPL ; specifically to determine the best 
combinations and extent of dietary vitamin supplementation in the protection of sperm DNA 
from fragmentation. 
Female factor 
• Study t he effect of pre- conceptual weight loss on live birth rate using diet, exercise of 
therapeutic interventions . 
• Define optimal endometrial characteristics for pregnancy; develop tests that detect women 
with sub -optimal endometrium and treatments to improve it. 
• Further research is needed on the role of (c hronic) endometritis in RPL, including prospective 
observational studies and randomized controlled trials. 
 [147] 
 
Annex 4: Abbreviations 
AAGL American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists 
ACA Anticardiolipin antibodies 
AFC Antral follicle count 
AMH Anti-Müllerian hormone 
ANA Antinuclear antibody 
APS Antiphospholipid syndrome 
Array -CGH Array -based Comparative Genomic Hybridization 
ART Assisted reproductive technology 
aβ2GPI β2 glycoprotein I antibodies 
BMI Body mass index 
bp Base pair 
CCCT clomiphene citrate challenge test 
CI Confidence Interval 
CT Computed tomography 
E2 Estrogen 
EM Expectant management 
EPL Early pregnancy loss 
ESGE European Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy 
FAI Free androgen inde x 
FG Fasting glucose 
FI Fasting insulin 
FISH Fluorescent in situ Hybridization 
FSH Follicle Stimulating Hormone 
G-CSF Granulocyte colony -stimulating factor 
GDG Guideline Development Group 
hCG Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin 
Hcy Homocysteine 
HHcy Hyperhomocysteinemia 
HLA Human Leukocyte Antigen 
hMG Human Menopausal Gonadotropins 
HOMA -IR Homeostatic Model Assessment Insulin Resistance 
HSG Hysterosalpingography 
HY male -specific minor histocompatibility 
ICSI Intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
IL Interleukin 
IR Insulin Resistance 
IU International units 
IUA Intrauterine adhesions 
IUI Intrauterine insemination 
IVF In vitro fertilisation 
IvIg Intravenous Immunoglobulin 
KIR Killer immunoglobulin -like receptor [148] 
 
LA Lupus Anticoagulant 
LAI-P Lupus a ctivity index -pregnancy 
LBR Live Birth Rate 
LH Luteinizing Hormone 
LIT lymphocyte immunization therapy 
LMWH Low molecular weight heparin 
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging 
MTHFR Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 
NGS Next Generation Sequencing 
NK Natural Killer 
OR Odd’s ratio 
P Progesterone 
PCOS Polycystic ovary syndrome 
PGD Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis 
PGD -A Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis of aneuploidy 
PGS Preimplan tation Genetic Screening 
PGT Preimplantation Genetic Testing 
PGT-A PGT for aneuploidies 
PGT-M PGT for monogenic/single gene defects 
PGT-SR PGT for chromosomal structural rearrangements 
PICO Patients – interventions – comparison – outcome 
PL Pregna ncy loss 
POI Premature Ovarian Insufficiency 
PSS Perceived stress scale 
RCT Randomized controlled trial 
ROS reactive oxygen species 
RPL Recurrent pregnancy loss 
RR Relative risk 
SCH Subclinical hypothyroidism 
SHBG sex hormone -binding globulin 
SHG Sonohysterography (or hysterosonography) 
T3 Triiodothyronine 
T4 Thyroxine 
TPO Thyroid peroxidase 
TPOAb Thyroid peroxidase antibodies 
TSH Thyroid stimulating hormone 
tTG Tissue transglutaminase antibodies 
TUNEL Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase -mediated dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL). 
TV-US Transvaginal ultrasound 
UFH Unfractionated heparin 
Vs Versus 
VTE venous thromboembolism 
 [149] 
 
Annex 5: Methodology 
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT 
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) guideli nes are developed based on 
the Manual for ESHRE guideline development (N. Vermeulen, A. D'Angelo , P. de Sutter, W.L.D.M. Nelen, 
Manual for ESHRE guideline development , version 2013), which can be consulted at the ESHRE website 
(www.eshre.eu /guidelines ). The principal aim of this manual is to provide stepwise advice on ESHRE 
guideline development for members of ESHRE guideline development groups. The manual describes a 
12-step procedure for writing clinical management guid elines by the guideline development group, 
supported by the ESHRE methodological expert . 
 
The current guideline was developed and funded by ESHRE, which covered expenses associated with 
the guideline meetings (travel, hotel and catering expenses) associa ted with the literature searches 
(library costs, costs associated with the retrieval of papers) and with the implementation of the 
guideline (printing, publication costs). Except for reimbursement of their travel expenses, GDG 
members did not receive any p ayment for their participation in the guideline development process. 
The scope of the guideline and first version of the key questions were drafted by the coordinator and 
deputies of the ESHRE Special Interest Group Implantation and Early Pregnancy. A cal l was launched for 
experts in the field interested in joining the guideline development group. All applications were 
reviewed and experts were selected based on expertise and geographical location. We strived towards 
a balance in ge nder and location within Europe. A meeting of the guid eline development group was 
organized to discuss the key questions and redefine them through the PICO process (patients – 
interventions – comparison – outcome). This resulted in a final list of 18 key questions. Based on the 
defined key words, literature searches were performed by the methodological expert (Dr. N. 
Vermeulen). Key words were sorted to importance and used for searches in PUBMED/MEDLINE and 
the Cochrane library. We searched the databases from inception up to 31 Ma rch 2017 . 
Literature searches were performed as an iterative process. In a first step, systematic reviews and meta -
analyses were collected. If no results were found, the search was extended to randomized controlled trials, and further to cohort studies and case reports , following the hierarchy of the levels of evidence. 
Reference were selected or excluded by the methodological expert and expert GDG member based on 
title and abstract and knowledge of the existing literature. If necessary, additional searches were 
performed in order to get the final list of papers. The quality of the selected papers was assessed by means of the quality assessment checklist, defined in the ESHRE guideline manual. Furthermore, the 
evidence was collected and summarized in an evid ence table according to format suggested by the 
Guidelines International network (GIN) (http://www.g -i-n.net/activities/etwg
). The quality assessment 
[150] 
 
and evidence tables were constructed by the expert GD G members. Summary of findings tables (Annex 
2) were prepared according to the GRADE approach for all intervention s with at least two studies per 
outcome. Where available, summary of findings tables were based on existing up -to-date well -executed 
systemat ic reviews, if necessary supplemented with additional recent RCTs. When there was no recent 
valid systematic review available, we systematically searched for relevant studies , as described above. 
Cumulative live birth rate , live birth rate and pregnancy lo ss rate (or miscarriage rate) were considered 
the critical outcomes. 
GDG meeting s were organized to discuss the draft recommendations and the supporting evidence and 
to reach consensus on the final formulation of the recommendations. In a final step, all evidence and 
recommendations were combined in the ESHRE guideline: “Management of Recurrent Pregnancy Loss ” 
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
We labelled the recommendations as either ‘‘strong’’ or ‘‘conditional’’ according to the GRADE 
approach. We used the words ‘‘we recommend’’ for strong recommendations and ‘‘we suggest’’ for 
conditional recommendations. S uggested interpretation of strong and conditional recommendations 
by patients, clinicians and health care policy makers is as follows: 
Implications for Strong recommendation Conditional recommendation 
Patients Most individuals in this situation would 
want the recommended course of action, 
and only a small proportion would not The majority of individuals in this situation 
would want the suggested course o f 
action, but many would not 
Clinicians Most individuals should receive the 
intervention 
Adherence to this recommendation 
according to the guideline could be used as 
a quality criterion or performance indicator 
Formal decision aids are not likely to be 
needed to help individuals make decisions 
consistent with their values and 
preferences Recognize that different choices will be 
appropriate for individual patients and that 
you must help each patient arrive at a 
management decision consistent with his 
or her values and preferences 
Decision aids may be useful in helping 
individuals to make decisions consistent 
with their values and preferences 
Policy makers The recommendation can be adopted as 
policy in most situations Policy making will require substantial 
debate and involvement of various 
stakeholders 
 
For each recommendation, it is mentioned whether it is strong or conditional and what the quality of 
the supporting evidence was. In the justification section, more data are provided on the considerations 
taken into account when formulating the recommendations: balance between desirable and 
undesirable effects, certainty of the evidence of effects, certainty in how people value the outcome, 
acceptability and feasibility of the intervention. Impact on health eq uity and resource impact were only 
discussed where relevant. 
STRATEGY FOR REVIEW O F THE GUIDELINE DRAFT 
After finalization of the guideline draft, the review process was initiated . The draft guideline was 
published on the ESHRE website, accompanied by th e reviewers’ comments form and a short [151] 
 
explanation of the review process. The guideline was open for review between 30 June and 15 August 
2017. 
To notify interested clinicians, we sent out an invitation to review the guideline by email to all members 
of the ESHRE SIG of Implantation and Early Pregnancy . Selected reviewers were invited personally by 
email. These reviewers included: 
- Coordinators and deputies of the ESHRE SIG Implantation and Early Pregnancy and the ESHRE SIG 
Quality and Safety in ART. 
- Contac t persons of patient organizations across Europe. 
- Contact persons of international and national societies focused on miscarriage across Europe. 
All reviewers are listed in annex 6. The Reviewer comments processing report, including further 
information on the review and a list of all comments per reviewer with the response formulated by the 
GDG will be published on the ESHRE website. 
GUIDELINE IMPLEMENTATION STRATE GY 
The standard dissemination procedure for all ESHRE guidelines comprises publishing and anno uncement. 
Each guideline is published on the ESHRE Website and in Human Reproduction. The announcement 
procedure includes an announcement in “Focus on Reproduction”, a newsflash on the ESHRE website 
homepage and a news item in the next digital ESHRE newsl etter. All participants in the annual ESHRE 
meeting will be informed about the development and release of new guidelines; all related national societies and patient organizations are informed about the guideline release. They are asked to 
encourage local i mplementation by, for instance, translations or condensed versions, but they are also 
offered a website link to the original document. 
Patient version s of the guideline will be developed by a subgroup of the GDG together with patient 
representatives. Th e patient version is a translation of the recommendations in everyday language, with 
emphasis on questions important to patients . It aims to help patients understand the guideline’s 
recommendations and facilitates clinical decision -making. 
To further enhance implementation of the guideline, the members of the GDG, as experts in the f ield, 
will be asked to make suggestions for tailor -made implementation interventions (e.g. option grids, flow-
charts, additional recommendations, addition of graphic/visual materi al to the guideline). 
SCHEDULE FOR UPDATING THE GUIDELINE 
The current guideline will be considered for revision in 2021 ( four years after publication ). An 
intermediate search for new evidence will be performed two years after publication, which will infor m 
the GDG of the necessity of an update. 
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at the time of publication. 
However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this 
docu ment, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can be found at 
www.eshre.eu/guidelines . 
 
For more details on the methodology of ESHRE guidelines, visit www.eshre.eu/guidelines [152] 
 
Annex 6: Stakeholder consultation 
As mentioned in the methodology, the guideline draft was open for review for 6 weeks, between 30 
June and 1 5 August 2017 . All reviewers, their comments and the reply of the guideline develop ment 
group are summarized in the review report, which is published on the ESHRE website as supporting 
documentation to the guideline. The list of representatives of professional organization , and of 
individual experts that provided comments to the guideline are summarized below. 
Representative Organi zation 
ESHRE/ESGE CONUTA Group 
Grigoris Grimbizis ESHRE/ESGE CONUTA Group 
RCOG Guidelines Committee 
Bethany King Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
Giovanni Scambia SIGO President 
Elsa Vio ra AOGOI President 
Nicola Colacurci AGUI President SIGO - AOGOI – AGUI (Italy) 
 
Reviewer Country 
Stephan Gordts Belgium 
T C Li China 
Fang Ma China 
Henriette Svarre Nielsen Denmark 
Aboubakr Elnashar Egypt 
Thomas Strowitzki Germany 
Christiane Kling Germany 
Pratip Chakraborty India 
Mayumi Sugiura -Ogasawara Japan 
Raminta Bausyte Lithuania 
Michal Kunicki Poland 
Kersti Lundin Sweden 
Recurrent Pregnancy Loss group LUMC 
Harjo Verburg, Sandra Dieben, Lisa Lashley, Marie -
Louise van der Hoorn The Nether lands 
H.D.L. Ockhuijsen The Netherlands 
Ahmet Berkiz Turp Turkey 
Alessandra Pipan UAE 
Hena Zaheer UAE 
Mahmoud Moussa UK 
Shehnaaz Jivraj UK 
Arianna D'Angelo UK 
Ying Cheong UK 
Joe Leigh Simpson USA 
Channing Burks , Mary D. Stephenson , 
Theresa S. Falcon -Cullinan USA 
 [153] 

Copyright © European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology - All rights reserved 
The content of these ESHRE guidelines has been published for personal and educational use only. No 
commercial use i s authorised. No part of the ESHRE guidelines may be translated or reproduced in any 
form without prior written permission of the ESHRE communications manager.