# Extracted from: GTG 2015 - FGM.pdf
# Guideline ID: gtg-2015-fgm
# Content length: 79892 characters
# Processing date: 1732953490.9407358

Female Genital Mutilation 
and its Management
Green-top Guideline No. 53
July 2015
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists2 of 26Female Genital Mutilation and its Management
This is the second edition of this guideline, which was previously published under the same title in 
2009. Prior to this, an RCOG statement with the same title was published in 2003.
Executive summary of recommendations 
Complications of female genital mutilation (FGM)
Clinicians should be aware of the short- and long-term complications of FGM.
The legal and regulatory responsibilities of health professionals
FGM and UK law
All health professionals must be aware of the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 in England, 
Wales and Northern Ireland and the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005 
in Scotland. Both Acts provide that: 
1. FGM is illegal unless it is a surgical operation on a girl or woman irrespective of her age: 
(a) which is necessary for her physical or mental health; or 
(b) she is in any stage of labour, or has just given birth, for purposes connected with the 
 labour or birth. 
2. It is illegal to arrange, or assist in arranging, for a UK national or UK resident to be taken 
overseas for the purpose of FGM.
3. It is an offence for those with parental responsibility to fail to protect a girl from the risk 
of FGM. 
4. If FGM is confirmed in a girl under 18 years of age (either on examination or because the 
patient or parent says it has been done), reporting to the police is mandatory and this 
must be within 1 month of confirmation. [ New 2015 ]
Female genital cosmetic surgery (FGCS) may be prohibited unless it is necessary for the patient’s 
physical or mental health. All surgeons who undertake FGCS must take appropriate measures to 
ensure compliance with the FGM Acts. [ New 2015 ]
Re-infibulation is illegal; there is no clinical justification for re-infibulation and it should not be 
undertaken under any circumstances. [ New 2015 ]
What are the legal and regulatory responsibilities of health professionals in their evaluation of women 
with FGM?
When a woman with FGM is identified: 
The health professional must explain the UK law on FGM. [ New 2015 ]
The health professional must understand the difference between recording (documenting FGM in 
the medical records for data collection) and reporting (making a referral to police and/or social 
services) and their responsibilities with regards to these (Appendix I). [ New 2015 ]
The health professional must be familiar with the requirements of the Health and Social Care 
Information Centre (HSCIC) FGM Enhanced Dataset and explain its purpose to the woman. The 
requirement for her personal data to be submitted without anonymisation to the HSCIC, in order 
to prevent duplication of data, should be explained. However, she should also be told that all 
personal data are anonymised at the point of statistical analysis and publication. [ New 2015 ]P
D
D
D
D
DDRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists3 of 26The health professional should be aware that it is not mandatory to report all pregnant women to 
social services or the police. An individual risk assessment should be made by a member of the 
clinical team (midwife or obstetrician) using an FGM safeguarding risk assessment tool (an example 
of such a tool can be found at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-women-
and-girls-at-risk-of-fgm). If the unborn child, or any related child, is considered at risk then a report 
should be made. [ New 2015 ]
What are the principles of FGM management in obstetric and gynaecological practice? 
All acute trusts/health boards should have a designated consultant and midwife responsible for 
the care of women with FGM (Appendix II).
All gynaecologists, obstetricians and midwives should receive mandatory training on FGM and its 
management, including the technique of de-infibulation. They should complete the programme of 
FGM e-modules developed by Health Education England. [ New 2015 ]
Specialist multidisciplinary FGM services should be led by a consultant obstetrician and/or 
gynaecologist and be accessible through self-referral. These services should offer: information and 
advice about FGM; child safeguarding risk assessment; gynaecological assessment; de-infibulation; 
and access to other services.
Health professionals should ensure that, in consultations with women affected by FGM, the 
consultation and examination environment is safe and private, their approach is sensitive and 
nonjudgemental and professional interpreters are used where necessary. Family members should 
not be used as interpreters.
How should recent FGM be managed? 
Healthcare professionals should be vigilant and aware of the clinical signs and symptoms of recent 
FGM, which include pain, haemorrhage, infection and urinary retention. [ New 2015 ]
Examination findings should be accurately recorded in the clinical records. Some type 4 FGM, 
where a small incision or cut is made adjacent to or on the clitoris, can leave few, if any, visible 
signs when healed. Consideration should be given to photographic documentation of the findings 
at acute presentation. [ New 2015 ]
Legal and regulatory procedures must be followed (Appendix I); all women and girls with acute or 
recent FGM require police and social services referral. [ New 2015 ]
How should FGM be managed in gynaecological practice? 
What should the referral pathway be for women with FGM?
Women may be referred by their general practitioner (GP) to a hospital gynaecology clinic. The 
referral should be directed to FGM services, if available, or to the designated consultant obstetrician 
and/or gynaecologist responsible for the care of women and girls with FGM.
Women should be able to self-refer. [ New 2015 ]
All children with FGM or suspected FGM should be seen within child safeguarding services. 
[New 2015 ]
How should women with FGM be assessed in gynaecological practice?
Women with FGM may present with symptoms directly attributable to their FGM or with 
co-existing gynaecological morbidity. Gynaecologists should ask all women from communities 
that traditionally practise FGM whether they have had the procedure. [ New 2015 ]P
P
P
D
D
D
P
PP
P
PPRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists4 of 26Clinicians should be aware that psychological sequelae and impaired sexual function can occur 
with all types of FGM.
Examination should include inspection of the vulva to determine the type of FGM and whether 
de-infibulation is indicated, as well as to identify any other FGM-related morbidities, e.g. 
epidermoid inclusion cysts. [ New 2015 ]
All women should be offered referral for psychological assessment and treatment, testing for HIV, 
hepatitis B and C and sexual health screening. Where appropriate, women should be referred to 
gynaecological subspecialties, e.g. psychosexual services, urogynaecology, infertility. [ New 2015 ] 
Gynaecologists should be aware that narrowing of the vagina due to type 3 FGM can preclude 
vaginal examination for cervical smears and genital infection screens. De-infibulation may be 
required prior to gynaecological procedures such as surgical management of miscarriage (SMM) 
or termination of pregnancy (TOP).
What is the role of de-infibulation in gynaecological practice?
Women who are likely to benefit from de-infibulation should be counselled and offered the 
procedure before pregnancy, ideally before first sexual intercourse.
Women offered de-infibulation should have the option of having the procedure performed under 
local anaesthetic in the clinic setting in a suitable outpatient procedures room (Appendix III).
What is the role of clitoral reconstruction?
Clitoral reconstruction should not be performed because current evidence suggests unacceptable 
complication rates without conclusive evidence of benefit. [ New 2015 ]
How should FGM be managed in pregnancy? 
What level of care do women with FGM require?
Women with FGM are more likely to have obstetric complications and consultant-led care is 
generally recommended. However, some women with previous uncomplicated vaginal deliveries 
may be suitable for midwifery-led care in labour.
How should women with FGM be identified in pregnancy?
All women, irrespective of country of origin, should be asked for a history of FGM at their booking 
antenatal visit so that FGM can be identified early in the pregnancy. This should be documented in 
the maternity record. [ New 2015 ]
Women identified as having FGM should be referred to the designated consultant obstetrician or 
midwife with responsibility for FGM patients. Local protocols will determine which elements of care 
should be undertaken by these individuals and which may be undertaken by other appropriately 
trained midwives or obstetricians (Appendix IV).
What antenatal documentation is required to demonstrate that legal and regulatory processes have been 
adhered to? 
The midwife or obstetrician should ensure that all relevant information is documented in the 
clinical records (Appendix I). [ New 2015 ]
How should antenatal care be managed?
Referral for psychological assessment and treatment should be offered.P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
PDPCRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists5 of 26The vulva should be inspected to determine the type of FGM and whether de-infibulation is 
indicated. If the introitus is sufficiently open to permit vaginal examination and if the urethral 
meatus is visible, then de-infibulation is unlikely to be necessary.
Screening for hepatitis C should be offered in addition to the other routine antenatal screening 
tests (hepatitis B, HIV and syphilis). [ New 2015 ]
De-infibulation may be performed antenatally, in the first stage of labour or at the time of delivery 
and can usually be performed under local anaesthetic in a delivery suite room. It can also be 
performed perioperatively after caesarean section (Appendix III).
The midwife or obstetrician should discuss, agree and record a plan of care (see Appendix IV). This 
may be documented in a preformatted sheet.
Women should be informed that re-infibulation will not be undertaken under any circumstances. 
[New 2015 ]
How should intrapartum care be managed?
If a woman requires intrapartum de-infibulation, the midwife and obstetrician caring for her should 
have completed training in de-infibulation or should be supervised appropriately.
If de-infibulation planned for the time of delivery is not undertaken because of recourse to caesarean 
section, then the option of perioperative de-infibulation (i.e. just after caesarean section) should 
be considered and discussed with the woman. [ New 2015 ]
Labial tears in women with FGM should be managed in the same manner as in women without 
FGM. Repairs should be performed where clinically indicated, after discussion with the woman and 
using appropriate materials and techniques.
How should intrapartum care be managed for women identified as having FGM in pregnancy for whom 
there has been no agreed documented plan of care?
The impact of FGM on labour and delivery should be sensitively discussed and a plan of care 
agreed. [ New 2015 ]
How should postnatal care be managed?
A woman whose planned de-infibulation was not performed because of delivery by caesarean 
section should have follow-up in a gynaecology outpatient or FGM clinic so that de-infibulation 
can be offered before a subsequent pregnancy. [ New 2015 ]
The discharging midwife should ensure that all legal and regulatory processes have been adhered 
to prior to discharge (Appendix I). [ New 2015 ]
1. Purpose and scope
The purpose of this guideline is to provide evidence-based guidance on the management of women with 
female genital mutilation (FGM) and those who are considered to be at risk. It covers the clinical care of 
women before, during and after pregnancy, including the legal and regulatory responsibilities of health 
professionals. The focus of this guideline is on practice in the UK. Although much of the content is 
applicable to all four constituent countries, the regulatory framework in Scotland and Northern Ireland 
differs to that described here; further information is available elsewhere.1,2
For a global perspective on FGM, further information is available from other sources.3,4P
D
DP
P
P
P
PPPPRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists6 of 262. Introduction and background epidemiology
2.1 Definition and classification
Female genital mutilation, also known as ‘female genital cutting’, ‘female genital mutilation/cutting’ or 
‘cutting’, refers to ‘all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia or 
other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons’.3,5 The widely accepted classification 
of FGM developed by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1995 and updated in 2007 is shown in 
Table 1. FGM is practised for a variety of complex reasons, usually in the belief that it is beneficial for the 
girl.4 It has no health benefits and harms girls and women in many ways. FGM is a human rights violation 
and a form of child abuse, breaching the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child,4 and is a 
severe form of violence against women and girls.6
Table 1. WHO FGM classification3
Type 1: Partial or total removal of the clitoris and/or the prepuce (clitoridectomy). 
Type 2: Partial or total removal of the clitoris and the labia minora, with or without excision of the labia majora 
(excision). 
Type 3: Narrowing of the vaginal orifice with creation of a covering seal by cutting and appositioning the labia minora 
and/or the labia majora, with or without excision of the clitoris (infibulation).
Type 4: All other harmful procedures to the female genitalia for non-medical purposes, for example: pricking, piercing, 
incising, scraping and cauterization.
2.2 Global epidemiology
UNICEF estimates that worldwide over 125 million women and girls have undergone FGM.4 It is a 
traditional cultural practice in 29 African countries. FGM prevalence by country is shown in Figure 1. 
Outside Africa, FGM is also practised in Yemen, Iraqi Kurdistan and parts of Indonesia and Malaysia. Far 
smaller numbers have been recorded in India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, Peru 
and Colombia.
The type of FGM varies between countries. FGM type 3 (infibulation) is practised almost exclusively in 
Africa, with the highest prevalence in northeastern Africa, including Somalia, Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea 
and Djibouti. FGM prevalence also varies within countries, where it may be associated with particular 
ethnic groups. FGM is almost always carried out on girls between infancy and the age of 15, but the age 
at which girls are mutilated varies considerably between countries. It is estimated that in over half of 
countries practising FGM, girls are cut under the age of 5 years. In some communities adult women may 
undergo re-infibulation following childbirth.
Those performing FGM are usually traditional practitioners with no formal medical training, who practise 
without anaesthetics using crude instruments such as knives, scissors or razor blades. However, in some 
countries health professionals undertake a substantial number of FGM procedures. These include Egypt, 
where doctors undertake the majority of FGM procedures, Sudan and Kenya. Globally, the trend towards 
medicalisation of FGM is increasing.4
As a result of migration, there has been a substantial increase in the number of girls and women with 
FGM living in North America, Australia, New Zealand and Europe.4
2.3 UK epidemiology
It has been estimated that 137 000 women and girls in England and Wales, born in countries where 
FGM is traditionally practised, have undergone FGM, including 10 000 girls aged under 15 years. 
These provisional interim estimates were derived by combining published data on FGM prevalence 
in FGM-practising countries with census and birth registration data in England and Wales.7 There are RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists7 of 26no published studies on the prevalence of FGM in Scotland or Northern Ireland. There is anecdotal 
evidence that girls are taken from the UK to their country of origin to undergo FGM and that FGM also 
takes place in the UK.8
In order to capture data about numbers of women with FGM receiving care from the National Health 
Service in England, the Department of Health implemented an FGM data set in 2014. In April 2015, an 
enhanced data set was introduced, requiring all acute trusts, general practices and mental health trusts 
to record FGM data and return patient-identifiable data to the Health and Social Care Information Centre 
(HSCIC). Information can be found on the HSCIC website: http://www.hscic.gov.uk/fgm.
3. Identification and assessment of evidence
This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing RCOG Green-top 
Guidelines. MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane Library were searched. The search was restricted to 
articles published between 2007 and January 2014 and limited to humans and the English language. A 
top-up literature search was performed in April 2015. The databases were searched using the relevant 
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, including all subheadings, and this was combined with 
a keyword search. Search terms included ‘FGM’, ‘female genital cutting’, ‘female genital mutilation’, 
‘circumcision’, ‘infibulation’, ‘deinfibulation’, ‘de-infibulation’, ‘clitoridectomy’ and ‘defibulation’. The 
National Guideline Clearinghouse, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) Evidence 
Search, Trip, Guidelines International Network and the Geneva Foundation for Medical Education and 
Research website were also searched for relevant guidelines. The websites of the WHO, UNICEF, United 
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the Population Council, the Population Reference Bureau, FORWARD Figure 1. Prevalence of FGM. Percentage of girls and women aged 15–49 who have undergone FGM, by region/
country. Source: UNICEF4
Somalia
Guinea
Djibouti
Egypt
Eritrea
Mali
Sierra Leone
Sudan
Gambia
Burkina Faso
Ethiopia
Mauritania
Liberia
Guinea-Bissau
Chad
Côte d’Ivoire
Kenya
Nigeria
Senegal
Central African Republic
Yemen
United Republic of Tanzania
Benin
Iraq
Ghana
Togo
Niger
Cameroon
Uganda98%
96%
93%
91%
89%
89%
88%
88%
76%
76%
74%
69%
66%
50%
44%
38%
27%
27%
26%
24%
23%
15%
13%
8%
4%
4%
2%
1%
1%This map is 
stylized and 
not to scale. It 
does not reflect 
a position by 
UNICEF on the 
legal status of 
any country or 
territory or the 
delimitation of 
any frontiers. 
The final 
boundary 
between the 
Republic of the 
Sudan and the 
Republic of 
South Sudan 
has not yet been 
determined.Above 80%
51% – 80%
26% – 50%
10% – 25%
Less than 10%
FGM/C is not 
concentrated in 
these countries
FGM/C female genital mutilation/cuttingRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists8 of 26(Foundation for Women’s Health Research and Development), Rainbo and the UK Government were 
searched for relevant reports. Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. Areas 
lacking evidence are highlighted and annotated as ‘good practice points’.
4. Complications of FGM 
Clinicians should be aware of the short- and long-term complications of FGM.
4.1 Short-term complications
A systematic review by Berg9 found that the most common immediate complications from 
FGM were haemorrhage (5–62%), urinary retention (8–53%) and genital swelling (2–27%), 
although there were additional studies reporting infection and fever, and three deaths directly 
attributed to FGM. The methodological quality of these studies was generally poor.
There is concern that some type 4 FGM procedures, where a small cut is made adjacent to the clitoris, 
may now be performed more frequently.4 This may leave little in the way of long-term scarring and so 
contemporaneous recording of all findings is crucial.
4.2 Long-term complications
Reported long-term complications of FGM are listed below. The systematic review by Berg9 demonstrated 
an association of FGM with urinary tract infection, dyspareunia and bacterial vaginosis. Cohort 
studies and case reports have also found associations with other sequelae. Most studies are of poor 
methodological quality.
Genital scarring
Genital scarring after FGM can be unsightly and painful. Keloid scarring has been reported 
in up to 3% of women. Epidermoid inclusion cysts and sebaceous cysts may need surgical 
excision.10 Neuroma of the clitoris causing pain has been described.11–13
Urinary tract complications
Lower urinary tract symptoms are more common in women with FGM, particularly those 
with type 2 or type 3 FGM.14 Poor urinary flow beneath the infibulation scar may result in 
symptoms of urinary obstruction, and stasis of urine may lead to recurrent urinary tract 
infection (relative risk [RR] 3.01, CI 1.42–6.38)9 and to urinary or vaginal calculi.15 The 
recommended treatment is de-infibulation.
Damage to the urethra during FGM of any type may result in a urinary stricture or fistulae. These require 
assessment by a urologist or urogynaecologist. 
There is no evidence that FGM directly increases the long-term risk of genital prolapse or 
incontinence.16 However, vaginal narrowing may hamper urodynamic investigation. 
Dyspareunia, apareunia and impaired sexual function
Dyspareunia may occur as a result of vaginal narrowing and painful scar tissue (RR 1.53, 95% 
CI 1.20–1.97). Apareunia and vulvovaginal lacerations during sexual intercourse have also 
been reported.9
The removal of sexually sensitive tissue such as the clitoris and labia minora may reduce 
sexual sensation, while scarring over the clitoris may be painful. Numerous reports exist of Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 2+Evidence 
level 2+PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists9 of 26various sexual consequences of FGM, including a reduction in desire and arousal, reduced 
frequency of orgasm or anorgasmia, decreased lubrication and poorer sexual satisfaction.17–19 
Psychological sequelae
It is accepted that FGM has psychological effects, and flashbacks, anxiety20 and post-traumatic 
stress disorder have been reported.21 FGM has been linked to an increased incidence of 
domestic violence in Africa22,23 but there are no European or UK data on this.
Menstrual difficulties
Haematocolpos due to FGM has been reported. Dysmenorrhoea has also been reported among 
women with FGM, although the underlying mechanisms are unclear.13
Genital infection and pelvic inflammatory disease
FGM has been associated with an increased risk of bacterial vaginosis9 and herpes simplex 
virus type 2.24 However, currently there is no conclusive epidemiological evidence to support 
an increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease as a consequence of FGM. One case–control 
study from Sudan showed similar rates of chlamydia, gonorrhoea and syphilis in women with 
and without FGM.25
Infertility
At present, there are no well-planned studies that confirm whether or not FGM leads to 
infertility. Potential factors could include lack of sexual intercourse (apareunia, dyspareunia, 
impaired sexual function) and ascending infections caused by the FGM procedure. One case–
control study showed an association between primary infertility and FGM.26
HIV and hepatitis B infection
Many FGM-practising countries are hepatitis B endemic27 and some have a high prevalence of HIV.28 
Although mechanisms by which FGM may increase the risk of transmission of hepatitis B, hepatitis C 
and HIV have been proposed (i.e. sharing of non-sterile instruments and cutting in groups), there is 
currently no conclusive epidemiological evidence to support this.
Obstetric complications 
Research into the obstetric complications of FGM has been hampered by patchy methodology and the 
fact that in Africa, where FGM is typically practised, maternal and perinatal mortality and morbidity are 
already high due to other factors. Obstetric complications have been described with all types of FGM. 
However, the risks are greater with greater tissue damage. 
Maternal complications associated with FGM have been described in Africa, North America 
and Europe. One large prospective study by the WHO investigated both maternal and 
perinatal outcomes in 28 000 women in six African countries.29 A meta-analysis by Berg et al.30 
reviewed maternal outcomes and included some studies from Western countries (USA and 
Europe), although the majority were from Africa. The meta-analysis reported an increased 
risk of prolonged labour, postpartum haemorrhage and perineal trauma. The WHO study also 
found an increased risk of caesarean section and demonstrated an increased need for neonatal 
resuscitation and risk of stillbirth and early neonatal death.
There are no good quality European or UK studies investigating FGM and perinatal outcomes. 
However, evidence from epidemiological studies of non-European migrants in Europe has Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 2–
Evidence 
level 2–Evidence 
level 2+
Evidence 
level 3
Evidence 
level 3RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists10 of 26shown a higher incidence of stillbirth31,32 and neonatal death,31 so women in the UK from FGM-
practising countries may be at higher risk.
Although fistulae have been associated with FGM, studies have not demonstrated that a history 
of FGM increases the risk of subsequent obstetric fistulae due to obstructed labour.33
Other obstetric consequences that have been described include fear of childbirth, difficulty 
in intrapartum monitoring (including application of fetal scalp electrodes and fetal blood 
sampling), difficulty in catheterisation during labour, wound infection and retention of lochia.29
5. The legal and regulatory responsibilities of health professionals
5.1 FGM and UK law
All health professionals must be aware of the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 in England, 
Wales and Northern Ireland and the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005 
in Scotland. Both Acts provide that: 
1. FGM is illegal unless it is a surgical operation on a girl or woman irrespective of her age: 
(a) which is necessary for her physical or mental health; or 
(b) she is in any stage of labour, or has just given birth, for purposes connected with the 
 labour or birth. 
2. It is illegal to arrange, or assist in arranging, for a UK national or UK resident to be taken 
overseas for the purpose of FGM.
3. It is an offence for those with parental responsibility to fail to protect a girl from the risk 
of FGM. 
4. If FGM is confirmed in a girl under 18 years of age (either on examination or because the 
patient or parent says it has been done), reporting to the police is mandatory and this 
must be within 1 month of confirmation.
Female genital cosmetic surgery (FGCS) may be prohibited unless it is necessary for the patient’s 
physical or mental health. All surgeons who undertake FGCS must take appropriate measures to 
ensure compliance with the FGM Acts.
Re-infibulation is illegal; there is no clinical justification for re-infibulation and it should not be 
undertaken under any circumstances.
Health professionals must have a clear understanding of the law on FGM so that they can 
explain it to their patients and so that they understand the basis for reporting concerns to the 
police and/or social care.34
FGM is illegal in England, Wales and Northern Ireland under the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 and 
in Scotland under the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005. Both Acts make it 
an offence for any person:
(a) to excise, infibulate or otherwise mutilate the whole or any part of a person’s labia majora, labia 
minora or clitoris; or
(b) to aid, abet, counsel or procure the performance by another person of any of those acts on that 
other person’s own body, or
(c) to aid, abet, counsel or procure a person to excise, infibulate or otherwise mutilate the whole or 
any part of her own labia majora, labia minora or clitoris. 
Both Acts also make it a criminal offence to carry out FGM abroad, and to aid, abet, counsel or procure 
the carrying out of FGM abroad, including in countries where the practice is legal. Both Acts permit DDD
Evidence 
level 4Evidence 
level 4
Evidence 
level 2+Evidence 
level 2–RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists11 of 26surgical procedures that may fall within these categories (carried out by an appropriately registered 
practitioner) if necessary for the physical or mental health of the woman or if performed during labour 
or immediately postpartum ‘for purposes connected with the labour or birth’. It should be noted that 
the FGM Acts apply to adult women as well as children.
The Serious Crime Act 2015 reinforced existing FGM legislation and introduced mandatory reporting of 
FGM in girls under 18 years by healthcare workers, teachers and social workers to the police.35 
All health professionals should be aware of the Department of Health’s guidance on FGM risk assessment 
and safeguarding.5
FGCS refers to non-medically indicated cosmetic surgical procedures, which change the 
structure and appearance of the healthy external genitalia of women (or internally in the case 
of vaginal tightening). UK guidance on FGCS is available and this includes the recommendation 
that FGCS should not normally be carried out on those under 18.36 The legal status of some 
FGCS procedures has been called into question and it is likely to be illegal unless necessary to 
safeguard the patient’s physical or mental health (the section 1(2)(a) exemption).
Re-infibulation refers to the resuturing (usually after childbirth) of the incised scar tissue in a 
woman with FGM type 2 or 3. Previously there was uncertainty as to whether re-infibulation 
was covered by the FGM Acts.6 However, it is now accepted that re-infibulation is illegal and 
should not be performed in any circumstances.
5.2 What are the legal and regulatory responsibilities of health professionals in their 
evaluation of women with FGM?
When a woman with FGM is identified: 
The health professional must explain the UK law on FGM.
The health professional must understand the difference between recording (documenting FGM in 
the medical records for data collection) and reporting (making a referral to police and/or social 
services) and their responsibilities with regards to these (Appendix I).
The health professional must be familiar with the requirements of the HSCIC FGM Enhanced Dataset 
and explain its purpose to the woman. The requirement for her personal data to be submitted 
without anonymisation to the HSCIC, in order to prevent duplication of data, should be explained. 
However, she should also be told that all personal data are anonymised at the point of statistical 
analysis and publication.
The health professional should be aware that it is not mandatory to report all pregnant women to 
social services or the police. An individual risk assessment should be made by a member of the 
clinical team (midwife or obstetrician) using an FGM safeguarding risk assessment tool (an example 
of such a tool can be found at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-women-
and-girls-at-risk-of-fgm). If the unborn child, or any related child, is considered at risk then a report 
should be made.
To assist health professionals in explaining the law on FGM to their patients, women should be referred 
to information provided in the Health Passport.38 This document is available in a range of languages.39
The legal and regulatory responsibilities of health professionals are summarised in Appendix I.Evidence 
level 4
D
DD
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists12 of 26Recording (see Appendix I)
Recording must be in accordance with the requirements of the HSCIC FGM Enhanced Dataset, which 
was implemented primarily to improve services for those with FGM. It requires all acute trusts, general 
practices and mental health trusts to record demographic, clinical and family information for all women 
with FGM and for these data to be submitted, without anonymisation, to the HSCIC. This should be 
explained to the woman. However, she should also be told that all personal data are anonymised at 
the point of statistical analysis and publication. According to Department of Health guidance (http:// 
www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/AboutNHSservices/sexual-health-services/Documents/2903740%20DH%20 
FGM%20Leaflet%20Acessible%20-%20English.pdf), women who object to use of their data in this way 
should go to http://www.hscic.gov.uk/patientconf for more details. 
In accordance with the Enhanced Dataset, when a patient with FGM is identified, the fact that they 
have had FGM must be documented in the medical records regardless of whether FGM is the reason for 
presentation. A clinical examination may be indicated to determine the type of FGM and clinicians are 
required to use the WHO FGM classification (Table 1). For this reason genital piercings must be included 
as type 4 FGM. The woman should be informed that her personal data will be transmitted to the HSCIC 
for the purpose of FGM prevalence monitoring and that the data will not be anonymised. Some services, 
such as sexual health services, are likely to be exempt from returning identifiable FGM data on adult 
women due to their specific legal obligations regarding confidentiality.
Reporting (see Appendix I)
Reporting means making a referral to the police or social services and guidance from the Department 
of Health is available.5
The requirement to report depends on whether an adult or a child is affected. FGM is child abuse and 
any child with confirmed or suspected FGM, or a child considered to be at risk of FGM, must be reported, 
if necessary without the consent of the parents. Information should also be shared with the general 
practitioner (GP) and health visitor. This is in accordance with section 47 of the Children Act 1989. 
Local Safeguarding Children Boards (LSCBs) have responsibility for developing inter-agency protocols 
and procedures for safeguarding. If in any doubt, health professionals must contact their named lead for 
safeguarding who will advise. The urgency of the referral will vary depending on the type of risk. 
There is no requirement to report a nonpregnant adult woman aged 18 or over to the police or social 
services unless a related child is at risk. The patient’s right to confidentiality must be respected if they do 
not wish any action to be taken. No reports to social care or the police should be made in these cases.5,34
It is not mandatory to report every pregnant woman identified as having had FGM to social services or 
the police. An individual risk assessment must be made by a member of the clinical team caring for the 
woman during her pregnancy. If the unborn child, or any related child, is considered to be at risk of 
FGM, then a report must be made to children’s social care or the police.
Healthcare professionals must record identified FGM in antenatal notes, screening returns and 
immunisation notes. Notes should also include whether the woman has been de-infibulated and, where 
appropriate, referred to further specialist care. A list of specialist FGM clinics is available (please note 
that this list only covers England).40
Following birth, relevant information about the mother’s FGM should be recorded in the maternity 
discharge documentation so that GPs and health visitors are aware of the mother’s history. The family 
history of FGM should also be recorded in the baby’s personal child health record (‘Red Book’).41 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists13 of 26Where appropriate, healthcare professionals should educate women on how FGM is illegal in the UK 
and how the practice has serious long-term physical, psychological and emotional consequences.4
6. What are the principles of FGM management in obstetric and gynaecological practice? 
All acute trusts/health boards should have a designated consultant and midwife responsible for 
the care of women with FGM (Appendix II).
All gynaecologists, obstetricians and midwives should receive mandatory training on FGM and its 
management, including the technique of de-infibulation. They should complete the programme of 
FGM e-modules developed by Health Education England.
Specialist multidisciplinary FGM services should be led by a consultant obstetrician and/or 
gynaecologist and be accessible through self-referral. These services should offer: information and 
advice about FGM; child safeguarding risk assessment; gynaecological assessment; de-infibulation; 
and access to other services.
Health professionals should ensure that, in consultations with women affected by FGM, the 
consultation and examination environment is safe and private, their approach is sensitive and 
nonjudgemental and professional interpreters are used where necessary. Family members should 
not be used as interpreters.
Each trust/health board should have a designated obstetrician and/or gynaecologist responsible for FGM 
care. These individuals should be aware of local and/or regional specialist multidisciplinary FGM services. 
They should remain competent and up to date in all aspects of FGM (including child safeguarding protocols). 
The programme of FGM e-modules developed by Health Education England is available free to 
all healthcare professionals (http://www.e-lfh.org.uk/programmes/female-genital-mutilation). Use of a 
de-infibulation bench-top trainer as an aid to learning may be considered. 
Most UK specialist FGM services are in major cities and may be located in a hospital or 
community clinic (e.g. GP surgery or sexual health clinic). All FGM specialist services should 
offer information and advice regarding FGM as well as gynaecological assessment and access 
to de-infibulation. Some may also offer antenatal care. Specialist FGM services should offer 
access to psychological assessment and treatment, sexual health screening and treatment and 
gynaecological subspecialties such as urogynaecology, psychosexual services and infertility. 
They should work collaboratively with other healthcare providers, including GPs and acute 
trusts, voluntary sector organisations, the police, social services and schools. Currently referral 
pathways, clinic hours and service provision vary and there is a need to develop national 
minimum quality assurance standards for establishing and operating these services.42
Guidance about the professional approach to take when women with FGM attend for 
consultation is available.34 Health professionals should be nonjudgemental, pointing out the 
illegality and health risks of the practice without appearing to blame the woman. Appropriate 
language should be used. Although the term ‘FGM’ may be understood and accepted by some, 
referring to being ‘cut’, ‘closed’ or ‘circumcised’ may be more acceptable to many women.34 A 
list of local/traditional terms for FGM is available in the Department of Health Female Genital 
Mutilation Risk and Safeguarding guidance.5
7. How should recent FGM be managed?
Healthcare professionals should be vigilant and aware of the clinical signs and symptoms of recent 
FGM, which include pain, haemorrhage, infection and urinary retention.P
Evidence 
level 4
DP
P
DEvidence 
level 4RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists14 of 26Examination findings should be accurately recorded in the clinical records. Some type 4 FGM, 
where a small incision or cut is made adjacent to or on the clitoris, can leave few, if any, visible 
signs when healed. Consideration should be given to photographic documentation of the findings 
at acute presentation.
Legal and regulatory procedures must be followed (Appendix I); all women and girls with acute or 
recent FGM require police and social services referral.
Healthcare professionals should be aware of the clinical signs and symptoms of FGM and record their 
examination findings accurately in the clinical records. The legal and regulatory procedures are outlined 
in Appendix I.
8. How should FGM be managed in gynaecological practice? 
8.1 What should the referral pathway be for women with FGM?
Women may be referred by their GP to a hospital gynaecology clinic. The referral should be directed 
to FGM services, if available, or to the designated consultant obstetrician and/or gynaecologist 
responsible for the care of women and girls with FGM.
Women should be able to self-refer.
All children with FGM or suspected FGM should be seen within child safeguarding services.
All hospitals are expected to identify women with FGM and assess appropriately. In areas of low 
prevalence there must be clear pathways for referral to FGM services, including self-referral. 
8.2 How should women with FGM be assessed in gynaecological practice?
Women with FGM may present with symptoms directly attributable to their FGM or with co-
existing gynaecological morbidity. Gynaecologists should ask all women from communities that 
traditionally practise FGM whether they have had the procedure.
Clinicians should be aware that psychological sequelae and impaired sexual function can occur 
with all types of FGM.
Examination should include inspection of the vulva to determine the type of FGM and whether de-
infibulation is indicated, as well as to identify any other FGM-related morbidities, e.g. epidermoid 
inclusion cysts.
All women should be offered referral for psychological assessment and treatment, testing for HIV, 
hepatitis B and C and sexual health screening. Where appropriate, women should be referred to 
gynaecological subspecialties, e.g. psychosexual services, urogynaecology, infertility.
Gynaecologists should be aware that narrowing of the vagina due to type 3 FGM can preclude 
vaginal examination for cervical smears and genital infection screens. De-infibulation may be 
required prior to gynaecological procedures such as surgical management of miscarriage (SMM) 
or termination of pregnancy (TOP).
The clinical management of women with FGM in gynaecological practice is summarised in Appendix II. 
8.3 What is the role of de-infibulation in gynaecological practice?
Women who are likely to benefit from de-infibulation should be counselled and offered the 
procedure before pregnancy, ideally before first sexual intercourse.C
PPP
PP
P
P
PP
DRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists15 of 26Women offered de-infibulation should have the option of having the procedure performed under 
local anaesthetic in the clinic setting in a suitable outpatient procedures room (Appendix III).
De-infibulation is a minor surgical procedure to divide the scar tissue sealing the vaginal introitus in 
type 3 FGM. The need for de-infibulation can be determined on inspection of the external genitals by an 
experienced health professional. De-infibulation is sometimes termed a ‘reversal’ of FGM; however, this 
is incorrect as it does not replace genital tissue or restore normal genital anatomy and function.
De-infibulation is recommended if the introitus is not sufficiently open to permit normal urinary and 
menstrual flow, vaginal examination, comfortable sexual intercourse and safe vaginal delivery. It may also 
be necessary to permit cervical smears, sexual health screens and gynaecological surgery (e.g. SMM, TOP). 
In practice it will be required for most women with type 3 FGM, as the vaginal introitus will be narrowed.
De-infibulation can usually be performed under local anaesthetic in an appropriately equipped room for 
minor procedures or in a delivery suite room. Occasionally a spinal or general anaesthetic is required. 
One recommended method of de-infibulation is shown in Appendix III.
8.4 What is the role of clitoral reconstruction?
Clitoral reconstruction should not be performed because current evidence suggests unacceptable 
complication rates without conclusive evidence of benefit.
Several publications, including a large retrospective study,43 claim that reconstructive clitoral 
surgery can restore clitoral function. However, surgery cannot replace clitoral tissue removed 
at FGM and it is also possible that surgical exploration of the clitoral area may result in further 
damage to the clitoral nerves and vasculature and loss of sensation. It is debatable that these 
procedures improve clitoral sensation, although improving the genital appearance may have 
benefits for some women. Existing studies are retrospective with poor follow-up and they lack 
standardised assessment of sexual function. In the study by Foldès,43 2938 women underwent 
surgery but only 29% attended for follow-up and 4% required hospital readmission because of 
surgical complications. There is a need for well-designed clinical trials to investigate the safety 
and effectiveness of this procedure.
9. How should FGM be managed in pregnancy? 
9.1 What level of care do women with FGM require?
Women with FGM are more likely to have obstetric complications and consultant-led care is 
generally recommended. However, some women with previous uncomplicated vaginal deliveries 
may be suitable for midwifery-led care in labour.
Women with FGM are more likely to have obstetric complications and consultant-led care is generally 
recommended. However, some women who have previously had one or more uncomplicated pregnancies 
and have delivered vaginally may be considered low risk, provided that they have no history of post-
delivery re-infibulation.
9.2 How should women with FGM be identified in pregnancy?
All women, irrespective of country of origin, should be asked for a history of FGM at their booking 
antenatal visit so that FGM can be identified early in the pregnancy. This should be documented in 
the maternity record.P
D
Evidence 
level 3
P
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists16 of 26Women identified as having FGM should be referred to the designated consultant obstetrician or 
midwife with responsibility for FGM patients. Local protocols will determine which elements of care 
should be undertaken by these individuals and which may be undertaken by other appropriately 
trained midwives or obstetricians (Appendix IV).
Pregnancy is a time when the majority of women engage with healthcare services. It presents 
a key opportunity to identify women with FGM, provide information and advice, address 
healthcare needs and assess the risk to the unborn child and to other female family members. 
In the UK, it is normal practice to defer vaginal examination of pregnant women until the 
onset of labour, unless there is a clinical indication. For this reason, early identification of FGM 
in pregnancy is best achieved by asking all women booking for antenatal care whether they 
have a history of FGM.41 It is good practice if possible to obtain such a clinical history from the 
patient in the absence of a partner or other family member. It might be important to consider 
that some women may not know if they have been exposed to FGM.
The clinical management of pregnant women is summarised in Appendix II. 
9.3 What antenatal documentation is required to demonstrate that legal and regulatory 
processes have been adhered to? 
The midwife or obstetrician should ensure that all relevant information is documented in the 
clinical records (Appendix I).
The information in the clinical records should include documentation that FGM has been recorded in 
accordance with the HSCIC Enhanced Dataset, as well as other information as shown in Appendix I.
9.4 How should antenatal care be managed?
Referral for psychological assessment and treatment should be offered.
The vulva should be inspected to determine the type of FGM and whether de-infibulation is 
indicated. If the introitus is sufficiently open to permit vaginal examination and if the urethral 
meatus is visible, then de-infibulation is unlikely to be necessary.
Screening for hepatitis C should be offered in addition to the other routine antenatal screening 
tests (hepatitis B, HIV and syphilis).
De-infibulation may be performed antenatally, in the first stage of labour or at the time of delivery 
and can usually be performed under local anaesthetic in a delivery suite room. It can also be 
performed perioperatively after caesarean section (Appendix III).
The midwife or obstetrician should discuss, agree and record a plan of care (see Appendix IV). This 
may be documented in a preformatted sheet.
Women should be informed that re-infibulation will not be undertaken under any circumstances.
For women with type 3 FGM, where adequate vaginal assessment in labour is unlikely to be possible, 
de-infibulation should be recommended antenatally, usually in the second trimester, typically at around 
20 weeks of gestation. Antenatal de-infibulation as an elective procedure ensures that the procedure 
is performed by an appropriately trained midwife or obstetrician. However, women may prefer 
de-infibulation during labour, as this is the usual practice in some countries where FGM is prevalent. 
There have been no randomised trials conducted on measures that may improve outcomes for pregnant 
women with a history of FGM.44 However de-infibulation (when the introitus is narrowed) and selective 
episiotomy (depending on assessment at the time of delivery) may improve clinical outcomes. DP
P
P
P
P
PEvidence 
level 4PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists17 of 26Women should be informed that re-infibulation will not be undertaken under any 
circumstances.37 They should also be informed of the health consequences of re-infibulation 
and the benefits of not re-infibulating.
9.5 How should intrapartum care be managed?
If a woman requires intrapartum de-infibulation, the midwife and obstetrician caring for her should 
have completed training in de-infibulation or should be supervised appropriately.
If de-infibulation planned for the time of delivery is not undertaken because of recourse to caesarean 
section, then the option of perioperative de-infibulation (i.e. just after caesarean section) should 
be considered and discussed with the woman.
Labial tears in women with FGM should be managed in the same manner as in women without 
FGM. Repairs should be performed where clinically indicated, after discussion with the woman and 
using appropriate materials and techniques.
Women with FGM should generally be delivered in units with immediate access to emergency obstetric 
care and should have intravenous access established in labour and blood taken for full blood count and 
group and save. However, in certain circumstances women with FGM may be considered low risk and 
midwifery-led care in labour may be appropriate (see section 9.1).
The technique of de-infibulation at delivery is similar in principle to de-infibulation performed at other 
times (see Appendix III). However, in contrast to de-infibulation prepregnancy, antenatally or in the first 
stage of labour, when either a scalpel or scissors may be used, at delivery the incision should be made 
with scissors (rather than a scalpel) just before crowning of the fetal head. Lidocaine without adrenaline 
(epinephrine) should be used. Once the procedure has been performed, the need for episiotomy should 
be assessed; this is commonly required (irrespective of FGM type) due to scarring and reduced skin 
elasticity of the introitus. 
In women for whom intrapartum de-infibulation was planned to permit safe vaginal delivery, emergency 
caesarean section may result in the woman having an ongoing need for de-infibulation during a subsequent 
pregnancy. If feasible from the perspective of maternal and fetal wellbeing, the option of perioperative 
de-infibulation, after safe caesarean delivery of the baby, should be discussed with the woman prior to 
transfer to theatre. This scenario may be discussed with women antenatally. 
Guidance for repair of perineal and genital trauma is available45 and should be followed for 
women with FGM, for example, in the case of labial tears.
9.6 How should intrapartum care be managed for women identified as having FGM in 
pregnancy for whom there has been no agreed documented plan of care?
The impact of FGM on labour and delivery should be sensitively discussed and a plan of care agreed.
If vaginal examination is not possible or intrapartum procedures and urinary catheterisation are not 
feasible, then de-infibulation in the first stage of labour should be recommended. An epidural should be 
offered to cover the procedure and for subsequent examinations and delivery. If vaginal access is adequate 
then de-infibulation can be performed at the time of delivery under local anaesthetic (see section 9.5).
9.7 How should postnatal care be managed?
A woman whose planned de-infibulation was not performed because of delivery by caesarean 
section should have follow-up in a gynaecology outpatient or FGM clinic so that de-infibulation 
can be offered before a subsequent pregnancy.P
D
P
PEvidence 
level 4PEvidence 
level 4RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists18 of 26The discharging midwife should ensure that all legal and regulatory processes have been adhered 
to prior to discharge (Appendix I).
The designated consultant obstetrician or named specialist midwife may consider a postnatal debrief 
with the patient and her partner, regardless of whether intrapartum procedures were undertaken or 
not. This represents a further opportunity to educate the family on FGM. All the appropriate legal and 
regulatory processes should be documented as shown in Appendix I. The discharging midwife should 
ensure that the documentation is complete. 
10. Recommendations for future research
l The rates of stillbirth and neonatal death in women with FGM.
l Interventional trials to assess the role of de-infibulation in improving pregnancy outcomes and the 
optimal timing of de-infibulation. 
l Clinical trials to investigate the safety and effectiveness of clitoral reconstruction.
l The role of psychological assessment and treatment in the antenatal care of women with FGM. 
11. Auditable topics
l The proportion of women asked about FGM at booking (100%).
l The proportion of healthcare professionals who are familiar with the HSCIC FGM Enhanced 
Dataset (100%).
l The proportion of healthcare workers (gynaecologists, obstetricians and midwives) who have 
received training on FGM and its management (100%).
l The proportion of pregnant women identified as having FGM who are referred to a designated 
consultant obstetrician or specialist midwife with responsibility for FGM patients (100%).
l The proportion of women identified as having FGM who are offered screening for hepatitis B, 
hepatitis C, HIV and syphilis (100%).
l The quality of documentation of FGM in the medical records, including ensuring information is 
transferred to the community.
l Number of referrals made to social services and/or police.
12. Useful links and support groups
l Department of Health. Commissioning services to support women and girls with female genital 
mutilation . London: DH; 2015 [https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/services-for-women-
and-girls-with-fgm].
l Department of Health. Female Genital Mutilation Risk and Safeguarding. Guidance for 
professionals . London: DH; 2015 [https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-
women-and-girls-at-risk-of-fgm].
l Patient information leaflets may be ordered from the Department of Health [https://www.orderline.
dh.gov.uk/ecom_dh/public/saleproduct.jsf?catalogueCode=2903740].
l FORWARD (Foundation for Women’s Health Research and Development) [http://www.forwarduk.
org.uk].
l Multi-agency practice guidelines have been produced by the Home Office and the Department for 
Education to support front-line professionals to prevent FGM [https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/female-genital-mutilation-guidelines].
l NHS Choices. Female genital mutilation
 m For patients: [http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/female-genital-mutilation/Pages/Introduction.aspx].
 m For professionals: [http://www.nhs.uk/nhsengland/aboutnhsservices/sexual-health-services/
pages/fgm-for-professionals.aspx].
l Orchid Project (a charity dedicated to ending female genital cutting) [http://orchidproject.org/].PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists19 of 26References
1. Baillot H, Murray N, Connelly E, Howard N; Scottish 
Refugee Council; London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine. Tackling Female Genital Mutilation in 
Scotland. A Scottish model of intervention . Glasgow: 
Scottish Refugee Council; 2014.
2. [Department of Finance and Personnel, Northern 
Ireland]. Multi-agency practice guidelines: female 
genital mutilation . [Bangor, Northern Ireland]: [DFP]; 
[2014] [http://www.dfpni.gov.uk/multi-agency-practice-
guidelines-on-female-genital-mutilation.pdf]. Accessed 
2015 May 29.
3. World Health Organization. Eliminating female genital 
mutilation: an interagency statement . Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2008.
4. United Nations Children’s Fund. Female Genital Mutilation/
Cutting: A statistical overview and exploration of the 
dynamics of change . New York: UNICEF; 2013.
5. Department of Health. Female Genital Mutilation Risk 
and Safeguarding. Guidance for professionals . London: 
DH; 2015.
6. Royal College of Midwives, Royal College of Nursing, Royal 
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, Equality 
Now, Unite. Tackling FGM in the UK: Intercollegiate 
recommendations for identifying, recording and 
reporting . London: RCM; 2013. 
7. Macfarlane A, Dorkenoo E. Female Genital Mutilation in 
England and Wales. Updated statistical estimates of the 
numbers of affected women living in England and Wales 
and girls at risk. Interim report on provisional estimates . 
London: City University London; 2014.
8. House of Commons Home Affairs Committee. Female 
genital mutilation: the case for a national action plan. 
Second Report of Session 2014–15 Report, together 
with formal minutes relating to the report . HC 201 
[Incorporating HC 1091, 2013–14]. London: The Stationery 
Office; 2014.
9. Berg RC, Underland V, Odgaard-Jensen J, Fretheim A, Vist 
GE. Effects of female genital cutting on physical health 
outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 
Open 2014;4:e006316.
10. Asante A, Omurtag K, Roberts C. Epidermal inclusion cyst 
of the clitoris 30 years after female genital mutilation. Fertil 
Steril 2010;94:1097.e1–3.
11. Abdulcadir J, Pusztaszeri M, Vilarino R, Dubuisson JB, 
Vlastos AT. Clitoral neuroma after female genital mutilation/
cutting: a rare but possible event. J Sex Med 2012;9:1220–5.
12. Fernández-Aguilar S, Noël JC. Neuroma of the clitoris after 
female genital cutting. Obstet Gynecol 2003;101:1053–4.
13. Kaplan A, Forbes M, Bonhoure I, Utzet M, Martín M, 
Manneh M, et al. Female genital mutilation/cutting in The 
Gambia: long-term health consequences and complications 
during delivery and for the newborn. Int J Womens Health 
2013;5:323–31.
14. Amin MM, Rasheed S, Salem E. Lower urinary tract 
symptoms following female genital mutilation. Int J 
Gynaecol Obstet 2013;123:21–3.
15. Yusuf L, Negash S. Vaginal calculus following severe form 
of female genital mutilation: a case report. Ethiop Med J 
2008;46:185–8.
16. Peterman A, Johnson K. Incontinence and trauma: sexual 
violence, female genital cutting and proxy measures of 
gynecological fistula. Soc Sci Med 2009;68:971–9.
17. Berg RC, Denison E. Does female genital mutilation/cutting 
(FGM/C) affect women’s sexual functioning? A systematic 
review of the sexual consequences of FGM/C. Sex Res 
Social Policy 2012;9:41–56.
18. Andersson SH, Rymer J, Joyce DW, Momoh C, Gayle CM. 
Sexual quality of life in women who have undergone 
female genital mutilation: a case–control study. BJOG 
2012;119:1606–11.19. Alsibiani SA, Rouzi AA. Sexual function in women with 
female genital mutilation. Fertil Steril 2010;93:722–4.
20. Vloeberghs E, van der Kwaak A, Knipscheer J, van den 
Muijsenbergh M. Coping and chronic psychosocial 
consequences of female genital mutilation in The 
Netherlands. Ethn Health 2012;17:677–95.
21. Behrendt A, Moritz S. Posttraumatic stress disorder and 
memory problems after female genital mutilation. Am J 
Psychiatry 2005;162:1000–2.
22. Salihu HM, August EM, Salemi JL, Weldeselasse H, Sarro YS, 
Alio AP. The association between female genital mutilation 
and intimate partner violence. BJOG 2012;119:1597–605.
23. Peltzer K, Pengpid S. Female genital mutilation and intimate 
partner violence in the Ivory Coast. BMC Womens Health 
2014;14:13.
24. Morison L, Scherf C, Ekpo G, Paine K, West B, Coleman R, 
et al. The long-term reproductive health consequences of 
female genital cutting in rural Gambia: a community-based 
survey. Trop Med Int Health 2001;6:643–53.
25. Elmusharaf S, Elkhidir I, Hoffmann S, Almroth L. A case–
control study on the association between female genital 
mutilation and sexually transmitted infections in Sudan. 
BJOG 2006;113:469–74.
26. Almroth L, Elmusharaf S, El Hadi N, Obeid A, El Sheikh MA, 
Elfadil SM, et al. Primary infertility after genital mutilation 
in girlhood in Sudan: a case-control study. Lancet 
2005;366:385–91.
27. Hwang EW, Cheung R. Global epidemiology of hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) infection. N Am J Med Sci (Boston) 2011;4:7–13.
28. Duri K, Stray-Pedersen B. HIV/AIDS in Africa: trends, missing 
links and the way forward. J Virol Antivir Res 2013;2(1).
29. WHO study group on female genital mutilation and 
obstetric outcome, Banks E, Meirik O, Farley T, Akande 
O, Bathija H, et al. Female genital mutilation and obstetric 
outcome: WHO collaborative prospective study in six 
African countries. Lancet 2006;367:1835–41.
30. Berg RC, Odgaard-Jensen J, Fretheim A, Underland V, Vist 
G. An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of 
the obstetric consequences of female genital mutilation/
cutting. Obstet Gynecol Int 2014;2014:542859. 
31. Gissler M, Alexander S, Macfarlane A, Small R, Stray-
Pedersen B, Zeitlin J, et al. Stillbirths and infant deaths 
among migrants in industrialized countries. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand 2009;88:134–48.
32. Small R, Gagnon A, Gissler M, Zeitlin J, Bennis M, Glazier 
R, et al. Somali women and their pregnancy outcomes 
postmigration: data from six receiving countries. BJOG 
2008;115:1630–40.
33. Browning A, Allsworth JE, Wall LL. The relationship 
between female genital cutting and obstetric fistulae. 
Obstet Gynecol 2010;115:578–83.
34. HM Government. Multi-Agency Practice Guidelines: Female 
Genital Mutilation . [London]: HM Government; 2014.
35. Ministry of Justice, Home Office. Serious Crime Act 2015. 
Factsheet – female genital mutilation . [London]: Ministry 
of Justice; 2015 [https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/ 
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/416323/Fact_
sheet_-_FGM_-_Act.pdf]. Accessed 2015 May 29.
36. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Ethical 
considerations in relation to female genital cosmetic 
surgery (FGCS) . Ethical opinion paper. London: RCOG; 2013.
37. World Health Organization. Global strategy to stop health-
care providers from performing female genital mutilation 
UNAIDS, UNDP, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNIFEM, WHO, 
FIGO, ICN, IOM, MWIA, WCPT, WMA . Geneva: WHO; 2010.
38. HM Government. A Statement Opposing Female Genital 
Mutilation . [London]: HM Government; 2014. 
39. Statement opposing female genital mutilation [https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/statement-
opposing-female-genital-mutilation]. Accessed 2015 Apr 20. RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists20 of 2640. Department of Health. NHS Specialist Services for Female 
Genital Mutilation . [London]: DH; 2014 [http://www.
nhs.uk/NHSEngland/AboutNHSservices/sexual-health-
services/Documents/List%20of%20FGM%20Clinics%20
Mar%2014%20FINAL.pdf]. Accessed 2015 Apr 20.
41. Health and Social Care Information Centre. Female Genital 
Mutilation (FGM) Enhanced Dataset. Requirements 
Specification . [Leeds]: HSCIC; 2015. 
42. FORWARD. Reviewing Access to FGM Specialist Services 
in England (2011) . Research Brief No. 2. London: 
FORWARD; 2011.43. Foldès P, Cuzin B, Andro A. Reconstructive surgery after 
female genital mutilation: a prospective cohort study. 
Lancet 2012;380:134–41.
44. Balogun OO, Hirayama F, Wariki WM, Koyanagi A, Mori R. 
Interventions for improving outcomes for pregnant women 
who have experienced genital cutting. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2013;(2):CD009872.
45. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. 
Intrapartum care: care of healthy women and their 
babies during childbirth . NICE clinical guideline 190. 
[Manchester]: NICE; 2014.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists21 of 26Appendix I: Legal and regulatory responsibilities of health professionals 
1. Data recording ( http://www.hscic.gov.uk/fgm )
l Data recording is mandatory for all women identified as having FGM.
l Document FGM diagnosis in medical records (even if FGM is not the reason for presentation).
l If genital examination is performed and type of FGM is identified, record FGM type (WHO 
classification).*
l Document further details in accordance with the HSCIC FGM Enhanced Dataset.
l Explain to the woman that her personal data will be transmitted to the HSCIC for the purpose of 
FGM prevalence monitoring and that the data will not be anonymised.
2. Reporting to police and/or social services in the event of risk to a child 
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-women-and-girls-at-risk-of-fgm ) 
l Children under 18:
 m If FGM is confirmed (on examination or if the patient or parent says it has been done), refer as 
a matter of urgency to the police and this should be done within 1 month of confirmation.
 m If FGM is suspected (but not confirmed) or the girl is at risk (but has not had FGM), refer to 
social services or the police. The urgency of the referral depends on the degree of risk. 
l Nonpregnant women with FGM: no requirement to report unless a related child is at risk.
l Pregnant women:
 m A member of the clinical team (midwife or obstetrician) must make an individual risk 
assessment using an FGM safeguarding risk assessment tool and if the unborn child, or any 
other child in the family, is considered to be at risk of FGM then reporting to social services or 
the police must occur.
 m Document maternal history of FGM in the personal child health record (‘Red Book’) prior to 
postnatal discharge.
 m If delivery of a baby girl, notify the designated child protection midwife, who should inform 
the GP and health visitor.
*Genital piercings should be classified as type 4 FGM in accordance with the WHO FGM classification.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists22 of 26Appendix II: Clinical management of adult women with FGM in obstetric and gynaecological practice 
1. All acute trusts/health boards should have a designated consultant and midwife responsible for the 
care of women with FGM 
2. All women in obstetric and gynaecological practice
l Explain law on FGM, documenting the discussion and referring her to information provided in the 
Health Passport ( https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/statement-opposing-female-genital-
mutilation ).
l Provide interpreter if required (not a family member).
l Offer referral for psychological assessment and treatment.
l Offer specialist referral as appropriate, e.g. sexual health, urology.
l Make a clinical assessment of FGM (symptoms, examination) and need for de-infibulation.
l Record data in accordance with the HSCIC FGM Enhanced Dataset. These include age at FGM, 
country where FGM was performed, date of entry to UK (if applicable) and past history of 
de-infibulation and/or re-infibulation.
l If de-infibulation is indicated, offer before pregnancy – it can usually be performed on an 
outpatient basis.
l Reporting to social services or the police is only required if a related child is considered to be at 
risk.
3. Additional management in pregnant women
l Refer to designated consultant obstetrician or specialist midwife with responsibility for women 
with FGM. 
l Local protocols will determine which elements of care (child safeguarding risk assessment, data 
recording, clinical management) should be undertaken by the designated midwife or obstetrician 
and which may be undertaken by other appropriately trained midwives or obstetricians.
l Discuss and clearly document a plan of care – preformatted pro formas may be used.
l Make an individual risk assessment using an FGM safeguarding risk assessment tool (an example 
of such a tool can be found at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-women-
and-girls-at-risk-of-fgm ). If the unborn child or any related child is considered to be at risk then 
reporting to social services or the police must occur.
l Offer screening for hepatitis C in addition to routine screening for hepatitis B, HIV and syphilis. 
l If de-infibulation is indicated, discuss, agree and document the timing (antenatal or intrapartum). 
Inform the woman that re-infibulation after delivery will not be performed under any 
circumstances.
l Manage as high obstetric risk (increased risk of haemorrhage, perineal trauma and caesarean 
section), except for women who have had previous pregnancies with uncomplicated vaginal 
deliveries and no history of post-delivery re-infibulation.
l Document maternal history of FGM in the personal child health record (‘Red Book’) prior to 
postnatal discharge.
l If delivery of a baby girl, notify the designated child protection midwife, who should inform the GP 
and health visitor.
l Offer postnatal follow-up if de-infibulation performed intrapartum or if planned de-infibulation did 
not occur because of delivery by caesarean section.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists23 of 26Appendix III: One recommended method of performing de-infibulation 
2) Infiltration of midline scar with 
local anaesthetic1) Type 3 FGM (infibulation)
3) Incision of midline scar 4) Suturing of cut edges with 
absorbable sutureInfiltration of the 
infibulation scar with 
local anaesthetic should 
be undertaken with surgical 
forceps placed behind the 
scar to prevent injury to 
underlying tissues.
The incision should be made either with scissors or 
a knife and extended anteriorly until the external 
urethral meatus is visible.The cut edges may be oversewn with a fine 
absorbable suture and a paraffin gauze 
dressing applied.RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists24 of 26Appendix IV: Plan of care for women with FGM in pregnancy
Woman with FGM in pregnancy:
Referral to designated midwife and/or 
obstetrician with responsibility for FGM*
Consultant-led care
Child safeguarding risk 
assessment by midwife or 
obstetrician:
Use risk assessment tool
Explain law on FGM
Report to social services or the 
police if unborn child or related 
child at risk
Antenatal
1. Use professional interpreter if 
required (not family member) 
and explain law on FGM
2. Offer referral for 
psychological assessment 
and screening for hepatitis 
C, in addition to routine 
antenatal screening
3. Make clinical assessment 
of FGM. If de-infibulation is 
required, agree timing and 
explain that re-infibulation 
will not be performed
4. Assess other obstetric 
risk factors and action 
appropriately
5. Agree and document plan for 
antenatal, intrapartum and 
postpartum careClinical management plan:
Ensure clear documentation
Preformatted pro formas may 
be used
Postpartum
1. Document maternal history of 
FGM in personal child health 
record (‘Red Book’)
2. If delivery of baby girl, notify 
safeguarding midwife who 
should inform the GP and 
health visitor
3. Offer postnatal follow-up 
if de-infibulation performed 
intrapartum or if planned 
de-infibulation did not occur 
because of delivery by 
caesarean section
4. Ensure all data required for 
HSCIC Enhanced Dataset 
have been recordedData recording:
Ensure compliance with HSCIC 
Enhanced Dataset
Document FGM diagnosis, 
including FGM type 
(WHO classification)
Intrapartum
1. Generally manage as high 
risk for caesarean section, 
haemorrhage and perineal 
trauma
2. Some women may be 
considered low risk and 
suitable for midwifery-led 
care if history of previous 
uncomplicated vaginal 
delivery 
3. If de-infibulation is required, 
ensure that the midwife 
and obstetrician caring for 
the woman have received 
appropriate training
4. Perineal tears in women with 
FGM should be managed 
in the same manner as in 
women without FGM
* Local protocols will determine which elements of care (child safeguarding risk assessment, data recording, clinical manage -
ment plan) should be undertaken by the designated midwife or obstetrician responsible for women with FGM and which may be 
undertaken by other appropriately trained midwives or obstetriciansRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists25 of 26Appendix V: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in 
making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. Each guideline is systematically 
developed using a standardised methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical 
Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website 
at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These recommendations are not intended to dictate 
an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be evaluated with reference to individual 
patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. 
It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into routine 
practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated. 
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations 
formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or 
randomised controlled trial rated as 1++, and 
directly applicable to the target population; or 
A systematic review of randomised controlled 
trials or a body of evidence consisting 
principally of studies rated as 1+, directly 
applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results
A body of evidence including studies rated 
as 2++ directly applicable to the target 
population, and demonstrating overall 
consistency of results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
1++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2+ directly applicable to the target population, 
and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a very 
low risk of bias
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
low risk of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of 
randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a high 
risk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of 
case–control or cohort studies or high-
quality case–control or cohort studies 
with a very low risk of confounding, bias 
or chance and a high probability that the 
relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort 
studies with a low risk of confounding, 
bias or chance and a moderate 
probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a 
high risk of confounding, bias or chance 
and a significant risk that the 
relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, 
case series
4 Expert opinionClassification of evidence levels Grades of recommendations
Good practice point
Recommended best practice based on the 
clinical experience of the guideline 
development groupDCBA
PRCOG Green-top Guideline No. 53 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists26 of 26This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by: 
Dr NM Low-Beer MRCOG, London and Professor SM Creighton FRCOG, London
and peer reviewed by: 
Dr J Abdulcadir, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; Dr F Abu Amna MRCOG, Preston; 
Ms J Albert, London; Dr MM Amin, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan; 
Dr IA Babarinsa MRCOG, Doha, Qatar; Ms O Balogun, National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, 
Japan; Dr RC Berg, Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services, Oslo, Norway; Miss P Buck FRCOG, 
Lancashire; Crown Prosecution Service; Department of Health; Professor A Macfarlane, City University London; 
Dr R Mori, National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan; RCOG Women’s Network; 
Professor AA Rouzi, King Abdulaziz University Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; Royal College of Midwives; 
Dr SMA Saad MRCOG, Paisley; Mr E Vloeberghs, Pharos, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Dr AL Wright FRCOG, London; 
Dr AEA Yagoub MRCOG, Blackpool; and Professor L Yusuf, Addis Ababa University College of Health, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia. 
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr M Gupta MRCOG, London; Dr M Ledingham MRCOG, Glasgow; 
Dr AJ Thomson MRCOG, Paisley; and Mr RC Wimalasundera FRCOG, London.
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta1 MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen2 FRCOG, Glasgow; 
and Dr AJ Thomson1 MRCOG, Paisley. 
1 co-chairs from June 2014 2 until May 2014. 
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising any 
conflicts of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/
guidelines/gtg53/ .
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. 
The review process will commence in 2018, unless otherwise indicated.
DISCLAIMER 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical 
practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for 
consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement 
regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light 
of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to 
be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols 
or guidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.