# Extracted from: GTG 2012 - Initial Mx of Chronic Pelvic Pain.pdf
# Guideline ID: gtg-2012-initial-mx-of-chronic-pelvic-pain
# Content length: 57433 characters
# Processing date: 1732953490.8998735

The Initial Management of Chronic 
Pelvic Pain 
Green-top Guideline No. 41 
May 2012 
The Initial Management of Chronic Pelvic Pain 
This is the second edition of this guideline. The first edition was published in 2005 under the same title. 
1.Purpose and scope 
The purpose of this guideline is to provide an evidence-based summary for the generalist to facilitate 
appropriate investigation and management of women presenting for the first time with chronic pelvic 
pain. 
2.Background and introduction 
Chronic pelvic pain can be defined as intermittent or constant pain in the lower abdomen or pelvis of a 
woman of at least 6months in duration, not occurring exclusively with menstruation or intercourse and not 
associated with pregnancy. It is a symptom not a diagnosis. Chronic pelvic pain presents in primary care as 
frequently as migraine or low-back pain 1and may significantly impact on a woman’s ability to function. 2
Living with any chronic pain carries a heavy economic and social burden. Aiming for accurate diagnosis and 
effective management from the first presentation may help to reduce the disruption of the woman’s life and 
may avoid an endless succession of referrals, investigations and operations. This guideline provides an 
evidence-based framework for the initial assessment of women with chronic pelvic pain. It is intended for the 
general gynaecologist but may be of use to the general practitioner in deciding when to refer and to whom. 
3.Identification and assessment of evidence 
The Cochrane Library and the Cochrane Register of Controlled Trials were searched for relevant 
randomised controlled trials, systematic reviews and meta-analyses. A search of Medline from 1966 to July 
2011 was also carried out. The database was searched using the MeSH terms ‘pelvic pain’, ‘dysmenorrhoea’ 
and ‘chronic disease’ including all sub-headings. This was combined with a keywords search using the 
terms ‘chronic pelvic pain’ and ‘dysmenorrhoea’. 
The definitions of types of evidence used in this guideline are detailed in RCOG Clinical Governance 
Advice No. 1a–c .3–5 Where possible, recommendations are based on, and explicitly linked to, the evidence 
that supports them although, unfortunately, little good-quality evidence exists. Areas lacking evidence are 
highlighted and annotated as ‘good practice points’. 
4.What are the possible aetiological factors in the genesis of chronic pelvic pain? 
There is frequently more than one component to chronic pelvic pain. Assessment should aim to identify 
contributory factors rather than assign causality to a single pathology.
At the initial assessment, it may not be possible to identify confidently the cause of the pain. 
Pain is, by definition, a sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage 
or described in those terms. 6The experience of pain will inevitably be affected by physical, psychological 
and social factors. The woman is often aware of these influences but may choose not to discuss them, 
fearing that her pain will be dismissed as psychological or that non-gynaecological symptoms will be 
considered irrelevant. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 2of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists P
PCareful scrutiny of the woman’s history and physical findings will frequently reveal factors that may be 
contributing to the pain and can therefore be at least partially treated. Given the incomplete understanding 
of the genesis of pelvic pain, it may be necessary to keep an open mind about the cause and consider 
unusual diagnoses ,such as hernias or retroperitoneal tumours, or consider causes which until recently 
might have been dismissed as rarities, such as musculoskeletal pain. It is important not to leave the woman 
with the feeling that nothing more can be done to help her. 
4.1 Central and peripheral nervous system 
Acute pain reflects fresh tissue damage and resolves as the tissues heal. In chronic pain, additional factors 
come into play and pain may persist long after the original tissue injury or exist in the absence of any 
such injury. Major changes are seen in both afferent and efferent nerve pathways in the central and 
peripheral nervous systems. 
Local factors, such as tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF -/H9251)and chemokines, may change peripheral nerve 
function and/or stimulate normally quiescent fibres, resulting in altered sensation over a wider area than 
that originally affected. A persistent barrage of pain may lead to changes within the central nervous system, 
which magnify the original signal. 7
Descending information from the central nervous system, possibly influenced by previous experiences and 
current circumstances, may modify pain perception and visceral function. Alteration in visceral sensation 
and function, provoked by a variety of neurological factors, has been termed ‘visceral hyperalgesia ’. Nerve 
damage following surgery, trauma, inflammation, fibrosis or infection may play a part in this process. 8,9 
Pain as a result of changes in the nerve itself is termed ‘neuropathic pain ’ and is characteristically, but not 
exclusively, burning, aching or shooting in nature. 10 
Possible contributory factors are separated out for the purposes of discussion but the problem must be 
seen as a whole by both the woman and her doctor. 
4.2 Endometriosis and adenomyosis 
Pelvic pain which varies markedly over the menstrual cycle is likely to be attributable to a hormonally 
driven condition such as endometriosis. 
Pelvic pain which varies markedly over the menstrual cycle is likely to be attributable to a 
hormonally driven condition such as endometriosis. The cardinal symptoms of dysmenorrhoea, 
dyspareunia and chronic pelvic pain are said to be characteristic of endometriosis or 
adenomyosis. 11 In a prospective study of 90 women undergoing laparoscopy or laparotomy, the 
combination of clinical examination and transvaginal ultrasound accurately identified ovarian 
endometriosis but not peritoneal disease. Symptoms alone were a poor predictor of finding 
endometriosis at surgery, 12 but a causal association between the disease and severe dysmen -
orrhoea probably exists. 13 In a recent case –control study comparing symptoms among 255 
women undergoing hysterectomy, pain symptoms predicted a higher likelihood of adenomysosis 
and fibroids rather than fibroids alone being found on histology. 14 It is important that dysmen -
orrhoea in adolescents is not overlooked as adenomyosis and endometriosis certainly occurs in 
the group. 15 
The existence of pelvic venous congestion as a cause of chronic pelvic pain remains controversial. A recent 
systematic review of diagnosis and management of this condition found no valid diagnostic tests, although 
ovarian suppression was effective in treating pelvic pain symptoms. In women suspected of having this 
condition, both progestins and gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH )agonists were shown in randomised 
controlled trials to effectively decrease pain during therapy, with GnRH agonists showing higher efficacy. 16 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 3of 16 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 D
Evidence 
level 
2+ to 4 Although many symptom complexes such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and pain perception itself 17 
may vary a little with the menstrual cycle (with 50% of women experiencing a worsening of their 
symptoms in association with their period 18 ), strikingly cyclical pain is likely to be gynaecological in nature. 
4.3 Adhesions 
There is no evidence to support the division of fine adhesions in women with chronic pelvic pain. 
Division of dense vascular adhesion should be considered as this is associated with pain relief. 
Adhesions may be a cause of pain, particularly on organ distension or stretching. Dense vascular 
adhesions may cause chronic pelvic pain. However, adhesions may be asymptomatic. Evidence 
to demonstrate that adhesions cause pain or that laparoscopic division of adhesions relieves pain 
is lacking. However ,in a randomised controlled trial, 48 women with chronic pelvic pain 
underwent laparotomy with or without division of adhesions. Although overall there was no 
difference between the two groups, a subset analysis showed that division of dense, vascular 
adhesions produced significant pain relief. 19 In a 2003 study of 100 women, no difference in pain 
scores was found between a group undergoing laparoscopic adhesiolysis and those having 
laparoscopy alone. 20 
Adhesions may be caused by endometriosis, previous surgery or previous infection. Two distinct forms of 
adhesive disease are recognised: residual ovary syndrome (a small amount of ovarian tissue inadvertently 
left behind following oophorectomy which may become buried in adhesions) and trapped ovary syndrome 
(in which a retained ovary becomes buried in dense adhesions post-hysterectomy). Removal of all ovarian 
tissue or suppression using a GnRH analogue may relieve pain. 
4.4 IBS and interstitial cystitis 
Symptoms suggestive of IBS or interstitial cystitis are often present in women with chronic pelvic pain.
These conditions may be a primary cause of chronic pelvic pain, a component of chronic pelvic pain or a 
secondary effect caused by efferent neurological dysfunction in the presence of chronic pain (see section 
3.4). 
In a study of 798 women attending a gynaecology clinic, 50% of women referred because of pain 
had symptoms suggestive of IBS compared with 28% of women attending ear, nose and throat 
or dermatology clinics. 21 In three observational studies of women with chronic pelvic pain 
presenting to secondary care, 38–84% had symptoms suggestive of interstitial cystitis. 22–24 
4.5 Musculoskeletal 
Musculoskeletal pain may be a primary source of pelvic pain or an additional component resulting from 
postural changes. 
Pain may arise from the joints in the pelvis or from damage to the muscles in the abdominal wall or pelvic 
floor. Pelvic organ prolapse may also be a source of pain. 25 Increasing interest is also being shown in trigger 
points –localised areas of deep tenderness in a tight band of muscle, the aetiology of which is not fully 
under stood. It may relate to chronic contraction of the muscle, with the stimulus coming from misalign -
ment of the pelvis or a discrete pain such as endometriosis. The pain from a trigger point may then become 
self-perpetuating. 26,27 Clear evidence regarding diagnostic tests and therapeutic options is lacking. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 4of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists P
P
Evidence 
level 1+ 
C
Evidence 
level 2+ 
CIn a consecutive series of 26 women with laparoscopy-negative chronic pelvic pain undergoing 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI ), 20 were found to have injuries to the levator ani. In a pain- 
free control group undergoing MRI, none of the 20 nulliparous and two of the 32 multiparous 
women had such injuries. 28 Spasm of the muscles of the pelvic floor is proposed as a cause of 
pelvic pain which can be reduced by botulinum toxin injections. 29,30 A number of controlled and 
non-controlled observational studies have demonstrated a high prevalence of primary or 
secondary musculoskeletal abnormalities in women with chronic pelvic pain. 31–34 
4.6 Nerve entrapment 
Nerve entrapment in scar tissue, fascia or a narrow foramen may result in pain and dysfunction in the 
distribution of that nerve. 
The incidence of nerve entrapment (defined as highly localised, sharp, stabbing or aching pain, 
exacerbated by particular movements, and persisting beyond 5weeks or occurring after a pain- 
free interval) after one Pfannenstiel incision is 3.7%. 35,36 
4.7 Psychological and social issues 
Enquiry should be made regarding psychological and social issues which commonly occur in association 
with chronic pelvic pain; addressing these issues may be important in resolving symptoms.
Depression and sleep disorders are common in women with chronic pain. This may be a 
consequence rather than a cause of their pain, but specific treatment may improve the woman’s 
ability to function. 37 Similarly, women with chronic pelvic pain tend to suppress their unwanted 
thoughts and feelings either as a cause or consequence of their pain. 38 
The relationship between chronic pelvic pain and sexual or physical abuse is complex. Studies 
are difficult to interpret because many have a retrospective design and are performed in 
secondary care. In this secondary care population it appears that women with chronic pain in 
general are more likely to report physical or sexual abuse as children than pain-free women. 
Those who experience chronic pelvic pain specifically are more likely to report sexual abuse 
than women with another chronic pain complaint. 39–42 However, using multiple regression 
analysis, it appears that child sexual abuse may be a marker for continuing abuse and the 
development of depression, anxiety or somatisation ,which then predispose the individual to the 
development or presentation of chronic pelvic pain. 43,44 In a primary care population, 26% of 
women reported child sexual abuse and 28% reported adult sexual abuse ,but only those 
reporting both were more likely to have increased pain symptoms (dysmenorrhoea, dyspareunia 
or chronic pelvic pain) than women reporting no abuse. 45 Interestingly ,in a prospective study 
of young adults who had been abused there was no increase in medically unexplained 
symptoms (albeit the study subjects were only followed into their 20s) compared with those 
not known to have been abused, but those who did have unexplained symptoms were more 
likely to report their history of abuse. 46 
In summary ,it may be that ,for some individuals, child sexual abuse may initiate a cascade of events or 
reactions which make an individual more vulnerable to the development of chronic pelvic pain as an 
adult. Women who continue to be abused are particularly at risk. 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 5of 16 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 Evidence 
level 
1+ to 3 
D
Evidence 
level 3/4 
B
Evidence 
level 
1+/3 
Evidence 
level 3 5.What should underline the initial assessment of chronic pelvic pain? 
Adequate time should be allowed for the initial assessment of women with chronic pelvic pain. They 
need to feel that they have been able to tell their story and that they have been listened to and believed. 
Many women present because they want an explanation for their pain. Often they already have a theory 
or a concern about the origin of the pain. These ideas should ideally be discussed in the initial consult -
ation.
It has been shown that consultations which elicit the patient’s ideas will result in a better doctor –patient 
relationship and improved concordance with investigation and treatment. 47 Women with chronic pelvic 
pain want their experience to be heard and validated and they want to receive personal care to help them 
understand and manage their pain. 48–50 
Particularly if they have had negative experiences previously, women may need to be encouraged to talk 
about their symptoms and ideas, allowing them to influence and shape the doctor –patient relationship as 
a partnership. In a study of 105 consecutive referrals to a university gynaecology clinic, a favourable patient 
rating at the initial consultation was associated with complete recovery at follow-up. 51 
The multifactorial nature of chronic pelvic pain should be discussed and explored from the start. The aim 
should be to develop a partnership between the clinician and the woman to plan a management 
programme.
In the only study of its kind, 106 women with chronic pelvic pain were randomised to an 
integrated approach or standard treatment, which involved exclusion of organic causes followed 
by a laparoscopy. If the laparoscopy was negative, attention was then given to psychological 
factors. In the integrated approach, equal attention was devoted to possible organic, 
psychological, dietary and environmental causes of the pain. In this group, laparoscopy was not 
routinely performed; a consultation with a physiotherapist was included and provocation tests 
were performed. After 1year, the integrated approach group reported significantly greater pain 
relief than the standard treatment group. 52 
In a meta-analysis of pain management in a related condition involving over 3000 women, a 
multidisciplinary approach to chronic back pain has been shown to be effective both in 
reducing subjective pain measures and in improving work and social functioning. 53 When an 
interdisciplinary approach is adopted for the management of chronic pelvic pain, improvement 
is seen only when all components of the programme are in place. 54 
In a study of 53 women with chronic pelvic pain undergoing weekly psychological and physio -
therapy-based treatment in small groups over 10 weeks, significant and sustained improvement 
was seen in pain scores, analgesia intake, use of health service resources and ability to work. 
Over the course of treatment, women seemed to develop greater self-knowledge and to take 
more responsibility for, and control over, their own health. 55 
Many women with chronic pelvic pain can be managed in primary care. General practitioners might 
consider referral when the pain has not been explained to the woman’s satisfaction or when pain is 
inadequately controlled. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 6of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists P
P
B
Evidence 
level 1+ 
Evidence 
level 
1+ to 3 
Evidence 
level 2+ 5.1 History 
The initial history should include questions about the pattern of the pain and its association with other 
problems, such as psychological, bladder and bowel symptoms, and the effect of movement and posture 
on the pain. 
Symptoms alone may be used to diagnose IBS positively in this group (see Appendix 1). 
On taking the woman’s history, special note should be taken of any ‘red flag ’symptoms (see Appendix 2)
which may need further investigation and referral to a specialist. If the situation allows ,it may be helpful 
to ask directly about past or present sexual assault, particularly intimate partner violence. The doctor must 
be prepared to listen and accept these experiences as stated and know where to access specialist support. 
Completing a daily pain diary for two to three menstrual cycles may help the woman and the doctor 
identify provoking factors or temporal associations. The information may be useful in understanding the 
cause of the pain. 
It may be helpful to establish the woman’s level of function at the start of treatment (e.g. time off work, 
avoiding activities), both to monitor progress and to emphasise the value of functional goals. Asking which 
drugs have been used previously, and whether or not they helped, may be helpful both to aid diagnosis 
and to plan effective management. 
Symptom-based diagnostic criteria can be used with confidence to make the diagnosis of IBS 
with a positive predictive value of 98%. 56,57 Long-term follow-up of women in whom a positive 
diagnosis of IBS is made suggests that the diagnosis is unlikely to be changed. 58 
A number of validated symptom-based tools are also available for the detection of psychological 
comorbidity. However, simply enquiring generally about things at home and symptoms such as sleep or 
appetite disturbance and tearfulness may be enough. 
If the history suggests to the woman and doctor that there is a specific non-gynaecological component 
to the pain, referral to the relevant healthcare professional – such as gastroenterologist, urologist,
genitourinary medicine physician, physiotherapist, psychologist or psychosexual counsellor – should 
be considered, usually via the GP. 
5.2 Examination 
The examination is most usefully undertaken when there is time to explore the woman’s fears and 
anxieties. The examiner should be prepared for new information to be revealed at this point.
The assessment should include abdominal and pelvic examination, looking particularly for focal tenderness, 
enlargement, distortion or tethering, or prolapse. Highly localised trigger points may be identified in the 
abdominal wall and/or pelvic floor. The sacroiliac joints or the symphysis pubis may also be tender, 
suggestive of a musculoskeletal origin to the pain. 
6. What investigations should be undertaken? 
6.1 Screening for infection 
Suitable samples to screen for infection, particularly Chlamydia trachomatis and gonorrhoea, should be 
taken if there is any suspicion of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 7of 16 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 P
B
P
P
PEvidence 
level 
2++ to 4 All sexually active women with chronic pelvic pain should be offered screening for sexually transmitted 
infections (STIs). 
A positive endocervical sample supports but does not prove the diagnosis of PID. The absence 
of a result positive for Chlamydia trachomatis or gonococcus does not rule out the diagnosis 
of PID. 59 
If PID is suspected clinically, this condition is best managed in conjunction with a genitourinary 
medicine physician in order that up -to -date microbiological advice and contact tracing can be 
arranged. Sexually active women with chronic pelvic pain should be offered screening for STIs .60 
6.2 Transvaginal scanning (TVS) and MRI 
TVS is an appropriate investigation to identify and assess adnexal masses.
TVS and MRI are useful tests to diagnose adenomyosis. 
The role of MRI in diagnosing small deposits of endometriosis is uncertain.
A systematic review of the value of TVS in the diagnosis of endometriosis found that endo -
metriomas may be accurately distinguished from other adnexal masses. 61 
It is also useful in identifying structural abnormalities such as hydrosalpinges or fibroids, which may be 
relevant even if not the cause of the pain. 
TVS is of little value for the positive identification of other causes of chronic pelvic pain ,
including peritoneal endometriosis. However, in a study of 120 consecutive women with 
chronic pelvic pain undergoing TVS prior to laparoscopy, the presence of soft markers such as 
tenderness or poor ovarian mobility improved the prelaparoscopy probability of identifying 
relevant pathology at laparoscopy from 58% to 73% (likelihood ratio [LR ]1.9, 95% CI 1.2 –3.1). 
In the absence of soft markers, the prelaparoscopy likelihood of pathology fell to 20% (LR 0.18, 
95% CI 0.09 –0.34). TVS may therefore have a role in identifying those women who are less likely 
to obtain a positive diagnosis from a diagnostic laparoscopy. 62 
The sensitivities of MRI and TVS for the diagnosis of adenomyosis are comparable in the best 
hands. Sensitivities of 70–78% and specificities of 86–93% for MRI, with figures of 65–68% and 
65–98% for TVS, were achieved in two prospective blinded studies of consecutive patients 
undergoing hysterectomy and in a systematic review, using histopathology as the gold 
standard. 63–66 A systematic review of 14 trials examining the diagnostic accuracy of TVS for 
diagnosing adenomyosis found a sensitivity of 82.5% and specificity of 84.6% .64 
While MRI lacks sensitivity in the detection of endometriotic deposits, it may be useful in the 
assessment of palpable nodules in the pelvis or when symptoms suggest the presence of 
rectovaginal disease. 67 It may also reveal rare pathology. 
6.3 Diagnostic laparoscopy 
Diagnostic laparoscopy has been regarded in the past as the ‘gold standard’ in the diagnosis of chronic 
pelvic pain. It may be better seen as a second-line investigation if other therapeutic interventions fail. 
Diagnostic laparoscopy may have a role in developing the woman’s beliefs about her pain. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 8of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists D
Evidence 
level 4 
Evidence 
level 4 
B
B
P
Evidence 
level 2++ 
Evidence 
level 2+ 
Evidence 
level 
1++/2++ 
Evidence 
level 4 
D
PDiagnostic laparoscopy is the only test capable of reliably diagnosing peritoneal endometriosis 
and adhesions. Gynaecologists have therefore seen it as an essential tool in the assessment of 
women with chronic pelvic pain. However, it carries significant risks: an estimated risk of death 
of approximately 1 in 10 000, and a risk of injury to bowel, bladder or blood vessel of approx -
imately 2.4 in 1000, of whom two-thirds will require laparotomy. 68–70 
Clearly, conditions such as IBS and adenomyosis are not visible at laparoscopy ,but there is also 
a risk that some forms of endometriosis will be missed. Endometriosis is a disease with a large 
variety of appearances and many authorities consider that it is significantly underdiagnosed at 
laparoscopy. Some recommend that all suspicious areas should be biopsied. It is well known that 
the existing scoring systems do not correlate with severity of pain and that deeply infiltrating 
endometriosis, which is strongly correlated with pain, may be misinterpreted as minimal 
disease. 71 
One -third to one -half of diagnostic laparoscopies will be negative and much of the pathology 
identified is not necessarily the cause of pain. There may be adverse consequences of a negative 
laparoscopy. Many women may feel disappointed that no diagnosis has been made. 72 This set of 
events may lead to disengagement with the medical process. 49 
The risks and benefits of diagnostic laparoscopy and the possibility of negative findings should be 
discussed before the decision is made to perform a laparoscopy. Perhaps it should be performed only 
when the index of suspicion of adhesive disease or endometriosis requiring surgical intervention is high, 
or when the patient has specific concerns which could be addressed by diagnostic laparoscopy such as 
the existence of endometriosis or adhesions potentially affecting her fertility. 
Microlaparoscopy or ‘conscious pain mapping’ has been proposed as an alternative to diagnostic 
laparoscopy under general anaesthetic. Although the technique seems to provide an opportunity 
to confirm particular lesions as the source of the patient’s pain, it has not been widely adopted, 
and questions remain as to the acceptability, reproducibility and validity of this technique. 73 In 
a recent study of 43 women undergoing conscious pain mapping, 39 had a successful procedure, 
but in only seven was a different diagnosis or treatment suggested by the awake laparoscopy 
compared with one performed under general anaesthetic. 74 
In a postal questionnaire study of 63 women following a diagnostic laparoscopy, their sub -
sequent pain experience and quality of life were not affected by the result of the laparoscopy. 75 
Similarly, in a prospective study of 71 women undergoing laparoscopy for chronic pelvic pain, 
women were interviewed before and after their operation. The only factor identified through 
regression analysis which predicted an improvement in pain scores was a change in health 
beliefs as a result of having a laparoscopy. This finding applied to women with positive or 
negative findings at laparoscopy. 76 Simply showing women a photograph of their pelvis does not 
seem to affect their health beliefs or their pain outcome. 77 
6.4 CA125 
Women reporting any of the following symptoms persistently or frequently (more than 12 times per 
month) –bloating, early satiety, pelvic pain or urinary urgency or frequency – should have a serum CA125 
measurement taken. Particularly in women over the age of 50 years, any new IBS symptoms should prompt 
such action. 78 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 9of 16 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 Evidence 
level 4 
Evidence 
level 4 Evidence 
level 3/4 
Evidence 
level 2+/3 
Evidence 
level 
1+ to 3 7. What therapeutic options are available? 
Women with cyclical pain should be offered a therapeutic trial using hormonal treatment for a period of 
3–6 months before having a diagnostic laparoscopy. 
Women with IBS should be offered a trial with antispasmodics. 
Women with IBS should be encouraged to amend their diet to attempt to control symptoms.
Women should be offered appropriate analgesia to control their pain even if no other therapeutic 
manoeuvres are yet to be initiated. If pain is not adequately controlled, consideration should be given to 
referral to a pain management team or a specialist pelvic pain clinic.
Ovarian suppression can be an effective treatment for cyclical pain associated with endo -
metriosis. The effect can be achieved with the combined oral contraceptive, progestogens, 
danazol or GnRH analogues, all of which are equally effective but have differing adverse effect 
profiles. 67,79 The levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system (Mirena®; Bayer) could also be 
considered, even in adolescents. 80 Non-endometriosis -related cyclical pain also appears to be 
well controlled by these treatments. 81–83 
In a randomised controlled trial, 100 women with clinically suspected endometriosis received 
either a GnRH analogue or placebo without a pretreatment laparoscopy. After 12 weeks, the 
treatment group had significantly less pain than women taking placebo. 84 This trial is the only 
study in which the effectiveness of this treatment approach has been evaluated. However, there 
is a growing consensus which supports this strategy. 11,84–86 An economic evaluation of the use 
of GnRH analogues as empirical treatment for cyclical pain prior to laparoscopy demonstrated 
improved patient and physician satisfaction at reduced cost. 87 
For further advice on the management of IBS, please see NICE clinical guideline 61. 88 
A systematic review has concluded that smooth -muscle relaxants such as mebeverine 
hydrochloride are beneficial in the treatment of IBS where abdominal pain is a prominent 
feature. The efficacy of bulking agents has not been established but they are commonly used. 57,89 
In a study of 200 women suffering from IBS using an exclusion diet, 36% were able to identify 
one or more dietary components, the avoidance of which led to sustained improvement in 
symptoms. The most commonly implicated foods were dairy products and grains .90 
Dietary manipulation may therefore be worth considering for an individual woman but evidence is lacking. 
Regular non -steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs with or without paracetamol may be particularly useful in 
this context. Compound analgesics such as co -dydramol may be appropriate. For the general gynaecologist 
it is probably unwise to prescribe opioids for regular use in women with chronic pelvic pain. 91 Adjuvant 
treatments such as amitriptyline or gabapentin may be useful in the treatment of neuropathic pain. 92 For 
further information on the management of neuropathic pain ,please see NICE clinical guideline 96. 93 Non- 
pharma cological modalities such as transcutaneous nerve stimulation, acupuncture and other 
comple mentary therapies may be helpful for some women. Dietary modification may also relieve pain. 
Laparoscopic uterosacral nerve ablation (LUNA) is ineffective in the management of chronic pelvic 
pain. 94,95 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 10 of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists B
PA
C
Evidence 
level 
1+ to 4 
Evidence 
level 
1+ to 4 
Evidence 
level 
1++/4 
Evidence 
level 
3Voluntary organisations such as Endometriosis UK can be an important source of information and support 
for some patients. A list of such organisations is given in section 10. Self-management techniques as 
suggested by the Department of Health’s Expert Patient Initiative may also be of value to some women . 
8. Summary 
Chronic pelvic pain is common ,affecting perhaps one in six of the adult female population. 96 Much 
remains unclear about its aetiology , but chronic pelvic pain should be seen as a symptom with a number 
of contributory factors rather than as a diagnosis in itself. As with all chronic pain it is important to consider 
psychological and social factors as well as physical causes of pain. Many non-gynaecological conditions 
such as nerve entrapment or IBS may be relevant. Women often present because they seek an explanation 
for their pain. 
The assessment process should allow enough time for the woman to be able to tell her story. This may be 
therapeutic in itself. A pain diary may be helpful in tracking symptoms or activities associated with the pain. 
Where pain is strikingly cyclical and no abnormality is palpable at vaginal examination, a therapeutic trial 
of ovarian suppression may be more helpful than a diagnostic laparoscopy. Other conditions such as IBS 
require specific treatment. Even if no explanation for the pain can be found initially, attempts should be 
made to treat the pain empirically and to develop a management plan in partnership with the woman. 
9.Suggested audit topics 
GWhat proportion of sexually active women with chronic pelvic pain are tested for STIs? 
GWhat proportion of women have an ultrasound scan performed prior to diagnostic laparoscopy? 
GWhat proportion of women with cyclical chronic pelvic pain are offered a therapeutic trial of 
hormonal treatment for 3 –6 months before having a diagnostic laparoscopy? 
10.Organisations providing further information and/or support 
GEndometriosis UK www.endometriosis-uk.org 
GIBS Network www.theibsnetwork.org 
GCystitis and Overactive Bladder foundation www.cobfoundation.org 
GWomen’s Health www.womens-health.co.uk or womenshealth.gov 
GPelvic Pain Support Network www.pelvicpain.org.uk 
GDepartment of Health Expert Patient Initiative www.expertpatients.co.uk/ 
References 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 11 of 16 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 1. Zondervan KT, Yudkin PL, Vessey MP , Dawes MG, Barlow DH, 
Kennedy SH. Prevalence and incidence of chronic pelvic pain 
in primary care: evidence from a national general practice 
database. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1999;106:1149–55. 
2. Grace V , Zondervan K . Chronic pelvic pain in women in New 
Zealand: comparative well-being, comorbidity, and impact on 
work and other activities. Health Care Women Int 
2006;27:585–99. 
3. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists . Develop -
ment of RCOG Green-top Guidelines: Policies and Processes.
Clinical Governance Advice No. 1a. London: RCOG; 2006 
[www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ]. 
4. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Develop -
ment of RCOG Green-top Guidelines: Producing a Scope.
Clinical Governance Advice No. 1b. London: RCOG; 2006 
[www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health/clinical-guidance/ 
development-rcog-green-top-guidelines-producing-scope ]. 5. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Develop -
ment of RCOG Green-top Guidelines: Producing a Clinical 
Practice Guideline. Clinical Governance Advice No. 1c. 
London: RCOG; 2006 [ www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health/ 
clinical-guidance/development-rcog-green-top-guide lines-pro 
ducing-clinical-practice-gu ]. 
6. Merskey H, Bogduk N (editors); International Association for 
the Study of Pain Task Force on Taxonomy. C lassification of 
Chronic Pain . Second edition. Seattle: IASP Press ; 1994. 
7. Malykhina AP . Neural mechanisms of pelvic organ cross-sensiti -
zation. Neuroscience 2007;149:660–72. 
8. McMahon SB, Dmitrieva N, Koltzenburg M. Visceral pain. Br J 
Anaesthesia 1995;75:132–44. 
9. Wesselmann U. Neurogenic inflammation and chronic pelvic 
pain. World J Urol 2001;19:180–5. 
10. Baranowski AP . Chronic pelvic pain. Best Pract Res Cli 
Gastroenterol 2009;23:593–610. 11. Scialli AR. Evaluating chronic pelvic pain. A consensus 
recommendation. Pelvic Pain Expert Working Group. J Reprod 
Med 1999;44:945–52. 
12. Eskenazi B, Warner M, Bonsignore L, Olive D, Samuels S, 
Vercillini P . Validation study of nonsurgical diagnosis of 
endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2001;76:929–35. 
13. Fauconnier A, Chapron C. Endometriosis and pelvic pain: 
epidemiological evidence of the relationship and implications. 
Hum Reprod Update 2005;11:595–606. 
14. Taran FA, Weaver AL, Coddington CC, Stewart EA. Character -
istics indicating adenomyosis coexisting with leiomyomas: a 
case–control study . Hum Reprod 2010;25:1177–82. 
15. Dietrich JE. An update on adenomyosis in the adolescent. Curr 
Opin Obstet Gynecol 2010;22:388–92. 
16. Giamberardino MA, Berkley KJ, Iezzi S, de Bigontina P , Vecchiet 
L. Pain threshold variations in somatic wall tissues as a function 
of menstrual cycle, segmental site and tissue depth in non- 
dysmenorrheic women, dysmenorrheic women and men. Pain 
1997;71:187–97. 
17. Moore J, Barlow D, Jewell D, Kennedy SH. Do gastrointestinal 
symptoms vary with the menstrual cycle? Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol 1998;105:1322–5. 
18. Peters AA, Trimbos-Kemper GC, Admiraal C, Trimbos JB, 
Hermans J. A randomized clinical trial of the benefits of adhesi -
olysis in patients with intraperitoneal adhesions and chronic 
pelvic pain. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1992;99:59–62. 
19. Swank DJ, Swank-Bordewijk SC, Hop WC, Van Erp WF , Janssen 
IM, Bonjer HJ, et al. Laparoscopic adhesiolysis in patients with 
chronic abdominal pain: a blinded randomised controlled 
multi-centre trial. Lancet 2003;361:1247–51. 
20. Prior A, Wilson K, Whorwell PJ, Faragher EB. Irritable bowel 
syndrome in the gynecological clinic. Survey of 798 new 
referrals. Dig Dis Sci 1989;34:1820–4. 
21. Parsons CL, Dell J, Stanford EJ, Bullen M, Kahn BS, Willems JJ. 
The prevalence of interstitial cystitis in gynecologic patients 
with pelvic pain, as detected by intravesical potassium 
sensitivity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;187:1395–400. 
22. Clemons JL, Arya LA, Myers DL. Diagnosing interstitial cystitis 
in women with chronic pelvic pain. Obstet Gynecol 
2002;100:337–41. 
23. van Os-Bossagh P , Pols T, Hop WC, Bohnen AM, Vierhout ME, 
Drogendijk AC. Voiding symptoms in chronic pelvic pain 
(CPP). Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2003;107:185–90. 
24. Reddy J, Barber MD, Walters MD, Paraiso MF , Jelovsek JE. Lower 
abdominal and pelvic pain with advanced pelvic organ 
prolapse: a case –control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2011;204:537.e1–5. 
25. Montenegro ML, Gomide LB, Mateus-Vasconcelos EL, Rosa-e- 
Silva JC, Candido-dos-Reis FJ, Nogueira AA, Poli-Neto OB. 
Abdominal myofascial pain syndrome must be considered in 
the differential diagnosis of chronic pelvic pain. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol 2009;147:21–4. 
26. Lavell ED, Lavelle W, Smith HS. Myofascial trigger points. 
Anesthesiol Clin 2007;25:841–51 , vii–ii. 
27. Lucas N, Macaskill P , Irwig L, Moran R, Bogduk N. Reliability of 
physical examination for the diagnosis of myofascial trigger 
points: a systematic review of the literature. Clin J Pain 
2009;25:80–9. 
28. Quinn M. Injuries to the levator ani in unexplained, chronic 
pelvic pain. J Obstet Gynaecol 2007;27:828–31. 
29. Abbott JA, Jarvis SK, Lyons SD, Thomson A, Vancaille TG. 
Botulinum toxin type A for chronic pain and pelvic floor 
spasm in women: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet 
Gynecol 2006;108:915–23. 
30. Sinha D, Thomson AJ. Botulinum toxin for pelvic pain in 
women. Womens Health (Lond Engl) 2008;4:173–81. 31. King PM, Myers CA, Ling FW , Rosenthal RH. Musculoskeletal 
factors in chronic pelvic pain. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 
1991;12:87–98. 
32. Montenegro ML, Vasconcelos EC, Candido Dos Reis FJ, 
Nogueira AA, Poli-Neto OB. Physical therapy in the manage -
ment of women with chronic pelvic pain. Int J Clin Pract 
2008;62:263–9. 
33. Tu FF , As-Sanie S, Steege JF . Prevalence of pelvic musculoskeletal 
disorders in a female chronic pelvic pain clinic. J Reprod Med 
2006;51:185–9. 
34. Tu FF , Holt J, Gonzales J, Fitzgerald CM. Physical therapy 
evaluation of patients with chronic pelvic pain: a controlled 
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2008;198:272 .e1– 7. 
35. Luijendijk RW, Jeekel J, Storm RK, Schutte PJ, Hop WC, 
Drogendijk AC, et al. The low transverse Pfannenstiel incision 
and the prevalence of incisional hernia and nerve entrapment. 
Ann Surg 1997;225:365–9. 
36. Perry CP . Peripheral neuropathies causing chronic pelvic pain. 
J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 2000;7:281–7. 
37. McGowan LP , Clark-Carter DD, Pitts MK. Chronic pelvic pain: 
a meta-analytic review. Psychol Health 1998;13:937–51. 
38. Thomas E, Moss-Morris R, Faquhar C. Coping with emotions 
and abuse history in women with chronic pelvic pain. J
Psychosom Res 2006;60:109–12. 
39. Collett BJ, Cordle CJ, Stewart CR, Jagger C. A comparative study 
of women with chronic pelvic pain, chronic nonpelvic pain 
and those with no history of pain attending general practi -
tioners. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:87–92. 
40. Walling MK, Reiter RC, O ’Hara MW , Milburn AK, Lilly G, Vincent 
SD. Abuse history and chronic pain in women: I. Prevalences of 
sexual abuse and physical abuse. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:193 –9. 
41. Lampe A, Sölder E, Ennemoser A, Schubert C, Rumpold G, 
Söllner W. Chronic pelvic pain and previous sexual abuse. 
Obstet Gynecol 2000;96:929–33. 
42. Lampe A, Doering S, Rumpold G, Sölder E, Krismer M, Kantner- 
Rumplmair W , et al . Chronic pain syndromes and their relation 
to childhood abuse and stressful life events. J Psychsom Res 
2003;54:361–7. 
43. Toomey TC, Seville JL, Mann JD, Abashian SW, Grant JR. 
Relationship of sexual and physical abuse to pain description, 
coping, psychological distress, and health -care utilization in a 
chronic pain sample. Clin J Pain 1995;11:307–15. 
44. Walling MK, O’Hara MW , Reiter RC, Milburn AK, Lilly G, Vincent 
SD. Abuse history and chronic pain in women: II. A multivariate 
analysis of abuse and psychological morbidity. Obstet Gynecol 
1994;84:200–6. 
45. Jamieson DJ, Steege JF . The association of sexual abuse with 
pelvic pain complaints in a primary care population. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:1408–12. 
46. Raphael KG, Widom CS, Lange G. Childhood victimization and 
pain in adulthood: a prospective investigation. Pain 
2001;92:283–93. 
47. Tu FF , Hahn D, Steege JF . Pelvic congestion syndrome- 
associated pelvic pain: a systematic review of diagnosis and 
management. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2010;65:332–40. 
48. Silverman J, Kurtz S, Draper J. Skills for communicating with 
patients . Oxford: Radcliffe Medical Press (Oxford); 1998. 
49. McGowan L, Luker K, Creed F , Chew-Graham CA. How do you 
explain a pain that can ’t be seen?: the narratives of women 
with chronic pelvic pain and their disengagement with the 
diagnostic cycle. Br J Health Psychol 2007;12:261–74. 
50. Price J, Farmer G, Harris J, Hope T, Kennedy S, Mayou R, et al. 
Attitudes of women with chronic pelvic pain to the gynaeco -
logical consultation: a qualitative study. BJOG 2006;113: 
446–52. 
51. Selfe SA, Matthews Z, Stones RW . Factors influencing outcome 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 12 of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in consultations for chronic pelvic pain. J Womens Health 
1998;7:1041–8. 
52. Peters AA, van Dorst E, Jellis B, van Zuuren E, Hermans J, 
Trimbos JB. A randomized clinical trial to compare two 
different approaches in women with chronic pelvic pain. 
Obstet Gynecol 1991;77:740–4. 
53. Flor H, Fydrich T, Turk DC. Efficacy of multidisciplinary pain 
treatment centers: a meta-analytic review. Pain 1992;49:221 –30. 
54. Kames LD, Rapkin AJ, Naliboff BD, Afifi S, Ferrer-Brechner T. 
Effectiveness of an interdisciplinary pain management program 
for the treatment of chronic pelvic pain. Pain 1990;41:41–6. 
55. Albert H. Psychosomatic group treatment helps women with 
chronic pelvic pain. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 
1999;20:216–25. 
56. Fass R, Longstreth GF , Pimentel M, Fullerton S, Russak SM, 
Chiou CF , et al. Evidence- and consensus-based practice 
guidelines for the diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome. Arch 
Intern Med 2001;161:2081–8. 
57. Spiller R, Aziz Q, Creed F , Emmanuel A, Houghton L, Hungin P , 
et al .; Clinical Services Committee of The British Society of 
Gastroenterology. Guidelines on the irritable bowel syndrome: 
mechanisms and practical management. Gut 2007;56:1770 –98 
58. Olden KW . Diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroen -
terology 2002;122:1701–14. 
59. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists . Manage -
ment of acute pelvic inflammatory disease . Green-top 
Guideline No. 32. London: RCOG; 2008 [www.rcog.org.uk/ 
womens-health/clinical-guidance/management-acute-pelvic- 
inflammatory-disease-32 ]. 
60. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of 
genital Chlamydia trachomatis infection . A national clinical 
guideline . Clinical Guideline no. 109. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2009 
[http://www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/109/index.html ]. 
61. Moore J, Copley S, Morris J, Lindsell D, Golding S, Kennedy S. A 
systematic review of the accuracy of ultrasound in the 
diagnosis of endometriosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2002;20:630–4. 
62. Okaro E, Condous G, Khalid A, Timmerman D, Ameye L, Huffel 
SV , et al. The use of ultrasound-based ‘soft markers ’for the 
prediction of pelvic pathology in women with chronic pelvic 
pain – can we reduce the need for laparoscopy? BJOG 
2006;113:251–6. 
63. Dueholm M, Lundorf E, Hansen ES, Sorensen JS, Ledertoug S, 
Olesen F . Magnetic resonance imaging and transvaginal 
ultrasonography for the diagnosis of adenomyosis. Fertil Steril 
2001;76:588–94. 
64. Bazot M, Cortez A, Darai E, Rouger J, Chopier J, Antoine JM, et 
al. Ultrasonography compared with magnetic resonance 
imaging for the diagnosis of adenomyosis: correlation with 
histopathology. Hum Reprod 2001;16:2427–33. 
65. Champaneria R, Abedin P , Daniels J, Balogun M, Khan KS. 
Ultrasound scan and magnetic resonance imaging for the 
diagnosis of adenomyosis: systematic review comparing test 
accuracy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2010;89:1374–84. 
66. Meredith SM, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM. Diagnostic 
accuracy of transvaginal sonography for the diagnosis of 
adenomyosis: systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2009 ;201:107.e1–6. 
67. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The investi -
gation and management of endometriosis . Green-top 
Guide line No. 24. London: RCOG; 2008 [http://www. 
rcog.org.uk/womens-health/clinical-guidance/ investigation- 
and-management-endometriosis-green-top-24 ]. 
68. Jansen FW , Kapiteyn K, Trimbos-Kemper T, Hermans J, Trimbos 
JB. Complications of laparoscopy: a prospective multicentre 
observational study. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1997;104:595–600. 69. Chapron C, Querleu D, Bruhat M, Madelenat P , Fernandez H, 
Pierre F , et al. Surgical complications of diagnostic and oper -
ative gynaecological laparoscopy: a series of 29,966 cases. 
Hum Reprod 1998;13:867–72. 
70. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Preventing 
entry-related gynaecological laparoscopic injuries . Green- 
top Guideline No. 49. London: RCOG; 2008 [http://www.rcog. 
org.uk/womens-health/clinical-guidance/preventing-entry- 
related-gynaecological-laparoscopic-injuries-green- ]. 
71. Howard FM. The role of laparoscopy as a diagnostic tool in 
chronic pelvic pain. Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Obstet 
Gynaecol 2000;14:467–94. 
72. Moore J, Ziebland S, Kennedy S. “People sometimes react funny 
if they’re not told enough”: women’s views about the risks of 
diagnostic laparoscopy. Health Expect 2002;5:302–9. 
73. Palter SF . Microlaparoscopy under local anesthesia and 
conscious pain mapping for the diagnosis and management of 
pelvic pain. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 1999;11:387–93. 
74. Swanton A, Iyer L, Reginald PW. Diagnosis, treatment and 
follow up of women undergoing conscious pain mapping for 
chronic pelvic pain: a prospective cohort study. BJOG 
2006;113:792 –6. 
75. Cox L, Ayers S, Nala K, Penny J. Chronic pelvic pain and quality 
of life after laparoscopy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 
2007;132:214–9. 
76. Elcombe S, Gath D, Day A. The psychological effects of 
laparoscopy on women with chronic pelvic pain. Psychol Med 
1997;27:1041–50. 
77. Onwude JL, Thornton JG, Morley S, Lilleymen J, Currie I, Lilford 
RJ. A randomised trial of photographic reinforcement during 
postoperative counselling after diagnostic laparoscopy for 
pelvic pain. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2004;112:89 –94. 
78. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Ovarian 
cancer. The recognition and initial management of ovarian 
cancer.NICE clinical guideline 122. London: NICE; 2011 [http:// 
guidance.nice.org.uk/CG122/NICEGuidance/pdf/English]. 
79. Surrey ES. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist and add- 
back therapy: what do the data show? Curr Opin Obstet 
Gynecol 2010;22:283–8. 
80. Aslam N, Blunt S, Latthe P . Effectiveness and tolerability of 
levonorgestrel intrauterine system in adolescents. J Obstet 
Gynaecol 2010;30:489–91. 
81. Soysal ME, Soysal S, Kubilay V , Ozer S. A randomized controlled 
trial of goserelin and medroxyprogesterone acetate in the 
treatment of pelvic congestion. Hum Reprod 2001;16:931–9. 
82. Shokeir T, Amr M, Abdelshaheed M. The efficacy of Implanon 
for the treatment of chronic pelvic pain associated with pelvic 
congestion: 1-year randomized controlled pilot study. Arch 
Gynecol Obstet 2009;280:437–43. 
83. Ling FW. Randomized controlled trial of depot leuprolide in 
patients with chronic pelvic pain and clinically suspected 
endometriosis . Pelvic Pain Study Group. Obstet Gynecol 
1999;93:51–8. 
84. Barbieri RL. Primary gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist 
therapy for suspected endometriosis: a nonsurgical approach 
to the diagnosis and treatment of chronic pelvic pain. Am J 
Manag Care 1997;3:285–90. 
85. Gambone JC, Mittman BS, Munro MG, Scialli AR, Winkel CA; 
Chronic Pelvic Pain/Endometriosis Working Group. Consensus 
statement for the management of chronic pelvic pain and 
endometriosis: proceedings of an expert-panel consensus 
process. Fertil Steril 2002;78:961–72. 
86. ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins–Gynecology. ACOG 
Practice Bulletin No. 51. Chronic pelvic pain. Obstet Gynecol 
2004;103;589–605. 
87. Kephart W . Evaluation of Lovelace Health Systems chronic pelvic 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 13 of 16 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 pain protocol. Am J Manage Care 1999;5 Suppl 5 :309 –15. 
88. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Irritable 
bowel syndrome in adults. Diagnosis and management of 
irritable bowel syndrome in primary care. NICE clinical 
guideline 61. London: NICE; 2008 [http://www.nice.org.uk/ 
guidance/CG61/NICEGuidance]. 
89. Jaiwala J, Imperiale TF , Kroenke K. Pharmacologic treatment of 
the irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review of random -
ized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med 2000;133:136–47. 
90. Nanda R, James R, Smith H, Dudley CR, Jewell DP . Food intol -
erance and the irritable bowel syndrome. Gut 1989;30: 
1099–104. 
91. The British Pain Society. Opioids for persistent pain: Good 
practice . A consensus statement prepared on behalf of the 
British pain Society, the Faculty of Pain Medicine of the Royal 
College of Anaesthetists, the Royal College of General Practi -
tioners and the Faculty of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. 
London: The British Pain Society; 2010 [ https://www.british -
painsociety.org/static/uploads/resources/files/book_opioid_ 
main.pdf ]. 92. Wiffen P , Collins S, McQuay H, Carroll D, Jadad A, Moore A. 
Anticonvulsant drugs for acute and chronic pain. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2005;(3):CD001133. 
93. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
Neuropathic pain. The pharmacological management of 
neuropathic pain in adults in non-specialist settings . NICE 
clinical guideline 96. London: NICE; 2010 [http://guidance. 
nice.org.uk/CG96/NICEguidance/pdf/English]. 
94. Daniels J, Gray R, Hills RK, Latthe P , Buckley L, Gupta J, et al.; 
LUNA Trial Collaboration. Laparoscopic uterosacral nerve 
ablation for alleviating chronic pelvic pain: a randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA 2009;302:955–61. 
95. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Laparo -
scopic uterine nerve ablation (LUNA) for chronic pelvic pain.
Interventional procedure guidance 234. London: NICE; 2007 
[http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/IPG234/Guidance/pdf]. 
96. Zondervan KT, Yudkin PL, Vessey MP , Jenkinson CP , Dawes MG, 
Barlow DH, et al .The community prevalence of chronic pelvic 
pain in women and associated illness behaviour. Br J Gen 
Pract 2001;51:541–7. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 14 of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists APPENDIX 1: Rome III criteria for the diagnosis of IBS 
Continuous or recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort on at least 3 days a month in the last 3 months, with 
the onset at least 6 months previously, associated with at least two of the following: 
Gimprovement with defecation 
Gonset associated with a change in frequency of stool 
Gonset associated with a change in the form of stool. 
Symptoms such as abdominal bloating and the passage of mucus are commonly present and are suggestive 
of IBS. Extraintestinal symptoms such as lethargy, back ache, urinary frequency and dyspareunia may also 
occur in association with IBS. 
APPENDIX 2: ‘Red flag’ symptoms and signs 
GBleeding per rectum 
GNew bowel symptoms over 50 years of age 
GNew pain after the menopause 
GPelvic mass 
GSuicidal ideation 
GExcessive weight loss 
GIrregular vaginal bleeding over 40 years of age 
GPostcoital bleeding APPENDIX 3 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 15 of 16 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 Grades of recommendations 
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or 
randomised controlled trial rated as 1++ and 
directly applicable to the target population; or 
A systematic review of randomised controlled 
trials or a body of evidence consisting 
principally of studies rated as 1+ directly 
applicable to the target population and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results 
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2++ directly applicable to the target 
population, and demonstrating overall 
consistency of results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
1++ or 1+ 
A body of evidence including studies rated as 
2+ directly applicable to the target population 
and demonstrating overall consistency of 
results; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 
2++ 
Evidence level 3 or 4; or 
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+ 
Good practice point 
Recommended best practice based on the 
clinical experience of the guideline 
development group Classification of evidence levels 
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
very low risk of bias 
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic 
reviews of randomised controlled trials 
or randomised controlled trials with a 
low risk of bias 
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of 
randomised controlled trials or 
randomised controlled trials with a high 
risk of bias 
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case– 
control or cohort studies or high-quality 
case–control or cohort studies with a 
very low risk of confounding, bias or 
chance and a high probability that the 
relationship is causal 
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort 
studies with a low risk of confounding, 
bias or chance and a moderate 
probability that the relationship is causal 
2- Case–control or cohort studies with a 
high risk of confounding, bias or chance 
and a significant risk that the 
relationship is not causal 
3Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, 
case series 
4Expert opinion PC
DBARCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 16 of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists DISCLAIMER 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice. 
They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration by 
obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular 
clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented 
by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available. 
This means that RCOG guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to be 
prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols or 
guidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken. This guideline was produced on behalf of the Guidelines Committee of the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists by: 
Ms SJ Moore MRCOG, Oxford and Mr SH Kennedy MRCOG, Oxford 
and peer reviewed by: Dr U Krishnamoorthy, East Lancashire ; College of Emergency Medicine ; Consumers’ Forum; 
Obstetric Anaesthetists ’ Association (OAA ); Royal College of Midwives (RCM); Women’s Health Pharmacist Group .
The Guidelines Committee lead reviewers were: Dr AJ Thomson MRCOG Paisley, Scotland and Dr KR Harding FRCOG, 
London. 
Conflicts of interest :none declared. 
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 17 of 16 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 41 18 of 16 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists