# Extracted from: Joint RCOG and BSGE Guideline- Laparoscopy in Pregnancy.pdf
# Guideline ID: joint-rcog-and-bsge-guideline-laparoscopy-in-pregnancy
# Content length: 93540 characters
# Processing date: 1733226825.3816676

51. Purpose and scope
The scope of this guideline is the laparoscopic 
management of non-obstetric, abdominal conditions 
in pregnancy. Laparoscopy is widely utilised to 
diagnose and treat, acute and chronic, gynaecological 
and general surgical conditions. It is only in recent 
years that laparoscopy has become an acceptable surgical alternative to open surgery in pregnancy. 
To date there is little clinical guidance pertaining 
to laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy. This is why 
the British Society of Gynaecological Endoscopy 
(BSGE) commissioned this guideline using evidence 
grading as used by the Royal College of Obstetricians 
and Gynaecologists (RCOG) (appendix 1) with the 
help of contributors.Evidence-Based Guideline on Laparoscopy in Pregnancy
Commissioned by the British Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy (BSGE)
Endorsed by the Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists (RCOG) 
E. B all1, N. W atErs2, N. C oopEr1,C. t alati3, r. M alliCk4, s. r aBas5, a. M ukhErjEE6, Y. s ri raNjaN7, 
M. t haha1, r. D ooDia8, r. k EEDWEll9, M. M aDhra10, N. k uruBa11, r. M alhas12, E. G auGhaN13, k. 
toMpsEtt1, h.G iBsoN14, h. W riGht15, C. G NaNaChaNDraN16, t. h ookaWaY18, C. B akEr19, k. M urali20, 
D. j urkoviC21, N. a Mso22, j. C lark23, s. t haNGaratiNaM5, t. C halhouB24, p. k aloo25, E. s ariDoGaN21
1Royal London Hospital; 2Royal Surrey County Hospital NHS Trust; 3Homerton Hospital; 4Brighton and Sussex University 
Hospitals NHS Trust; 5Queen’s Hospital London and King George Hospital; 6Northwick Park Hospital; 7Chelsea and 
Westminster Hospital; 8John Radcliffe Hospital; 9Royal Cornwall Hospitals NHS Trust; 10Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh; 
11Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital; 12Walsall Manor Hospital; 13Rotunda Hospital, Dublin; 14Barking, Havering 
and Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust; 15North Manchester General Hospital; 16Northampton General Hospital;
17Royal Gwent Hospital Aneurin Bevan Health Board; 18Plymouth Hospitals NHS Trust; 19Poole Hospital; 20Salisbury 
District and General Hospital; 21University College Hospital; 22Cardiff University School of Medicine; 23Birmingham 
Women’s Hospital; 24Royal Victoria Infirmary; 25Gloucestershire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust.
Correspondence at: Elizabeth Ball, Royal London Hospital, E-mail: elizabeth.ball9@nhs.net 
Abstract
Laparoscopy is widely utilised to diagnose and treat acute and chronic, gynaecological and general surgical 
conditions. It has only been in recent years that laparoscopy has become an acceptable surgical alternative to open 
surgery in pregnancy. To date there is little clinical guidance pertaining to laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy. 
This is why the BSGE commissioned this guideline. MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and the Cochrane library 
were searched up to February 2017 and evidence was collated and graded following the NICE-approved process. 
The conditions included in this guideline are laparoscopic management of acute appendicitis, acute gall bladder 
disease and symptomatic benign adnexal tumours in pregnancy.
The intended audience for this guideline is obstetricians and gynaecologists in secondary and tertiary care, general 
surgeons and anaesthetists. However, only laparoscopists who have adequate laparoscopic skills and who perform 
complex laparoscopic surgery regularly should undertake laparoscopy in pregnant women, since much of the 
evidence stems from specialised centres.
Key words: Laparoscopy in pregnancy, Appendicitis in pregnancy, Gallbladder disease / Cholecystitis in 
pregnancy, Benign adnexal tumours / Ovarian cysts in pregnancy.Facts Views Vis Obgyn , 2019, 11 (1): 5-25 Guideline
6 Facts Views Vis ObgynThe conditions included in this guideline are 
acute appendicitis, acute gall bladder disease and 
symptomatic benign adnexal tumours in pregnancy. 
The intended audience for this guideline is 
obstetricians and gynaecologists in secondary and 
tertiary care, general surgeons and anaesthetists. 
However, only laparoscopists who have specialist 
laparoscopic skills and who perform complex 
laparoscopic surgery regularly should undertake 
laparoscopy in pregnant women.
2. Identification and assessment of evidence
MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and the Cochrane 
library were searched for relevant articles. 
Literature searches were performed in MEDLINE 
(from 1950 to September 2015), EMBASE (from 
1980 to September 2015), CINAHL (from 1981 
to September 2015) and the Cochrane library. 
No restrictions were placed on the searches in an 
attempt to reduce selection bias. The databases 
were searched using the relevant MeSH terms and 
keywords. 
A subsequent update search ensured relevant papers 
were included up to February 2017.
The main search terms were ‘laparoscopy’ and 
‘pregnancy’, these were used with combinations 
of the following words and appropriate synonyms, 
depending upon the area of laparoscopy in pregnancy 
being examined; anaesthesia, appendicectomy, 
cholecystectomy, ovarian cysts, performance and 
safety of imaging.
The results of the searches were systematically 
reviewed to identify relevant articles. The reference 
lists of selected papers were then searched to identify 
any additional articles not captured by the literature 
search. When a study, which was relevant to one of 
the other topic areas, was identified in a search, we 
cross-referenced to ensure that it was identified in 
the relevant search. Studies were included if they 
addressed the diagnosis and / or management of 
acute surgical conditions, such as acute appendicitis, 
acute cholecystitis and symptomatic benign 
adnexal tumours in pregnancy. Suspected ovarian 
malignancy, ectopic and heterotopic pregnancy 
were excluded (guidance regarding these conditions 
can be found in the National Institute of Clinical 
Excellence (NICE) Guideline CG122, 2011(NICE, 
2011) and the NICE Guideline CG154, 2012 (NICE, 
2012), respectively).
Where possible, recommendations were based on 
available evidence and the areas where evidence 
was lacking were annotated as ‘good practice 
points’. Further information about the assessment of 
evidence and the grading of recommendations may 
be found in appendix 1.3. Introduction and background 
epidemiology
What is the incidence of non-obstetrical 
emergencies in pregnancy?
D
D
DCThe incidence of acute, non-obstetric 
abdominal surgical emergencies in 
pregnancy is low.
Clinicians should be aware of the possibility 
of appendicitis in pregnancy, but its incidence 
is lower than in the non-pregnant state.
Hormonal changes may increase the 
ultrasound scan findings of gallstones 
and sludge in pregnancy. However, the 
risk of gallbladder disease appears to be 
reduced.
The absolute numbers of torted and 
haemorrhagic ovarian cysts are low 
in pregnancy. Fertility treatment with 
GnRH analogues involving controlled 
ovarian stimulation appears to increase 
these risks.
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3EviDENCE
lEvEl 3Non-obstetric abdominal surgery during 
pregnancy is rare and occurs in 1–2/1000 
pregnancies (Silvestri et al., 2011; 
Balinskaite et al., 2017).
Two large cohort studies from the USA 
reported the incidence of appendicitis to be 
1 in 1000 pregnancies (Abbasi et al. (2014) 
examined n=7037386 pregnancies, Mourad 
et al. (2000) n=66993 pregnancies (0.1%)). 
A Korean health registry study found that 
the prevalence of acute appendicitis in 
pregnant women (96 ± 97 per 100000) was 
significantly lower than that in non- pregnant 
women (206 ± 3 per 100000), (OR, 0.376; 
95% CI, 0.31- 0.46, p <0.001) (Yuk et al., 
2013).
The search identified one large series of 
46075 pregnant women, that reported the 
incidence of biliary disease in pregnancy 
to be 0.16% (Swisher et al., 1994). In the 
general population the incidence is 10-15% 
with a female-to-male ratio of 4:1, despite the 
predilection for sludge and stone formation in 
pregnancy (Schirmer et al., 2005).
The reported incidence of ovarian cysts in 
pregnancy varies between studies, depending 
upon the study population, the inclusion 
criteria and the size of ovarian cysts. If a 
cut off of >3cm is used, the incidence in EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 75.2% (p=0.001) for PSI and 11.2% versus 
4.8% (p=0.0010) for SIRS. The authors 
suggested that compounding factors might 
include suppressed maternal immunity in 
pregnancy, difficulty making the diagnosis 
and reluctance to operate. There was a 
higher rate of fetal loss and early delivery 
when appendicitis was complicated by 
generalised peritonitis or peritoneal abscess 
(p<0.05); 6% fetal loss and 11% early 
delivery in complex appendicitis versus 2% 
fetal loss and 4% early delivery in simple 
appendicitis (McGory et al., 2007).
No studies were identified that compared 
the incidence of ovarian cyst complications 
in pregnant and in non-pregnant women in 
our search. For instance, there are no data on 
whether cyst accidents lead to more severe 
peritonitis or haemorrhage when a woman 
is pregnant. The risk of torsion appears 
to decrease with increasing gestation in a 
retrospective series of 107 fertility patients 
(Zanetta et al., 2003). After one episode of 
torsion the recurrence risk of repeat torsion 
was 19.5% in pregnant women and 9.1% in 
non-pregnant women in a retrospective case 
control study (n=118) (Hasson et al., 2010).
Pregnancy complications secondary 
to ovarian cysts include fetal loss and 
premature delivery. pregnancy is 1.2%, if a cut off of >5 cm is 
used the incidence in pregnancy is 0.05% 
(Duic et al., 2002; Zanetta et al., 2003; Katz 
et al., 2010). In non-pregnant women of 
reproductive age the incidence is 1.8%, if 
a cut off of > 4 cm is used (Borgfeldt and 
Andolf, 1999).
Ovarian torsion in pregnancy is rare in 
absolute terms. In Duic’s series, torsion, sub-
acute torsion or haemorrhage necessitating 
a surgical intervention occurred in 1:4000 
pregnancies. Katz et al. (2010) reported 
a torsion rate of 1:70000, with hospital 
admissions for pain required in 16% of 
women with cysts. The incidence of ovarian 
torsion in non- pregnant women is not 
known.
An association with ovarian stimulation 
for fertility treatment was observed in a 
retrospective review of 180 consecutive 
women of childbearing age over an 11-year 
period with surgically confirmed adnexal 
torsion; 48 women were pregnant (median 
gestational age 7 weeks), of those 39 women 
had received fertility treatment and nine 
had not. The relationship between ovarian 
enlargement and fertility treatment was not 
investigated (Tsafrir et al., 2012).
DB
CEviDENCE
lEvEl 3EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-4. Ovarian cyst accidents, appendicitis and 
cholecystitis causing complications specific to 
pregnancy
What are the specific concerns of ovarian cyst 
accidents, appendicitis and cholecystitis in 
pregnancy?
Without appropriate surgical treatment, 
appendicitis and cholecystitis carry 
specific risks in pregnancy including 
generalised peritonitis and maternal 
sepsis resulting in miscarriage, preterm 
delivery and stillbirth. No data was 
identified regarding the effect of cyst 
accidents on pregnancy.
When comparing pregnant to non-pregnant 
women, a large retrospective cohort study 
showed a higher rate of pre-operative 
systemic infection (PSI) and systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) 
in pregnant women (Silvestri et al., 2011). 
For appendicitis the incidence of PSI was 
39.7% versus 33.6% (p<0.001) and for SIRS 
it was 35.7% versus 32.2% (p=0.001). For 
cholecystitis the incidence was 11.9% versus 5. Safety of Laparoscopy
Is laparoscopy in pregnancy safe for mother and 
fetus?
In comparison with open surgery, 
laparoscopy for adnexal and gallbladder 
disease has no increased risk for mother 
and fetus. Where appropriate surgical 
equipment and expertise is available, 
laparoscopy should be considered an 
appropriate surgical approach.
(Recommendations for appendicitis in 
pregnancy see 9.1)
There is no additional risk of fetal 
malformation or stillbirth in women who 
undergo non-obstetric surgery compared 
with pregnant women who do not 
undergo surgery. The maternal condition 
necessitating surgery may be associated with 
risk of miscarriage and preterm labour.
Only experienced laparoscopists should 
carry out these procedures and outcomes 
8 Facts Views Vis ObgynPreviously pregnancy was thought to be a 
contraindication for laparoscopy, but now 
there are numerous publications, showing 
acceptable maternal and fetal outcomes. 
Most evidence is based on case series and 
systematic reviews of those.
Compared with laparotomy, laparoscopic 
surgery for ovarian cysts in pregnancy was 
associated with better maternal outcomes, 
and no increase in adverse obstetric 
outcomes (miscarriage, preterm delivery 
or fetal growth restriction) in a systematic 
review of 240 women (Liu et al., 2017).
Two systematic reviews of non-randomised 
controlled trial (RCT) studies of laparoscopy 
for gallbladder disease reported good maternal 
and fetal safety. Adverse fetal outcomes 
(OR=0.42, Confidence interval (CI)=0.28-
0.63, p<0.001), maternal complications 
(OR=0.42, CI=0.33-0.53, p<0.001), or intra-
operative immediate post-operative surgery 
related complications (OR=0.45, CI= 0.25-
0.82, p=0.01) were all less frequent in 
laparoscopy than in laparotomy (Sedaghat et 
al., 2017). In a non-comparative systematic 
review, Nasioudis et al. (2016) reported the 
rate of fetal loss as 0.4%. Intraoperative 
maternal complications were 3.86% and 
postoperative maternal complications were 
4%, of which fewer than 1/3 in each section 
could be classed as severe (see section 
9.2). A systematic review of suspected 
appendicitis in pregnancy identified 11 
non-randomised comparative studies of 
open (n=2816) and laparoscopic (n=599) 
treatment (Wilasrusmee et al., 2012). 
Fetal loss was significantly increased in the 
laparoscopy group (RR=1.91, CI=1.31-2.77).
However, the increased report of fetal 
loss was attributed to a single large study 
(McGory et al., 2007). No adverse fetal 
outcomes associated with laparoscopy 
were reported by the remaining smaller 
studies. McGory et al. (2007) studied 
retrospective administrative hospital records of pregnant (n=3133) and non-pregnant 
women (n=91656) who underwent open 
(n=73269) or laparoscopic appendicectomy 
(n= 24214). Gestational ages at surgery and 
at the time of fetal loss were not reported. 
Fetal loss was identified by diagnosis codes 
for miscarriage, dilatation and curettage 
or intrauterine death. Laparoscopy was 
associated with a higher rate of fetal loss 
(7%) compared with open appendicectomy 
(3%) (Odds ratio (OR)=2.31, CI=1.51-3.55, 
p<0.5) but early delivery was less common 
in laparoscopic appendicectomy (<1%) 
compared to open (8%) (p<0.5). In this 
study, it was not possible to make a causal 
link between laparoscopic appendicectomy 
and fetal loss. It has to be taken into 
account that the laparoscopic approach is 
the preferred approach in the first trimester, 
when spontaneous fetal loss occurs most 
frequently, and the association could be 
spurious.
When comparing laparoscopic to open 
appendectomy, Balinskaite et al. (2017) 
in a retrospective review of routinely 
collected hospital data in the UK reported 
higher incidence of spontaneous miscarriage 
(OR=2.36, CI=1.71 – 3.26). There was no 
increase in the other primary outcomes such 
as delivery by caesarean section, preterm 
delivery < 37 weeks’ gestation, low birth 
weight of <2500g, stillbirth, long inpatient 
stay and maternal death. They analysed data 
of the 6486280 pregnant women of whom 
47628 (0.7%) underwent non-obstetric 
surgery, 26% underwent abdominal 
surgery, including 3061 appendicectomies. 
They reported that in the first trimester 
laparoscopic procedures were nearly 5 
times more common than open surgery. 
Conversely, in the third trimester open 
procedures were 2.5 times more common 
than laparoscopic surgery. The authors stated 
that cause and effect could not be established 
and that the higher risk of miscarriage could 
be related to the preference of laparoscopic 
approach in the first trimester, when there is 
a higher chance of miscarriage.
Mazze et al. (1989) reviewed Swedish 
birth registries over a period of nine years, 
and investigated the risk of adverse fetal 
outcomes, after non-obstetric surgery in 
pregnancy. A total of 5405 operations (25% 
open abdominal - mainly appendicectomy, 
19% gynaecological/urological and 16% EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+should be carefully monitored. Joint 
surgery between gynaecologists and 
surgeons is encouraged.
The decision between laparoscopic 
and open routes of surgery should be 
based upon the available expertise, 
infrastructure, background history, 
gestation and the woman’s preference.
 EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 9Laparoscopic surgery is associated with 
faster recovery, shorter hospital stay and 
a trend to lower rate of wound infection 
for pregnant women. 
Cox et al. (2016) using the US National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Program 
(NSQIP) which included 1999 pregnant 
women undergoing laparoscopic or open 
cholecystectomies or appendicectomies 
in non-perforated appendicitis, reported 
shorter operation time (p<0.0001), shorter 
hospital stay (2.3 ± 5.8 versus 3.3 ± 2.5, 
p<0.01), and fewer postoperative wound 
complications (0.67% versus 3.9%, p<0.01) 
for laparoscopic surgery.
In a retrospective review of 2000 cases of 
open and laparoscopic appendicectomies 
in pregnancy from the NSQIP database, 
laparoscopy was associated with fewer 
wound infections (p=0.04), return to theatre, 
other infections, respiratory morbidity, 
venous thromboembolism (VTE), and blood 
transfusion (p=0.048), whilst open cases 
had more pre-operative systemic infections 
(Erekson et al., 2012).
Wilasrusmee et al. (2012) conducted a 
meta- analysis of 11 non-RCT studies of 
pregnant women undergoing surgery for 
appendicectomy (n=599 laparoscopic, 
n=2816 open). Only three studies reported 
wound infection, which was not significantly 
reduced in laparoscopy (RR=0.91, CI=0.12 
-7.18). Hospital stay was shorter by 
half a day (CI=1.76-0.78 days) with the 
laparoscopic approach.
Since the publication of Wilasrusmee et al. 
(2012) two comparative case series have 
been published. Laustsen et al. (2016) 
reported a small-scale comparison between 
19 laparoscopic and 25 open appendectomies 
and reported fewer complications including 
wound infection; abscess, haematoma (5.3% 
versus 36%, p=0.03) and shorter hospital 
stay (2.6 versus 5.5 days, p = 0.004) with 
the laparoscopic approach.
Segev et al. (2016) compared 50 laparoscopic 
with 42 open appendicectomy cases in 
pregnancy. Two per cent of the open cases 
were conversions from laparoscopy. The 
laparoscopy group had a lower median 
gestational age at surgery (16 weeks versus 
24 weeks, p<0.001), a shorter median 
hospital stay (5 days versus 3 days, p<0. 
001), and a lower rate of postoperative laparoscopic) were reviewed. Out of 868 
women who had laparoscopic surgery, 768 
had surgery in the first, 29 in the second and 
71 in the third trimester respectively. No 
direct comparison was made between an 
open and a laparoscopic approach. Mazze et 
al. (1989) concluded there was no additional 
risk of fetal malformation or stillbirth when 
compared with expected rates in non-
surgical pregnant women. However, there 
was an increase in the risk of low birth 
weight (<1500 grams risk ratio 2.2, 95% CI 
1.8-2.8; <2500 grams risk ratio 2.0, 95% CI 
1.8-2.2); preterm birth <37/40 weeks (rate 
7.5% versus 5.1% p=0.001) and neonatal 
death at 168 hours (risk ratio 2.1 CI 1.6- 
2.7) when compared with expected rates 
in non- surgical women. Neonatal deaths 
were associated with prematurity, but 
preterm births did not occur from delivery 
immediately after the operation but with 
an average delay of 21, 7 and 5 weeks 
in the first, second, and third trimester 
respectively. The relationship between 
the condition necessitating surgery in 
pregnancy and adverse outcomes of 
pregnancy was not investigated and could 
be a confounding factor.
Reedy et al. (1997) looked at 20-year period 
of health registry data (a proportion also 
included in Mazze et al. (1989) and compared 
open (n=1522) to laparoscopic (n=2181) 
surgery in pregnancy at gestations between 
four weeks and twenty weeks. When these 
women, who had undergone either open or 
laproscopic surgery, were compared to the 
normal pregnant population they had no 
increased risk of fetal malformations (open 
surgery versus total studied population risk 
ratio 1.08, 95% CI 0.85-1.11; laparoscopic 
surgery versus total studied population risk 
ratio 1.09, 95% CI 0.9-1.11).
No developmental or physical abnormalities 
were seen in children born to mothers 
who had laparoscopic surgery between 
16 and 28 weeks’ gestation (including 
cholecystectomy, appendicectomy and 
surgery for small bowel obstruction) (Rizzo, 
2003). The follow-up ranged from 1 to 8 
years.EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
What are the maternal benefits to laparoscopic 
compared to open surgery? C10 Facts Views Vis ObgynA case report details the rupture of uterine 
varicocele at laparoscopic appendectomy 
at 33 weeks, followed by conversion to 
emergency caesarean section, with good 
maternal and neonatal outcome (Holzer et 
al., 2011).
6. Anaesthesiacomplications (8% versus 24%, p=0.04), 
with no difference in gestational age at 
delivery, Apgar scores, and rates of preterm 
delivery or fetal loss.
A
D
D
D
DEviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 1-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 1-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
What are the maternal risks from laparoscopy in 
pregnancy?
General laparoscopic surgical risks such 
as haemorrhage and herniation at the 
port site also apply to laparoscopy during 
pregnancy.
Due to enlargement of the uterus and 
subsequent limitations to visual field 
and surgical access there is an increased 
risk of vascular and organ trauma, in 
particular uterine perforation, although 
this risk has not been quantified.
Clinicians should counsel women about 
consequences of uterine perforation, 
which include subsequent uterine 
rupture, infections, preterm delivery, and 
laceration of the fetus or the placenta. 
The size of the perforation is likely to be 
of importance.
Clinicians should be aware that there is 
increased risk of bleeding due to increased 
vascularity of uterus and adnexae, but 
this risk is currently not quantified.
A systematic review on cholecystectomy 
in pregnancy (Nasioudes et al., 2016) 
gives a narrative account of non-pregnancy 
specific complications such as haemorrhage 
and herniation at the port site after 
laparoscopy. Another systematic review 
on cholecystectomy in pregnancy reports a 
maternal death associated with laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy in 767 cases (Sedaghat et 
al., 2017). Details of this death are missing 
despite contacting the authors.
There are only case reports on trauma to the 
uterus. Case series of less than five cases 
were not included in the guideline, with the 
exception of this section, where no other 
evidence was available. In one case the 
uterus was laparoscopically repaired after 
Veress needle and trocar injury. PROM 
occurred at 32 weeks. The child was well 
at 12 months (Joumblat et al., 2012). 
In a second case, inadvertent pneumo-
amnion occurred at 21 weeks’ gestation 
during a negative laparoscopy, resulting in 
miscarriage (Friedman et al., 2002).No studies were identified which examined 
the maternal risks of anaesthesia for women 
undergoing laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy. 
Recommendations regarding the maternal 
anaesthetic risks for non-obstetric laparoscopic 
surgery in pregnancy have been extrapolated from 
both non-pregnant women having laparoscopy, 
and the delivery of anaesthesia in the pregnant 
population. 
What are the maternal anaesthetic risks of 
laparoscopy in pregnancy and how can these 
specific risks be safely managed?
The pre-operative anaesthetic review 
should include relevant features related 
to the pregnancy such as gestation and 
pregnancy related co- morbidities as well 
as the routine anaesthesia history and 
examination.
There should be early involvement of 
an obstetric anaesthetist, or at the very 
least consultation with an obstetric 
anaesthetist.
Aspiration prophylaxis should be 
administered, and a strategy for airway 
management should be made. General 
anaesthesia and endotracheal intubation 
are essential, and the use of a laryngeal 
mask airway is not recommended.
Creation of the pneumoperitoneum 
should be gradual, as should alterations 
in maternal positioning.
Pregnant woman undergoing non-
obstetric surgery are at an added risk 
for venous thromboembolism. Their risk 
for venous thromboembolism should be 
stratified and prophylaxis considered as 
per the Royal College of Obstetricians 
and Gynaecologists Green-Top Guidance. 
An anaesthetic assessment should include a 
thorough evaluation of the patient, including timely 
pre-operative resuscitation if necessary. Aspiration 
prophylaxis should be administered as part of the 
premedication, and an early strategy for airway EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 11No anaesthetic agents have yet been proven 
to be teratogenic in humans when used in 
clinical doses and when normal physiology 
is maintained (Kuczkowski, 2006).
Utero-placental blood flow is essential for 
oxygen delivery to the fetus and impairment 
to this can threaten fetal viability (Chestnut 
et al., 2009). When maternal blood pressure 
is maintained close to baseline and end-tidal 
CO 2 controlled between 3.7-4.3 kPa, no 
adverse outcomes were reported (Steinbrook 
et al., 1996; Bhavani-Shankar et al., 2000; 
Rajmohan et al., 2013).
ETCO 2 can be used as a surrogate marker 
for maternal arterial CO 2 monitoring, and 
invasive arterial monitoring is not routinely 
required in otherwise healthy and stable 
women, however the decision should be 
made on a case by case basis (Bhavani-
Shankar et al., 2000).
Uterine displacement can improve cardiac 
output and uteroplacental flow and should 
be used unless it adversely impacts on the 
ability to carry out the surgery in a timely 
and effective manner, when gestational age 
is greater than 18 weeks (Cluver et al., 2013).Establishment of pneumoperitoneum can 
be accompanied by marked changes in 
cardiovascular and respiratory physiology 
(Struthers and Cuschieri, 1998). Alterations 
in positioning and the creation of the 
pneumoperitoneum should be gradual, with 
vigilance and monitoring of the woman’s 
haemodynamic status.
Non-obstetric surgery during pregnancy 
is associated with an increased risk of 
venous thromboembolism (VTE). As 
a minimum, the RCOG classifies any 
surgical procedure as an intermediate risk, 
whereby pharmacological prophylaxis with 
low molecular weight heparin should be 
considered (RCOG, Guideline No 37a and 
37b, 2015). 
D
D
DEviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 1++EviDENCE
lEvEl 1++
management should be formulated. A rapid sequence 
induction should be considered to minimise the risk 
of pulmonary aspiration.
What are the fetal risks associated with anaesthesia 
and what strategies can be employed to increase the 
safety for the fetus, when pregnant women require 
non-obstetric laparoscopic surgery?
Modern anaesthetic agents, muscle 
relaxants and opioids are not thought to 
be teratogenic when used in therapeutic 
clinical doses and when the maternal 
physiology is maintained.
Clinicians should ensure the utero-
placental blood flow is maintained by 
avoiding maternal hypotension.
Maternal arterial CO 2 should be 
controlled, avoiding hypo- and 
hypercapnia, to maintain optimal utero-
placental flow and thus avoid fetal 
acidosis.
End-tidal CO 2 (ETCO 2) can be used as a 
surrogate marker for arterial CO 2.
No primary studies were identified that selectively 
investigated the fetal anaesthetic risks of 
laparoscopic surgery separately from the risks of the 
surgical intervention. There are no primary studies 
that distinguish the effects of anaesthetic factors 
from surgical factors with regard to fetal risks.
The risks of anaesthesia for the fetus of pregnant 
women undergoing non-obstetric laparoscopic 
surgery can broadly be divided into two. Firstly, 
the risks related to pharmacological agents used in anaesthesia and the risk of teratogenicity. Secondly, 
the risks related to a reduction in uteroplacental blood 
flow, secondary to changes in maternal mean arterial 
pressure, partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide 
(PaCO 2), oxygenation, aorto-caval compression and 
increased intra-abdominal pressure.
What type of anaesthesia should be used?
In most cases general anaesthesia should 
be employed.
There is limited evidence on the use of regional 
anaesthesia for laparoscopy in pregnancy. The 
benefits of general anaesthesia include securing the 
airway to reduce the risk of aspiration, good muscle 
relaxation to allow excellent surgical conditions 
and controlled ventilation to regulate maternal 
PaCO 2. In addition, general anaesthesia can avoid 
any discomfort that an awake woman may endure, 
related to either a high neuraxial sensory block 
level for an adequate pneumoperitoneum, or steep 
positioning.
 
7. Peri- and intra-operative laparoscopic 
management of non-obstetric emergencies
Who should be involved in the management 
of pregnant women requiring laparoscopy for 
abdominal non-obstetric conditions?12 Facts Views Vis ObgynWhen deciding on the route of surgery 
clinicians should be aware that recent 
small series have shown good maternal 
and fetal outcomes for laparoscopic 
appendicectomy, cholecystectomy and 
adnexal surgery up to 34 weeks gestation, 
which extends historical recommendation 
to limit laparoscopic surgery to the second 
trimester.
Any surgery in pregnancy is associated 
with maternal and fetal risks. Non-urgent 
surgery should be postponed until after 
pregnancy. 
According to previous American College 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) 
committee opinion, the second trimester is the 
best time to carry out non-urgent laparoscopic 
surgery, because preterm contractions and 
miscarriage are least likely (Committee 
Opinion No. 696, 2017). Furthermore, access 
to pelvic organs and the gallbladder is easier 
because the uterus is smaller than in the 
third trimester. However, there is emerging 
evidence showing good maternal and fetal 
outcomes outside the second trimester.
A series of third trimester cases managed 
laparoscopically included five cholecystectomies, 
four appendicectomies, and two adnexal 
operations (Upadhyay et al., 2007). One 
patient went into labour at 34 weeks following 
appendicectomy complicated by peritonitis. 
Another patient (29 weeks) was converted to 
open salpingo-oophorectomy for torsion after 
diagnostic laparoscopy due to operator preference 
but required emergency laparotomy and caesarean 
section due to bleeding from the ovarian pedicle. 
The two complications are not likely to be due to 
the laparoscopic approach.
Another observational study compared 117 
laparoscopic operations (adnexal torsion, 
persistent cysts, cholecystitis and appendicitis) 
in the first trimester (n=71, mean gestational 
age 7.7 ± 1.9 weeks) with laparoscopic 
surgeries in the second and third trimesters 
(n= 46, mean gestational age 18.1 ± 4.3 weeks, 
11 cases in third trimester, up to 34 weeks) 
(Weiner et al., 2015). No difference was found 
between the two groups regarding surgical 
complications and pregnancy outcomes. In 
both groups half of the deliveries were before 
37 weeks.A multi-disciplinary team should be in 
charge of the care of pregnant women 
requiring laparoscopy. Depending 
on the individual case this team 
may include gynaecologists, general 
surgeons, anaesthetists, obstetricians and 
neonatologists.
Laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy 
should be performed by advanced 
laparoscopic surgeons with appropriate 
training and competencies in order to 
reduce complications and operating 
times.
Pregnancy should not be a reason to delay 
urgent surgery.
If the expertise to undertake laparoscopic 
approach in pregnancy is lacking, then the 
open route is acceptable since maternal 
and fetal outcomes are good.
Both laparoscopic and open routes are 
acceptable, depending on circumstances, 
since maternal and fetal outcomes are 
equally acceptable. 
General surgeons with a large caseload (top 
quartile of participating surgeons in annual 
number of cholecystectomies) experienced 
fewer maternal (1% versus 14%, p<0.0001), 
fetal (4% versus 10%, p<0.0001) and surgical 
(10% versus 13%, p<0.05) complications 
than other surgeons. Their patients also had 
a shorter length of stay (4 versus 5 days, 
p<0.0001) in a retrospective cohort study of 
9714 predominantly laparoscopic surgeries 
(89% cholecystectomies) in pregnancy 
(p<0.0001) (Kuy et al., 2009).
The maternal benefits of laparoscopy 
(shorter operating time and hospital stay, 
minor complications) were not observed 
in cases of perforation of appendix or 
gallbladder (Cox et al., 2016). Timely 
surgical intervention is important in order 
avoid the risk of perforation and subsequent 
sepsis. Higher rates of perforation were 
observed when surgery was delayed for 
more than 24 hours after onset of symptoms 
(Tamir et al., 1990).
Maternal and fetal outcomes are satisfactory 
in both open and laparoscopic interventions 
(Aylin et al., 2016), therefore open surgery 
in experienced hands is preferable to delayed 
laparoscopic treatment.
DD
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-At what gestation should laparoscopic surgery in 
pregnancy be performed? EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 13surgery on ovarian cysts using a routine 
laparoscopic approach with less than 12 
mmHg pneumoperitoneum (Candiani et al., 
2012).
Intra-operative monitoring may be 
required only in selected cases and 
when emergency delivery of the fetus is 
being considered. According to ACOG 
the following items need to be present 
before considering fetal monitoring: 
fetal viability, technical feasibility for 
intraoperative electronic fetal monitoring, 
an obstetrician willing to intervene for 
fetal indications, maternal consent for 
Caesarean section (CS) (desirable) and 
feasibility to interrupt laparoscopic surgery 
for emergency CS (Committee Opinion 
No. 696, 2017). Intraoperative monitoring 
during laparoscopy can be achieved by 
trans-vaginal or trans-abdominal ultrasound 
scanning with a steep left tilt to overcome 
the pneumoperitoneum.
If there is a risk of preterm delivery of a viable 
fetus, antenatal corticosteroids between 
24±0 and 35±6 weeks and magnesium for 
fetal neuro protection should be used up 
to 33±6 in accordance with existing NICE 
guidance (NICE, 2015). Urgent surgery 
should not be delayed for administrating 
corticosteroids.
A systematic review showed no difference 
in the preterm delivery rate between women 
who received prophylactic tocolysis and 
those who did not (Walsh et al., 2008).
Laparoscopic surgery is generally not 
considered a sensitising event and therefore 
routine administration of prophylactic anti D 
is not required (Qureshi et al., 2014).Laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy 
should be carried out in settings where 
adequate time, laparoscopic expertise and 
monitoring facilities are available.
After the age of fetal viability pregnant 
women undergoing laparoscopic surgery 
should be treated in a unit with adequate 
obstetric and neonatal facilities in case 
the immediate delivery of the baby is 
indicated.
D
A
A
B
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+Where should laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy be 
performed?
The studies which informed this guideline originated 
mainly from tertiary care units in developed 
countries and so the recommendations cannot be 
extrapolated to all settings. 
What interventions are needed when planning 
laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy?
Fetal heart Doppler ultrasound 
monitoring may be done before and after 
surgery to confirm fetal wellbeing and 
reassure the mother. There is no need for 
routine intraoperative monitoring.
If there is a risk of pre-term delivery 
antenatal corticosteroids for fetal lung 
maturation and magnesium sulphate 
for fetal neuro-protection should be 
administered dependent upon the 
gestation of the fetus.
Anti-D administration is not deemed 
necessary according to guidelines since 
laparoscopic surgery is not included in 
the list of potentially sensitising events.
Routine tocolysis for women undergoing 
laparoscopic or open surgery in 
pregnancy is not recommended because it 
has not been shown to improve outcomes.
Caution needs to be exercised in steroid 
administration in maternal sepsis.
In the past intraoperative fetal heart 
monitoring, especially with open surgery, 
was seen as mandatory. Newer large case 
series have shown good outcomes without 
routine intra-operative fetal heart monitoring 
during laparoscopy (Kirshtein et al., 2009; 
Chung et al., 2013).
A small quasi-experimental study showed 
no Doppler anomalies of the fetal heart or 
the maternal uterine arteries (measured 
trans-vaginally) during laparoscopic 8. Intraoperative considerations
The following section discusses intraoperative 
issues relating to laparoscopy in pregnancy. Specific 
conditions (appendectomy, gallbladder disease and 
adnexal surgery) will be discussed in section 9. 
Clinicians would be aware that 
intrauterine manipulation is 
contraindicated in pregnancy. Hence 
collaboration with the anaesthetic team 
(positioning, tilting) and experienced 
operating assistance is required.
In order to improve surgical access without an 
intrauterine manipulator, alternative strategies 14 Facts Views Vis ObgynIn order to avoid uterine perforation 
and restricting views from having the 
camera port too close to the uterus, it is 
recommended to adjust the port location 
according to the fundus (Jeong et al., 2011). 
Therefore, the fundus should be palpated 
before insufflation. In very obese women 
transabdominal ultrasound and obstetric 
guidance may be required. Upadhyay et al. 
(2007) reported 11 laparoscopies between 
26-28 weeks’ gestation (appendicectomy, 
cholecystectomy and adnexal surgery) using 
1-2 cm below the costal margin on the left 
or right mid-clavicular line using Veress’ 
insufflation in 10 cases and Hasson’s in one 
case with no access-related complications.include digital vaginal manipulation, planning the 
placement of surgical ports according to pathology 
and uterine size, tilting of the surgical table and 
consideration of thirty-degree laparoscope. Bearing 
in mind that uterine surface in pregnancy is more 
friable and can bleed more easily on contact even 
with blunt instruments, a ‘no touch’ approach should 
be adopted.
8.1 Ports
How should the primary and secondary ports be 
placed?
For generic entry techniques refer to the RCOG 
recommendations preventing entry-related 
gynaecological laparoscopic injuries for non-
pregnant women (Green-top Guideline No 49, 2008). 
This section will address the issues specifically 
relevant to laparoscopy in pregnancy.
Where should the primary port be placed in 
pregnancy?
The location of the primary port will 
depend on the level of the uterine fundus.
The uterine size should be determined by 
palpation or ultrasound.
In the absence of RCTs clinicians should 
choose their primary port location including 
umbilical, supra-umbilical / sub-xiphoid 
and Palmers’ point (left upper quadrant 
in the mid- clavicular line) according to 
uterine size, location of pathology and 
operator experience.
It has been suggested that in the late 
second and the third trimesters primary 
port sites could include 1-2cm below 
costal margin in the left (Palmers’ point) 
or right mid-clavicular line or 3-6 cm 
above the umbilicus in the midline.
Insertion of an orogastric tube for gastric 
decompression maybe helpful when 
Palmer’s point is used for access.
No study was identified that randomised 
for location of the primary port, thus no 
recommendations can be made for one location 
over another.
Researchers describe a variety of different 
locations for primary ports depending on 
gestational age (Lyass et al, 2001; Lenglet et al., 
2006; Machado et al., 2009; Bani Hani, 2007; 
Kirshtein et al., 2009; Balthazar et al., 2011; 
Jeong et al., 2011; Wilasrusmee et al., 2012; Koo 
et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2014; 
Nasioudis et al., 2016; Sedaghat et al., 2017).DD
D
D
D
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3EviDENCE
lEvEl 3EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3Should the Veress or Hasson technique be used for 
primary port placement?
The Hasson technique has been reported 
inside or above the umbilicus in the 
midline. 
With either approach clinicians should be 
mindful of the possibility of uterine injury.
The benefits of the Hasson technique may 
include reducing the risk of uterine trauma 
and spillage of contents of ovarian cysts.
Clinicians should be aware that in 
experienced hands direct (gasless) entry 
may be an alternative, but there is 
insufficient information in late pregnancy 
to suggest this as a routine approach.
Although there are no studies randomised 
for Hasson’s and Veress’ entry techniques, 
a number of authors have recorded case 
series using these approaches throughout all 
gestations for cholecystectomy (Bani Hani, 
2007), appendicectomy (Lyass et al., 2001), 
and adnexal surgery without entry-related 
complications (Balthazar et al., 2011). The 
Hasson technique has been reported inside 
or above the umbilicus in the midline. 
Chen et al. (2014) reported direct entry 
in 33 laparoscopies for ovarian cysts in 
second trimester (mean gestation 16.8) 
without entry-related complications. The 
direct entry technique was described as 
placing an optical trocar under visual 
control in the umbilicus, whilst elevating 
the umbilicus with a towel forceps. Park 
et al. (2010) described direct entry via 
Palmer’s point (left upper quadrant in 
the mid-clavicular line) in n=8 cases of EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 15women (RCOG, Green-top Guideline No 
49, 2008). Since these pressures are only 
maintained for a short duration until the 
primary port is placed, they are unlikely to 
harm the fetus.
No adverse changes to feto-maternal 
perfusion or adverse pregnancy events 
were recorded at less than 12 mmHg 
pneumoperitoneum in a quasi- experimental 
setting using intraoperative Doppler studies 
(Candiani et al., 2012). This was backed 
up by numerous case reports showing no 
adverse effects on the fetus at operating 
pressures at or below 12 mmHg (Lyass et 
al., 2001; Mathevet et al., 2003; Yuen et al., 
2004; Lenglet et al., 2006; Kirshtein et al., 
2009; Jeong et al., 2011; Koo et al., 2012; 
Peng et al., 2013; Chung et al., 2013; Chen 
et al., 2014; Minig et al., 2016).
 8.3 Choice of laparoscopepregnancy appendicectomies (2 in first 
trimester, 5 in second trimester, one in third 
trimester) using a 5 mm trocar. No maternal 
of fetal complications were observed. The 
incidence of port entry complications is very 
low, and the studies above are too small to 
detect entry related complications.
Where should secondary ports be placed?
Secondary port placement will be dictated 
by uterine size, pathology and operative 
approach.
Pre-surgical planning is paramount 
due to the challenges of accessing the 
pathology, given the limited degrees of 
freedom in laparoscopic surgery and the 
added obstacle of the size of the pregnant 
uterus. Ipsilateral port placement may 
circumvent this obstacle.
A systematic search returned no randomised 
control trials, but authors of case series of 
appendicectomy (Kirshtein et al., 2009; 
Jeong et al., 2011; Miloudi et al., 2012), 
and cholecystectomy in pregnancy stated 
that secondary port placement is dictated by 
uterine size and pathology (Sungler et al., 
2014).
Secondary port placement should be 
considered on the same side (ipsilateral port 
placement) as the identified pathology as 
this technique prevents the surgeon from 
having to instrument across the pregnant 
uterus.
8.2 Pneumoperitoneum in pregnancyD
D
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4EviDENCE
lEvEl 4EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
What insufflation pressures and operative 
pressures should be used in laparoscopic surgery 
in pregnancy?
An intraabdominal pressure of 20-25 
mmHg should be used for gas insufflation 
before inserting the primary trocar .
Clinicians should be aware that current 
evidence supports operating pressures of 
12 mmHg.
Current recommendations on operating 
pressures in pregnancy are in keeping with 
recommendations for the non-pregnant state. 
There are no studies on insufflation pressure 
during port insertions in pregnancy. The 
recommendation for an insufflation pressure 
of 20-25 mmHg is extrapolated from the 
RCOG recommendation in non-pregnant What diameter laparoscope is preferred for 
laparoscopic procedures during pregnancy?
Both 5 and 10 mm diameter laparoscopes 
have been used in pregnancy and 
choice of diameter depends upon the 
surgical requirements and availability of 
equipment.
The benefits of using a 10 mm diameter 
laparoscope include better quality of image 
and the possibility of removing a larger 
specimen through the camera port. The 
benefits of a smaller 5 mm laparoscope 
include the need for smaller incisions with 
better cosmesis and the ability to insert them 
through secondary ports to gain different 
views. Although numerous authors describe 
their use of 5 and 10 mm laparoscope, no 
data specifically comparing laparoscope 
diameter during pregnancy were identified.
What degree of laparoscope is preferred for 
laparoscopic procedures during pregnancy?
The choice of degree of laparoscope 
depends upon the preference of the 
surgeon and the surgical situation. Skilful 
use of a 30-degree laparoscope might 
improve the visual field in the presence of 
a large uterus. 
There are no studies evaluating the optimal 
degree of laparoscope that should be 
used in pregnancy. Traditionally, many 16 Facts Views Vis ObgynUltrasound, bipolar and monopolar 
energy sources are safe to use during 
laparoscopy in pregnancy.
The operating surgeon should choose 
energy modality based on his or her 
own preference. The surgeon should 
be mindful of the principles of safe 
electrosurgery in laparoscopy.gynaecologists use 0 degree and general 
surgeons more often use 30 degree 
laparoscopes. However, extrapolating from 
non-pregnant laparoscopic surgery on large 
fibroid uteri, a 30 degree scope can improve 
visibility in the pelvis in trained hands.EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
What retrieval technique should be used to remove 
surgical specimens during laparoscopic surgery in 
pregnancy?
The choice of extraction method for 
surgical specimens during laparoscopic 
surgery in pregnancy should be in 
accordance with the preference of the 
operating surgeon.
Infected and potentially dangerous 
specimens should be contained in a tissue 
bag. 
D
Consideration should be given to the use of a tissue 
bag to avoid peritoneal spill of cystic contents, 
bearing in mind the likely preoperative diagnosis. For 
example, care should be taken not to spill contents 
of dermoid cysts to avoid chemical peritonitis and 
spillage of potentially malignant cysts as clinical 
assessment cannot absolutely preclude malignancy 
(RCOG, Green-top Guideline No 62, 2011).
A systematic search identified 10 case series 
that mention techniques of tissue removal at 
laparoscopy during pregnancy between 5-34 
weeks’ gestation (Lee et al., 2004; RCOG, 
Green-top Guideline No 49, 2008; Kirshtein et 
al., 2009; Machado and Machado, 2009; Koo 
et al., 2011a; Chung et al.,2013; Scheib et al., 
2013; Chen et al., 2014; Minig et al., 2016).
The indications for surgery included 
appendicectomy, cholecystectomy and 
adnexal surgery. The devices used included 
endobag, endocatch, endopouch and sterile 
condoms.EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
Bearing in mind the likely diagnosis of the specimen, 
consideration should be given to carrying out the 
dissection within the bag as well as using it for 
removal.
No comparative data to guide preferred techniques 
for tissue extraction specimen were identified. There 
was no data on power morcellation, which should be 
discouraged in pregnancy due to the risk of uterine 
trauma.
What energy modalities should be used during 
laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy?D
No papers were available that investigated energy 
use during laparoscopic procedures in pregnant 
women as their main research question. There is no 
evidence that electrosurgery in a pregnant woman 
is harmful to the fetus or embryo. When monopolar 
energy is used it is recommended that the return 
plate should not be placed such that the uterus is 
between the electrode and the plate.
Amniotic fluid, which is electrolyte rich, protects 
the fetus from concentration of current and there 
is no neuromuscular stimulation at the output 
frequency of electrosurgical generators. Whilst 
there is a discrepancy between advice from different 
manufacturers, published literature does not suggest 
increased risk of energy related complications with 
any type of energy devices including monopolar 
during pregnancy.
Nine case series’ reported on the use of 
energy modalities but this was not the main 
topic under investigation (Mathevet et al., 
2003; Kirshtein et al., 2009; Park et al., 
2010; Lee et al., 2010; Jeong et al., 2011; 
Chung et al., 2013; Peng et al., 2013; Chen 
et al., 2014; Takeda et al., 2014). The range 
of energy sources, which were used without 
complications, include ultrasonic, bipolar, 
and monopolar energy. Monopolar energy 
was reported as being used by Lee et al. 
in 2010. Lee et al. (2004) used monopolar 
scissors during 29 ovarian cystectomies 
between 6-16 weeks’ gestation without 
any operative complications. Mathevet et 
al. (2003) also used monopolar scissors in 
addition to bipolar diathermy in 48 pregnant 
women undergoing laparoscopic adnexal 
surgery (17 in first trimester, 27 in second 
and 4 in the third trimester). There were no 
intraoperative complications but one woman 
suffered a miscarriage at 17 weeks three 
days after surgery, which was not ascribed 
to the operating technique after review of 
the operative video. The use of Harmonic 
scalpel® reported in 2 case series (Chung 
et al., 2013; Park et al., 2010). Chung 
et al. (2013) carried out 22 laparoscopic 
appendicectomies (6 in first, 13 in second EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3 EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 178.6 Post-operative care
What maternal care and fetal monitoring should be 
offered post-operatively?
The literature search did not return any studies that 
investigated fetal monitoring after surgery. Fetal 
heart Doppler ultrasound monitoring may be done 
after surgery to confirm fetal wellbeing and reassure 
the mother.and 3 in third trimester). No intra-operative 
complications occurred. Park et al. (2010) 
reported the use of Harmonic scalpel® in 8 
cases of appendicectomy during pregnancy 
(2 in first trimester, 5 in second trimester, 
one in third trimester) with no operative 
complications.EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
Given the restricted access and visibility in 
laparoscopy in pregnancy the surgeon needs to 
respect electrosurgical principles to avoid trauma. 
General safety rules for monopolar diathermy apply 
(avoiding indirect thermal damage, pedicle effect, 
avoid coupling, checking for faulty insulation).
8.4 Closure Techniques
What wound closure techniques are recommended 
in pregnancy?
The risk of hernia formation is 1-2% in 
incisions greater than 10 mm, therefore 
the fascia should be closed.
No data were identified for port closure after 
laparoscopy in pregnancy. In non-pregnant 
women ports greater than 10 mm should 
be closed by formal sheath closure with a 
port closure system, such as Endoclose® 
(with pneumoperitoneum maintained) or 
by using a J-needle, unless the Hasson 
entry technique has been used, in which 
case previously placed stay sutures are tied 
together. The risk of postoperative hernia 
formation is greater at the lateral port sites, 
especially taking into account the impact 
of the enlarging uterus on the abdominal 
wall stretch, which may further increase the 
risk of herniation. The skin can be closed 
by a variety of techniques e.g. subcuticular 
polyglactin and skin glue. 
8.5 Use of drainsD
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
EviDENCE
lEvEl 4
Should an abdominal drain be inserted peri-
operatively on completion of laparoscopic 
procedures in pregnancy?
The operating surgeon should decide 
whether it is necessary to use a drain 
based on their preference and assessment 
of the individual case.
Drain placement has been only described 
in the context of laparoscopic appendicitis 
in pregnancy, not for cholecystectomy or 
adnexal surgery. Comparative data between 
routine placement (Park et al., 2010; Chung 
et al., 2013), and selective placement (Jeong 
et al., 2011), is lacking. EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3Antibiotics should be used if there is an 
infective process. The choice of antibiotic 
should be based upon local anti-microbial 
guidance and drug safety in pregnancy.
In the case of elective surgery for adnexal 
masses, antibiotics would not be routinely 
required.
Good analgesia, adequate rehydration 
to maintain euvolaemia and measures 
to prevent postoperative nausea and 
vomiting should be integrated into 
maternal postoperative care.
In a prospective case series of adnexal cysts 
operated on electively in the first trimester in 
12 women no routine antibiotics were given 
and there were no complications including 
infections (Minig et al., 2016). 
D
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
9. Management of the commonest laparoscopically 
treatable abdominal emergencies in pregnancy
9.1 Appendicitis
Is there a role for expectant management of 
appendicitis in pregnancy?
In suspected appendicitis in pregnancy 
timely surgical intervention is preferable 
as delay may be associated with adverse 
maternal and fetal outcomes.
Two large retrospective studies were 
identified comparing conservative to 
operative approach for suspected appendicitis 
in pregnancy. Abbasi et al. (2014) reported 
a higher rate of complications in women 
who had antibiotics only compared to open 
or laparoscopic appendicectomy. This study 
also showed higher rates of septic shock 
(OR=6.3, CI=1.9-20.8), peritonitis (OR= 
1.6, CI=1.3-2.1) and increase in venous 
thromboembolic disease (OR=2.5, CI=0.9-
7.4), when comparing pregnant women 
who underwent treatment with antibiotics 
(n=412) with those who underwent open 
(n=3421) or laparoscopic surgery (n=3279). C
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+D18 Facts Views Vis Obgynexperienced laparoscopists should carry 
out these procedures and outcomes 
should be monitored.
A systematic review of 11 non-randomised 
comparative studies of open (n=2816) and 
laparoscopic (n=599) cases for suspected 
appendicitis in pregnancy was identified 
(Wilasrusmee et al., 2012). Most cases were 
from the second trimester, but cases from 
all trimesters were included. There was no 
data on complexity of cases in either group. 
Fetal loss was significantly increased in the 
laparoscopy group (RR=1.91, CI=1.31-2.77).
The adverse findings reported by Wilasrusmee 
et al. (2012) were influenced by a single 
study by McGory et al. (2007) without which 
there would be no increase in fetal loss 
associated with laparoscopy. McGory et al. 
(2007) studied retrospective administrative 
hospital records of pregnant (n=3133) 
and non-pregnant women (n=91656) who 
underwent open (n=73269) or laparoscopic 
appendicectomy (n= 24214) and reported a 
higher rate of fetal loss compared with open 
appendicectomy (OR=2.31, CI=1.51-3.55).
A small retrospective study was 
published after the systematic review by 
Wilasrusmee et al. (2012). Laustsen et al. 
(2016) compared 19 laparoscopic with 
25 open appendicetomies and reported no 
miscarriages, no differences in Apgar score, 
weight, length and gestational age birth and 
improved maternal outcomes.
A large retrospective UK study on hospital 
data included 3061 appendicectomies 
(Aylin et al., 2016; Balinskaite et al., 
2017). Laparoscopic appendicectomies 
were associated with an increased risk 
of spontaneous miscarriage (RR=2.36, 
CI=1.71-4.41), but very few (1.8%) occurred 
during immediately after laparoscopic 
appendicectomy. No differences were 
observed in risk of in preterm delivery <37/40, 
maternal death, long inpatient stay and low 
birth weight <2500 g. They reported that in 
the first trimester laparoscopic procedures 
were nearly 5 times more common than open 
ones. Conversely, in the third trimester open 
procedures were 2.5 times more common 
than laparoscopic ones.
Both studies have a large risk of a systematic 
distortion in measuring the true frequency 
of miscarriage due to laparoscopy because Cheng et al. (2015) investigated outcomes 
in pregnant women with appendicitis and 
antibiotic conservative treatment (n=78), 
open (n=653) and laparoscopic (n=128) 
surgery and compared outcomes with 
pregnant women without appendicitis 
(n=3436) from a national database. Pregnant 
women who had conservative treatment 
for appendicitis had a higher incidence of 
preterm labour (OR=2.47, CI=1.17-5.24) 
and pregnancy loss (OR=31.37, CI=13.12-
75.01) than pregnant women who did not 
have appendicitis. Compared to pregnant 
women without appendicitis, women with 
open appendicectomy had significantly 
increased rates of preterm labour (OR=2.76, 
CI=2.06-3.70), pregnancy loss (OR=14.34, 
CI=7.70-26.71) and caesarean delivery 
(OR=1.24, CI=1.05-1.48). In contrast, 
women who underwent laparoscopic 
surgery had no statistically increased rates of 
preterm labour (OR=1.26, CI=0.57- 2.73), or 
caesarean delivery (OR=1.31, CI=0.91-1.88) 
compared to women without appendicitis. 
The risk of miscarriage was increased in all 
women who had appendicitis in pregnancy 
compared to pregnant women without 
appendicitis with conservative treatment 
11.5% (OR=31.37, CI=13.12-75.01), open 
appendicectomy 5.7% (OR=14.34, CI=7.70-
26.71), laparoscopic appendicectomy 5.5% 
(OR=13.88, CI=5.50-35.04). There was no 
direct comparison between the antibiotic and 
the surgical groups. All three outcomes were 
similar when the two surgical approaches 
were compared.
Tamir et al. (1990) reported that a 24-
hour delay in operating (laparotomy) in 
suspected appendicitis in pregnant women 
led to a 66% increase in perforation. 
Retrospectively, laparotomy occurred 
within 24 hours of symptom onset in 19/54 
(35%) cases. Perforation was seen in 23/54 
(42%) women, all of whom had symptoms 
exceeding 24h (p<0.0005).EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
Should the laparoscopic approach to appendicectomy 
be preferred over laparotomy in pregnancy?
Whilst maternal outcomes are 
good, controversy exists regarding 
the association of laparoscopic 
appendicectomy and miscarriage. 
Further research is needed to distinguish 
between association and causality. In view 
of this, it is not possible to recommend 
one approach over the other and only CEviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++ EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 19and laparoscopic) and showed no significant 
difference in the incidence of preterm 
delivery (3.5% versus. 6.0%, p=0.33) or 
fetal mortality (2.2% versus 1.2%, p=0.57) 
(Caspi et al., 2000). There was no case of 
maternal or fetal mortality in 20 reports 
of laparoscopic cholecystectomy and 9 
reports of ERCP. In 12 reports of gallstone 
pancreatitis, fetal mortality was 6/75 versus 
1/38 (p=0.28) in conservative and surgical 
groups respectively.of the over-representation of first trimester 
pregnancies in the laparoscopy group.
Hence the risk of spontaneous miscarriage 
associated with appendicectomy during 
pregnancy should be interpreted with caution.EviDENCE
lEvEl 2+
9.2 Gallbladder disease (Symptomatic gallstones 
and acute cholecystitis) 
Is there a role for expectant management of 
cholecystitis in pregnancy?
A conservative approach to gallbladder 
disease (symptomatic gallstones and acute 
cholecystitis) in pregnancy is associated 
with higher maternal morbidity than 
surgery.
Clinicians should be vigilant about 
complications of gallbladder disease such 
as gallstone pancreatitis, since this may 
be associated with a high risk of fetal 
mortality.
In pregnant women with biliary colic, 
supportive care will lead to resolution of 
symptoms in most cases. Complicated 
gallstone disease requires a more proactive 
approach.
The search identified one systematic 
review of moderate quality (Date et al., 
2008), and a retrospective case series 
(Othman et al., 2012), that compared 
conservative, endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography) and laparoscopic 
management. 112 pregnant women (first 
29, second 43 and third trimester 40) were 
analysed retrospectively according to their 
approach to treatment. In the first and third 
trimester there were more conservative 
than active (laparoscopic and ERCP) 
treatments, but outcomes were not reported 
by gestation. Conservative treatment was 
associated with more recurrent biliary 
symptoms (30/50 versus 4/31, p=0.0002) 
mean visits to the emergency department 
(1.7 versus 1.1, p=0.0006) and mean days 
spent in hospital (1.5 versus 1.2, p=0.034) 
and caesarean section delivery (15/43 versus 
2/25, p=0.04), but the duration of hospital 
stay (5 days versus 6.5 days, p=0.07) and the 
mean fetal birth weight (2752 g versus 2999 
g, p=0.1) were not significantly different.
Date et al. (2008) systematically reviewed 
six case series, comparing conservative with 
surgical management of cholecystitis (open D
D
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
Should the laparoscopic approach to 
cholecystectomy be preferred over laparotomy in 
pregnancy?
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy appears 
to be associated with better composite 
maternal and fetal outcomes than open 
approach, fewer surgical complications 
and shorter hospital stay.
The search identified a systematic 
review comparing laparoscopic and open 
cholecystectomy in pregnancy (Sedaghat 
et al., 2017). Sedaghat et al. (2017) 
reviewed eleven studies including 10632 
pregnant women with gallbladder disease 
or symptomatic gallstones who underwent 
open or laparoscopic cholecystectomy. All 
studies were retrospective, comparative and 
non-randomised. Seven studies reported the 
patients’ trimester at the time of surgery 
(161 cases). The first and second trimester 
predominated (first trimester 44/161, 
second trimester 102/161, third trimester 
15/161) but outcomes were not stratified 
by trimester. One maternal death was 
reported in connection with laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy at 20 weeks for chronic 
cholecystitis 2 weeks postoperatively due 
to intra-abdominal haemorrhage from a 
non- identified source. Composite fetal 
complications (OR=0.42, CI=0.28-0.63, 
p<0.001), composite maternal complications 
(OR=0.42, CI=0.33-0.53, p<0.001), 
and composite surgical complications 
(OR=0.45, CI=0.25-0.82, p<0.01) were all 
less frequent in the laparoscopy group. There 
was no significant difference in fetal mortality, 
(OR=0.39, CI=0.07-2.19, p=0.29), or preterm 
delivery before 27/40 (OR=1.35, CI=0.41-5.14, 
p=0.59) between the open and laparoscopic 
group. Operation time was not significantly 
different in four studies that reported it (86.2 
min versus 85.9 min, p=0.98). Length of 
hospital stay was reported in 5/11 studies and C
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++20 Facts Views Vis Obgynwas required. Expectant management of 
ovarian cysts in pregnancy appeared to 
be safe with a low intervention rate of 
4.2% (one evacuation of retained products 
of conception (ERPC) and laparoscopic 
cystectomy, three cystectomies at term 
section, two laparotomies in second 
trimester, aspiration in second trimester), 3% 
underwent torsion but only 0.13% of women 
required emergency surgery (laparotomy in 
second trimester, cystectomy at term section 
and second trimester cyst aspiration).
Zanetta et al. (2003) followed up 72 women 
with ovarian cysts in pregnancy greater 
than 3cm (after excluding those who were 
scanned in acute pain and required emergent 
surgery for torsions at presentation). Only 
two women required intervention (one had a 
cystectomy at caesarean section at 37 weeks 
for torsion, and one trans-cutaneous cyst 
aspiration for pain). All other pregnancies 
carried on to term. Two women required 
a caesarean section because cysts were 
obstructing labour. A high proportion of 
cyst resolution and decrease in size >50% 
was observed (27/39 simple cysts, 7/9 
endometrioma, no dermoids, 8/15 cysts with 
borderline appearance).
Caspi et al. (2000) followed up 68 
pregnancies with ultrasound-diagnosed 
dermoid cysts smaller than 6 cm, all treated 
conservatively. Cysts did not increase in size 
and no cyst accidents were observed. There 
were no fetal or maternal complications 
attributable to the presence of dermoid cysts 
in this group.
Katz et al. (2010) compared outcomes in 
pregnant women with (n=93) and without 
ovarian cysts (n=212017). Twenty-two 
women were diagnosed before or during 
pregnancy by ultrasound and 71 were 
diagnosed at CS. Among women with 
ovarian cysts three cases of ovarian torsion 
and one of haemorrhage were diagnosed. In 
the ovarian cyst group 15 women needed 
hospitalisation due to abdominal pain, but 
no data is provided for the control group. 
Fetal outcomes (rate of preterm delivery, 
low birth weight, APGAR<5 and perinatal 
mortality) did not differ statistically.
Majeed et al. (2011) reported 16 women 
diagnosed with persistent ovarian cysts 
and followed them up conservatively with was significantly shorter in the laparoscopic 
group (mean 3.2 versus 6.0 days p=0.02).EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++
9.3 Ovarian cysts and masses
Should surgery for ovarian cysts be preferred over 
the conservative approach in pregnancy?
Women with asymptomatic simple cysts may 
be managed conservatively in pregnancy 
provided that symptoms are absent or 
acceptable to the woman.
Women with large, non-torted 
symptomatic cysts who wish to avoid 
surgery may be offered aspiration under 
ultrasound guidance during pregnancy, 
with definitive cystectomy after delivery 
if required.
The risk of torsion of ovarian cysts 
requiring emergency surgery in 
pregnancy is low and, in most cases, 
surgery may be delayed until the woman 
becomes symptomatic, with good fetal 
outcomes.
A systematic search identified a retrospective 
series that observed the rate of torsion and 
malignancy by adnexal mass size in 470 
women who underwent surgery for adnexal 
masses during all trimesters of pregnancy 
between 2002-2009 (Koo et al., 2011b). 
Fifty-five women (11.7%) had torsion and 
28 women (31.8%) had emergency surgery 
for this indication. Torsion was more likely 
to occur when cysts were between 6-10cm 
than if they were smaller or larger than that 
(OR=2.68, CI=1.35-5.40, p<0.006). More 
than half of the torsions occurred in the first 
trimester and corpus luteum was the most 
common cyst type. Risk of torsion was not 
directly proportional to the cyst size.
A systematic search identified four 
retrospective and two prospective case series 
that evaluated conservative management 
of ovarian cysts in pregnancy (Condous 
et al., 2003). No evidence was found that 
recommended conservative treatment when 
an acute cyst accident was suspected.
Condous et al. (2004) followed up one 
hundred and sixty-one women with 166 
ovarian cysts diagnosed by first trimester 
ultrasound (43% asymptomatic, 56.3% 
had pain or vaginal bleeding) throughout 
pregnancy with serial scans every 4-6 weeks 
until either the cyst resolved or intervention D
D
D
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3 EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 21with open approach for persistent or torted 
ovarian cysts were identified (Koo et al., 
2012). These studies confirmed that maternal 
outcomes were better and fetal outcomes 
were similar in the laparoscopic compared 
to the laparotomy group. However, the case 
number of first and third trimester pregnancies 
and large cysts (>6 cm) were small. The fact 
that most reports were retrospective and from 
specialist centres could lead to the risk of 
reporting bias, with better outcomes for the 
reported techniques than could be expected 
in non-specialist settings.
Cyst aspiration with or without 
concurrent cystectomy may be a safe 
alternative.
Chung et al. (2001) reported a technique 
of extra-corporeal cystectomy or 
oophorectomy after aspiration of the cyst, in 
four obese second trimester women. Dohi et 
al. (2012) reports two cases of ultrasound-
guided culdotomy for cysts incarcerated in 
the pouch of Douglas after needle aspiration 
via scan probe. There were no operative 
complications and both women had vaginal 
deliveries. Duic et al. (2002) describes a 
technique of trans-vaginal ultrasound guided 
cyst aspiration in 1st and of percutaneous 
ultrasound guided cyst aspiration in second 
trimester with good outcomes. Hutt et al. 
(2000) also reports aspiration of two cases 
of large ovarian cysts, one twice after 
re-accumulation with normal pregnancy 
outcome.
Kitade et al. (2008) reports a 2 puncture 
extra-corporeal method of cyst aspiration 
including a specialised retractor and balloon 
to bring the cyst to a 3 cm suprapubic 
incision in a case series of n=18.ultrasound scan (frequency not stated) until 
they became symptomatic. Four women had 
emergency laparotomy due to ovarian cyst 
torsion and rupture, two women had elective 
laparotomy in second trimester due to large 
cyst size (>20 cm) and ten women had a 
laparotomy in the post- partum period. Fetal 
outcomes included one miscarriage and all 
remaining women had a term delivery.EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
EviDENCE
lEvEl 3
Should the laparoscopic approach to ovarian cysts 
be preferred over the open approach in pregnancy?
When surgery is indicated, laparoscopic 
cystectomy is associated with better 
maternal outcomes than laparotomy in 
the second trimester, with similarly good 
fetal outcomes.
Good maternal and fetal outcomes have 
also been reported for laparoscopic 
surgery for the first and third trimester, 
however the number of reported cases is 
small. More research is needed to prove 
the superiority of one approach over the 
other outside the second trimester. In the 
interim, choice of approach should be 
decided based on local circumstances and 
expertise.
A Cochrane database review from 2013 did 
not identify any RCTs (Bunyavejchevin et 
al., 2013). A newer systematic review (Liu et 
al., 2017) of one RCT (Chen et al., 2014), and 
three non-randomised comparative studies 
investigated laparoscopic and open surgery 
for suspected adnexal masses in the second 
trimester in 240 women. Laparoscopic 
surgery was associated with a reduced risk 
of post-operative complications (RR=0.20, 
CI=0.06–0.72); there was no difference 
in the risk of post-operative miscarriage 
(p=0.26). Laparoscopy was associated 
with lower estimated intra-operative blood 
loss, lower post-operative pain scores, 
and a shorter hospitalisation, readmission 
and immobilisation. Laparoscopy was 
associated with a longer operation duration 
compared with laparotomy (mean difference 
13.7 min, CI=12.58–14.82, p<0.001). In 
one of the reviewed studies significantly 
fewer adhesions at the time of caesarean 
section were observed in women who had 
undergone laparoscopy.
In addition, three further retrospective studies 
(Carter et al., 2004, Koo et al., 2012 and 
Martynov et al. 2014) comparing laparoscopic B
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2++
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
EviDENCE
lEvEl 2-
D
10. Safety of imaging in pregnancy
Guidance on ionising radiation in pregnancy can be 
found in Health Protections Agency & Royal College 
of Radiologists & College of Radiographers’ 
guidance (RCR, 2009). Recommendations on 
contrast media in pregnancy can be found in 
the European Society of Urogenital Radiology 
guidelines (Webb et al., 2005). For the conditions 
included in this guideline Magnet Resonance 
Imaging (MRI) with gadolinium is usually not 
required, since there are alternative modalities, 
such as MRI without gadolinium and ultrasound. 
Indications for MRI with gadolinium include the 22 Facts Views Vis Obgynlaparoscopic surgery in pregnancy. Anesthesiology. 
2000;93(2):370-3.
Borgfeldt C, Andolf E. Transvaginal sonographic ovarian 
findings in a random sample of women 25-40 years old. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 1999;13(5):345-50.
Bunyavejchevin S, Phupong V. Laparoscopic surgery for 
presumed benign ovarian tumor during pregnancy. 
The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 
2013;(1):Cd005459.
Candiani M, Maddalena S, Barbieri M et al. Adnexal masses 
in pregnancy: fetomaternal blood flow indices during 
laparoscopic surgery. J Minimally Invasive Gynecol. 
2012;19(4):443-7.
Carter JF, Soper DE. Operative laparoscopy in pregnancy. 
JSLS. 2004;8(1):57–60. 
Caspi B, Levi R, Appelman Z et al. Conservative management 
of ovarian cystic teratoma during pregnancy and labor. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 2000;182(3):503-5.
Chen L, Ding J, Hua K. Comparative analysis of laparoscopy 
versus laparotomy in the management of ovarian cyst during 
pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2014;40(3):763-9.
Cheng HT, Wang YC, Lo HC et al. Laparoscopic appendectomy 
versus open appendectomy in pregnancy: a population- 
based analysis of maternal outcome. Surg Endosc. 
2015;29(6):1394-9.
Chestnut DH WC, Tsen LC, Ngan Kee WD et al. Obstetric 
anesthesia: principles and practice. 4th ed. ed. London: 
Elsevier Mosby; 2009.
Chung JC, Cho GS, Shin EJ et al. Clinical outcomes compared 
between laparoscopic and open appendectomy in pregnant 
women. Can J Surg. 2013;56(5):341-6.
Chung MK, Chung RP. Laparoscopic extracorporeal 
oophorectomy and ovarian cystectomy in second trimester 
pregnant obese patients. JSLS. 2001;5(3):273-7.
Cluver C, Novikova N, Hofmeyr GJ et al. Maternal position 
during caesarean section for preventing maternal and 
neonatal complications. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013; 
28;(3):CD007623.
Committee Opinion No. 696. American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Nonobstetric surgery 
during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2017;129(777-8).
Condous G, Okaro E, Bourne T. The Conservative 
Management of Early Pregnancy Complications: a 
Review of the Literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 
2003 Oct;22(4):420-30.
Cox TC, Huntington CR, Blair LJ et al. Laparoscopic 
appendectomy and cholecystectomy versus open: a study 
in 1999 pregnant patients. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(2):593-
602.
Date RS, Kaushal M, Ramesh A. A review of the management 
of gallstone disease and its complications in pregnancy. 
Am J Surg. 2008;196(4):599-608.
Dohi S, Yamazaki R, Sagawa T et al. New ultrasound-
guided culdotomy of vaginal ovarian cystectomy for 
pregnant women incarcerated ovarian dermoid cysts 
in recto-uterine pouch: case reports. Endoscopy. 
2012;44(10):44 - A26.
Duic Z, Kukura V, Ciglar S et al. Adnexal masses in 
pregnancy: a review of eight cases undergoing surgical 
management. European journal of gynaecological 
oncology. 2002;23(2):133-4.
Erekson EA, Brousseau EC, Dick-Biascoechea MA et al. 
Maternal postoperative complications after nonobstetric 
antenatal surgery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 
2012;25(12):2639-44.
Friedman JD, Ramsey PS, Ramin KD et al. Pneumoamnion 
and pregnancy loss after second-trimester laparoscopic 
surgery. Obstet Gynecol. 2002;99(3):512-3.
Hasson J, Tsafrir Z, Azem F et al. Comparison of adnexal 
torsion between pregnant and nonpregnant women. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 2010;202(6):536 e1-6.
Holzer T, Pellegrinelli G, Morel P et al. Appendectomy 
during the third trimester of pregnancy in a 27-year old characterization of liver and brain lesions when 
suspecting a new malignancy, if treatment would 
make a difference.
The smallest possible dose of one of the most 
stable gadolinium contrast agents may be given 
to the pregnant mother if there is a very strong 
indication for enhanced MRI. No mutagenic and 
teratogenic effects have been described after 
maternal administration of gadolinium based on the 
limited data available (Webb et al., 2005). Webb et 
al. (2005) states that no additional neonatal tests are 
required.
11. Conclusions 
There is mounting evidence that appendicitis, 
gallbladder disease and symptomatic adnexal 
cysts can be safely managed laparoscocpically in 
pregnancy. Most evidence is from specialist centers. 
Only adequately trained laparoscopists should carry 
out these procedures and adequate peri- operative 
preparations are paramount. 
Especially outside the second trimester most 
included papers are from small case series and more 
high-grade evidence is needed. Because it is difficult 
to perform RCTs for these conditions, creation and 
analysis of national large databases appears to be a 
way forward. 
Declarations: Disclaimer from BSGE (See appendix 1)
Funding: this was an unfunded project .
Acknowledgements: Librarian Genny Franklin supported 
the systematic searches. Librarians Genny Franklin and 
Lisa Xue obtained the original articles. 
References
Abbasi N, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA. Management and 
outcomes of acute appendicitis in pregnancy-population-based 
study of over 7000 cases. BJOG. 2014;121(12):1509-14.
ACOG. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Nonobstetric surgery during pregnancy. Committee Opinion 
No. 696. Obstet Gynecol. 2017;129(777-8).
Aylin P, Bennett P, Bottle A et al. Estimating the risk of adverse 
birth outcomes in pregnant women undergoing non-obstetric 
surgery using routinely collected NHS data: an observational 
study. Health Services and Delivery Research. Southampton 
(UK); 2016.
Balinskaite V, Bottle A, Sodhi V et al. The Risk of Adverse 
Pregnancy Outcomes Following Nonobstetric Surgery 
During Pregnancy: Estimates From a Retrospective 
Cohort Study of 6.5 Million Pregnancies. Ann Surg. 
2017;266(2):260-6.
Balthazar U, Steiner AZ, Boggess JF et al. Management 
of a persistent adnexal mass in pregnancy: what is the 
ideal surgical approach?. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 
2011;18(6):720-5.
Bani Hani MN. Laparoscopic surgery for symptomatic 
cholelithiasis during pregnancy. Surg Laparosc Endosc 
Percutan Tech. 2007;17(6):482-6.
Bhavani-Shankar K, Steinbrook RA, Brooks DC et al. Arterial 
to end-tidal carbon dioxide pressure difference during EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 23appendectomy in pregnant women is associated 
with a substantial risk of fetal loss. J Am Coll Surg. 
2007;205(4):534-40.
Miloudi N, Brahem M, Ben Abid S et al. Acute appendicitis 
in pregnancy: specific features of diagnosis and treatment. 
Journal of visceral surgery. 2012;149(4):e275-9.
Minig L, Otano L, Cruz P et al. Laparoscopic surgery for treating 
adnexal masses during the first trimester of pregnancy. J 
Minim Access Surg. 2016;12(1):22-5.
Mourad J, Elliott JP, Erickson L et al. Appendicitis in pregnancy: 
new information that contradicts long-held clinical beliefs. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2000;182(5):1027-9.
Nasioudis D, Tsilimigras D, Economopoulos KP. Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy during pregnancy: A systematic review of 
590 patients. Int J Surg. 2016;27:165-75.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Ectopic 
pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and initial 
management. NICE clinical guideline [CG154] Manchester: 
NICE; 2012.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Ovarian 
Cancer: The Recognition and Initial Management of Ovarian 
Cancer. [CG122] Cardiff: NICE; 2011.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Preterm 
labour and birth. NICE guideline [NG25] Manchester: 
NICE; 2015.
Othman MO, Stone E, Hashimi M et al. Conservative 
management of cholelithiasis and its complications 
in pregnancy is associated with recurrent symptoms 
and more emergency department visits. Gastrointest 
Endosc.2012;76(3):564-9.
Park SH, Park MI, Choi JS et al. Laparoscopic appendectomy 
performed during pregnancy by gynecological laparoscopists. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2010;148(1):44-8.
Peng P, Zhu L, Lang JH et al. Clinical analysis of laparoscopic 
surgery for ovarian masses under different conditions during 
the second trimester. Chin Med J. 2013;126(17):3325-8.
Qureshi H, Massey E, Kirwan D et al. BCSH guideline for 
the use of anti-D immunoglobulin for the prevention of 
haemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. Transfusion 
Medicine. 2014;24(1):8-20.
Rajmohan N, Prakasam H, Simy J. Laparoscopic surgeries 
during second and third trimesters of pregnancy in a 
tertiary care centre in South India: Anaesthetic implications 
and long- term effects on children. Indian J Anaesth. 
2013;57(6):612-5.
RCR. Royal College of Radiologists and the College of 
Radiogaphers. Protection of Pregnant Patients during 
Diagnostic Medical Exposures to Ionising Radiation. Advice 
from the Health Protection Agency, RCR. 2009. 
Reedy MB, Kallen B, Kuehl TJ. Laparoscopy during 
pregnancy: a study of five fetal outcome parameters with 
use of the Swedish Health Registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1997;177(3):673-9.
Rizzo AG. Laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy: long-term 
follow-up. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2003;13(1):11-5. 
RCOG. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 
Preventing Entry-related Gynaecological Laparoscopic 
Injuries. Green-top Guideline No 49. London: RCOG; 2008. 
RCOG. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 
British Society of Gynaecological Endoscopy. Management 
of Suspected Ovarian Masses in Premenopausal Women. 
Green-top Guideline No 62. London: RCOG; 2011. 
RCOG. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 
Thrombosis and Embolism during Pregnancy and the 
Puerperium, Reducing the Risk Green-top Guideline No 37a.
London: RCOG; 2015.
RCOG. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 
Thrombosis and Embolism during Pregnancy and the 
Puerperium, the Acute Management of Green-top Guideline 
No 37b. London: RCOG; 2015.
Scheib SA, Jones HH, Boruta DM et al. Laparoendoscopic 
single-site surgery for management of adnexal masses 
in pregnancy: case series. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. patient: case report of a “near miss” complication. Patient 
Saf Surg. 2011;5(1):11.
Hutt R, Long M, Sturdy J. Conservative management of ovarian 
cysts in pregnancy during third trimester and intrapartum. J 
Obstet Gynaecol.. 2000;20(5):495-8.
Jeong JS, Ryu DH, Yun HY et al. Laparoscopic appendectomy 
is a safe and beneficial procedure in pregnant women. Surg 
Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2011;21(1):24-7.
Joumblat N, Grubbs B, Chmait RH. Incidental fetoscopy during 
laparoscopy in pregnancy: management of perforation of 
the gravid uterus. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 
2012;22(2):e76-8.
Katz L, Levy A, Wiznitzer A et al. Pregnancy outcome of 
patients with dermoid and other benign ovarian cysts. Arch 
Gynecol Obstet. 2010;281(5):811-5.
Kirshtein B, Perry ZH, Avinoach E et al. Safety of laparoscopic 
appendectomy during pregnancy. World J Surg. 
2009;33(3):475-80.
Kitade M, Takeuchi H, Kumakiri J et al. Instruments and 
Techniques: Two-Puncture Extracorporeal Method—a 
New Technique for Laparoscopic Management of Ovarian 
Tumors Detected During Pregnancy. J Gynecol Surg. 
2008;24(3):105-12.
Koo YJ, Lee JE, Lim KT et al. A 10-year experience of 
laparoscopic surgery for adnexal masses during pregnancy. 
Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2011a;113(1):36-9. 
Koo YJ, Kim TJ, Lee JE et al. Risk of torsion and malignancy 
by adnexal mass size in pregnant women. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand. 2011b;90(4):358-61.
Koo YJ, Kim HJ, Lim KT et al. Laparotomy versus laparoscopy 
for the treatment of adnexal masses during pregnancy. Aust 
N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2012;52(1):34-8.
Kuczkowski KM. The safety of anaesthetics in pregnant 
women. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2006;5(2):251-64.
 Kuy S, Roman SA, Desai R et al. Outcomes following 
cholecystectomy in pregnant and nonpregnant women. 
Surgery. 2009;146(2):358-66.
Laustsen JF, Bjerring OS, Johannessen O et al. Laparoscopic 
appendectomy during pregnancy is safe for both the mother 
and the fetus. Dan Med J. 2016;63(8).
Lee GS, Hur SY, Shin JC et al. Elective vs. conservative 
management of ovarian tumors in pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol 
Obstet. 2004;85(3):250-4.
Lee YY, Kim TJ, Choi CH et al. Factors influencing the choice 
of laparoscopy or laparotomy in pregnant women with 
presumptive benign ovarian tumors. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 
2010;108(1):12-5.
Lenglet Y, Roman H, Rabishong B et al. Laparoscopic 
management of ovarian cysts during pregnancy. Gynecol 
Obstet Fertil. 2006;34(2):101-6.
Liu YX, Zhang Y, Huang JF et al. Meta-analysis comparing 
the safety of laparoscopic and open surgical approaches for 
suspected adnexal mass during the second trimester. Int J 
Gynaecol Obstet. 2017;136(3):272-9.
Lyass S, Pikarsky A, Eisenberg VH et al. Is laparoscopic 
appendectomy safe in pregnant women? Surg Endosc. 
2001;15(4):377-9.
Machado NO, Machado LS. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
in the third trimester of pregnancy: report of 3 cases. Surg 
Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2009;19(6):439-41.
Majeed T SY, Waheed F, Mobusher I et al. Management of 
Ovarian Cyst in Pregnancy and its Effect on Pregnancy 
Outcome. PJMHS. 2011;5(1):77-80.
Martynov SA., Adamyan LV., Danilov AU. Comparison of 
Laparoscopy and Laparotomy in Treatment of Adnexal 
Masses during Pregnancy, JMIG 2014 21 (6) S43. 
Mathevet P, Nessah K, Dargent D et al. Laparoscopic 
management of adnexal masses in pregnancy: a case series. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2003;108(2):217-22.
Mazze RI, Kallen B. Reproductive outcome after anesthesia and 
operation during pregnancy: a registry study of 5405 cases. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1989;161(5):1178-85.
McGory ML, Zingmond DS, Tillou A et al. Negative 24 Facts Views Vis Obgynpregnant patient. Am J Surg. 1990;160(6):571-5; discussion 
5-6.
Tsafrir Z, Hasson J, Levin I et al. Adnexal torsion: 
cystectomy and ovarian fixation are equally important in 
preventing recurrence. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
2012;162(2):203-5.
Upadhyay A, Stanten S, Kazantsev G et al. Laparoscopic 
management of a nonobstetric emergency in the third 
trimester of pregnancy. Surg Endosc. 2007;21(8):1344-8.
Walsh CA, Tang T, Walsh SR. Laparoscopic versus open 
appendicectomy in pregnancy: a systematic review. Int J 
Surg. 2008;6(4):339-44.
Webb JA, Thomsen HS, Morcos SK. The use of iodinated and 
gadolinium contrast media during pregnancy and lactation. 
Eur Radiol. 2005;15(6):1234-40.
Weiner E, Mizrachi Y, Keidar R et al. Laparoscopic surgery 
performed in advanced pregnancy compared to early 
pregnancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015;292(5):1063-8.
Wilasrusmee C, Sukrat B, McEvoy M et al. Systematic review 
and meta-analysis of safety of laparoscopic versus open 
appendicectomy for suspected appendicitis in pregnancy. Br 
J Surg. 2012;99(11):1470-8.
Yuen PM, Ng PS, Leung PL et al. Outcome in laparoscopic 
management of persistent adnexal mass during the second 
trimester of pregnancy. Surg Endosc. 2004;18(9):1354-7.
Yuk JS, Kim YJ, Hur JY et al. Association between pregnancy 
and acute appendicitis in South Korea: a population-based, 
cross-sectional study. J Korean Surg Soc. 2013;85(2):75-9.
Zanetta G, Mariani E, Lissoni A et al. A prospective study of 
the role of ultrasound in the management of adnexal masses 
in pregnancy. BJOG. 2003;110(6):578-83.2013;20(5):701-7.
Schirmer BD, Winters KL, Edlich RF. Cholelithiasis 
and cholecystitis. J Long Term Eff Med Implants. 
2005;15(3):329-38.
Sedaghat N, Cao AM, Eslick GD et al. Laparoscopic versus 
open cholecystectomy in pregnancy: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(2):673-9.
Segev L, Segev Y, Rayman S et al. Appendectomy in 
Pregnancy: Appraisal of the Minimally Invasive Approach. 
J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2016;26(11):893-7.
Silvestri MT, Pettker CM, Brousseau EC et al. Morbidity 
of appendectomy and cholecystectomy in pregnant and 
nonpregnant women. Obstet Gynecol. 2011;118(6):1261-70.
Steinbrook RA, Brooks DC, Datta S. Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy during pregnancy. Review of anesthetic 
management, surgical considerations. Surg Endosc. 
1996;10(5):511-5.
Struthers AD and Cuschieri A. Cardiovascular consequences 
of laparoscopic surgery. Lancet (London, England). 
1998;352(9127):568-70.
Sungler P, Heinerman PM, Steiner H et al. Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy and interventional endoscopy for 
gallstone complications during pregnancy. Surg Endosc. 
2014;14(3):267-71.
Swisher SG, Schmit PJ, Hunt KK et al. Biliary disease during 
pregnancy. Am J Surg. 1994;168(6):576-9.
Takeda A, Hayashi S, Imoto S et al. Pregnancy outcomes after 
emergent laparoscopic surgery for acute adnexal disorders 
at less than 10 weeks of gestation. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 
2014;40(5):1281-7.
Tamir IL, Bongard FS, Klein SR. Acute appendicitis in the 
APPENDIX 1
Clinical guidelines are systematically developed 
statements which assist clinicians and women in 
making decisions about appropriate treatment for 
specific conditions’. These recommendations 
are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of 
management or treatment. They must be evaluated 
with reference to individual woman’s needs, 
resources and limitations unique to the institution 
and variations in local populations. It is hoped 
that this process of local ownership will help to 
incorporate these guidelines into routine practice. 
Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty 
where further research may be indicated.
The evidence used in this guideline was graded 
using the scheme below and the recommendations 
formulated in a similar fashion with a standardised 
grading scheme. EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINE ON LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY – BALL Et al. 25Classification of evidence levels
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of 
randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials 
with a very low risk of bias
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of 
randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials 
with a low risk of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised 
controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high 
risk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case– control or 
cohort studies or high-quality case–control or cohort studies 
with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a 
high probability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort studies with 
a low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a moderate 
probability that the relationship is causal
2- Case–control or cohort studies with a high risk of 
confounding, bias or chance and a significant risk that the 
relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series
4 Expert opinionAt least one meta-analysis, systematic review or 
randomised controlled trial rated as 1++ and di-
rectly applicable to the target population; or
A systematic review of randomised controlled tri-
als or a body of evidence consisting principally of 
studies rated as 1+ directly applicable to the target 
population and demonstrating overall consistency 
of results
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ 
directly applicable to the target population, and 
demonstrating overall consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 
1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ 
directly applicable to the target population and dem-
onstrating overall consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Recommended best practice based on the clinical 
experience of the guideline development groupGrades of recommendations
A
B
C
D
Good practice point