# Extracted from: MP001 Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care.pdf
# Guideline ID: mp001-provision-and-schedules-of-antenatal-care
# Content length: 66215 characters
# Processing date: 1750066901.042272

Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 2 of 33 

Provision and 
Schedules of 
Antenatal Care 

Maternity Protocol : MP001 
 Date agreed: April 2022 

Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 3 of 33 

Guideline Reviewer: Kate Morgan, Maria Stafford, Rebecca Elms 
Version: 4.4 
Approval Committee: Service users ’s Services Safety and Quality Committee 
Date agreed: 
Amended Date: April 2022 
February 2019, July 2019, December 2019, May 2020, August 2020, 
November 2020 , March 2022 
Review date: April 2025 
Cross reference: CO16 Domestic Abuse Policy 
MP011 Obesity 
MP010 Anti D and Rhesus Negative 
MP013 Safeguarding Children and Child Protection 
MP014 with Mental Health Problems 
MP017 DNA Appointments 
MP033 Induction of Labour 
MP046 Breech & ECV 
Antenatal Screening Protocols: 
MP002 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme 
MP003 Sickle Cell & Thalassaemia 
MP004 Infections in Pregnancy - HIV 
MP005 Infectious Diseases – Rubella Antibody 
MP006 Infectious Diseases – Hepatitis B 
MP007 Infectious Diseases – Syphilis 
MP008 Infections in Pregnancy Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 4 of 33 

Contents 
Key Principles ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 4 
Scope ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 4 
Responsibilities ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 4 
1 Booking and Antenatal ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 5 
2 Process and responsibilities of staff groups for initial contact and booking ....................... 5 
3 Late Bookers ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 5 
4 Concealed Pregnancy ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 7 
5 For Service users coming in from Outside the UK (Migrant Service users ) ......................... 7 
6 Communication and Language Support ................................ ................................ .............. 8 
7 Identification of Service users with Risk Factors and Reviewing Previous Notes ................ 9 
8 Missed Appointments ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 11 
9 The Notes and Antenatal Booking Visit ................................ ................................ ............. 11 
10 Calculating the EDD (Estimated Delivery Date) ................................ ................................ . 12 
11 Responsibilities of Relevant Staff Groups at Booking ................................ ........................ 13 
12 Responsibilities of all Health professionals ................................ ................................ ....... 13 
13 Paperwork to be Completed at Booking Visit ................................ ................................ .... 13 
14 Schedule of Care ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 14 
15 Named Midwife, choice of care and continuity of care ................................ .................... 16 
16 Notes ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 17 
17 Symphysis Fundal Height (SFH) measurement ................................ ................................ .. 17 
18 Referral of Service users for additional care ................................ ................................ ...... 19 
19 Process of Referral of Service users in whom risks are identified during the 
clinical assessment 
20 Process for referral back to Midwifery Led Care ................................ ............................... 20 
21 References ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 20 
Appendix A - Antenatal Care Schedule in Uncomplicated Pregnancy ................................ .......... 22 
Appendix B - Calculating the EDD ................................ ................................ ................................ . 26 
Appendix C - Calculating the EDD flow chart ................................ ................................ ................ 27 
Appendix D - Types of Referrals ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 29 
Appendix E - Calculating Symphysis Fundal Height Measurement ................................ .............. 32 
Appendix F – Criteria for Booking Growth Scans ................................ ................................ .......... 33 Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 5 of 33 

Key Principles 
 
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. 
Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol. 

Scope 
 
This protocol applies to: 
• All childbearing service users 
 
Responsibilities 
 
Midwives & Obstetricians : 
• To access, read, understand and follow this guidance 
• To use their professional judgement in application of this protocol 
 
This guidance is for midwives and doctors working in and with Brighton & Sussex 
University Hospitals Trust Maternity Services. The guidance is not rigid and should be 
tailored to the individual circumstances of each pregnant person . If the guidance is 
not being followed, documentation of the reasoning and/or justification is essential, 
with clear documentation of alternative plans and discussions 
 
Management Team : 
• To ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National 
recommendations 
• To ensure the protocol is accessible to all relevant staff 
• To ensure the protocol is available to service users on request Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 6 of 33 

1 Booking and Antenatal: 
The process for ensuring that service users have their first full booking visit and 
Badger Net record completed by 10 completed weeks of pregnancy. 
The following points need to be reviewed and discussed at each point of contact in 
the antenatal period : 
• Risk assessment 
• Place of Birth 
• Personalised care plans 

2 Process and responsibilities of staff groups for initial contact and 
booking: 
 
2.1 Newly pregnant women and people will self -refer via the e -referral system 
on the UH Sussex website . The GP surgeries sign post them to this process. 
The Maternity Office will generate a scan appointment and apply the 
named community midwife who is linked to their GP surgery. 
2.2 Pregnant women and people will be informed prior to their booking 
appointment that they need to download the Badgernet app and to 
complete the pre booking questionnaire prior to attending their booking 
appointment. The midwife should ensure women and people have access to 
the app at their first contact with the woman and pregnant person . 
2.3 At the booking appointment a booking questionnaire is completed on 
BadgerNet by the midwife with the woman and person (demographics, 
medical, social, psychological, obstetric history). The midwife then needs 
to refer all women and people to the Antenatal Clinic Lead Midwife via 
BadgerNet . 
2.4 The booking visit and the completion of the BadgerNet records should 
be completed by the midwife by the 10th completed week of pregnancy. 
 
3 Late bookers: 
A late booking is defined as presenting for maternity services after 20 weeks of 
pregnancy. 
3.1 Pregnant women and people over >12 weeks and un -booked: Midwife to 
complete a late booking form when online e -referral received and ensure a 
woman and person has been booked within 2 weeks of initial referral. The 
process is followed as above with the community midwife responsible for 
ensuring referrals are actioned urgently. A pre-booking appointment is not 
required. Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 7 of 33 
 3.2 Scans: 
If <20 weeks maternity office at PRH will do a scan referral to scan department, 
if >20 weeks it is the booking midwife’s responsibility to refer for scan. 
 
In relation to fetal anomaly screening please refer to Maternity Protocol: 
MP002 Antenatal screening: Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 8 of 33 

3.3 Women and people who have received A/N care during this pregnancy, but 
from another Trust should be seen by a community midwife within 2 weeks 
but will not usually require a scan unless clinically indicated . 
3.4 Where a midwife appointment is not available in the midwives own clinic the 
midwife will make arrangements for the woman and person to be seen for 
booking at another available clinic as soon as possible. 
3.5 The community midwife should undertake a booking appointment and 
complete the BadgerNet smart booking form . The reason for late 
booking should be documented on BadgerNet and on the antenatal 
lead midwife referral . 
3.6 Where women and people have booked at another trust and are transferring 
care to UH SUSSEX , the booking midwife should recommend that all booking 
bloods [to include blood tests for screening: Infectious diseases and sickle cell 
and thalassaemia] are repeated. This ensures a result is held within this NHS 
trust . Where women and people decline to have bloods repeated the 
booking midwife should ensure the following: 
 
• Advise the woman and person to have FBC and blood group 
repeated as a minimum 
• Scan and upload hard copies of blood results from the previous trust 
to BadgerNet 
• Hand written results from another trust are not acceptable. Where 
there are no hard copies of previous results attempts should be made 
to access the results from the previous trust. Where no hard copies 
are available and the pregnant person continues to decline screening 
bloods, a 
blood decline form should be sent to the Service users ’s Health 
Advisor [See Antenatal Screening policies for HIV, Hep B and 
Syphilis and sickle cell and thalassaemia for more information]. 
• The service users ’s decision to decline repeat screening should be 
clearly documented on BadgerNet 
3.7 If booking is late due to a transfer from another area, the midwife transfers 
previous antenatal information from service users ’s hand held notes to this 
Trust’s maternity notes. Where risk factors are identified midwife to consider 
(following discussion with the obstetric team) requesting copies of any 
previous notes from the relevant Trust. If a pregnant person has had a 20/40 
scan in the UK she does not need a repeat, but booking bloods need repeating. 
3.8 If the booking falls on or after 20 weeks and there is no history of antenatal 
care, the pregnant person should be advised to see a Consultant 
Obstetrician. The referral by the midwife can be made for the next 
available Consultant appointment in ANC via BadgerNet or by phone /email 
to the Maternity Office . Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 9 of 33 

3.9 If there are concerns for the pregnant person and her unborn baby’s welfare, 
a referral to be sent to children’s services electronically via the PANDA Portal , 
copying in community team leaders and safe guarding team . See Maternity 
Protocol: MP013 Safeguarding Children and Child Protection for further 
information. 

4 Concealed Pregnancy: 
 
A concealed pregnancy is when a pregnant person knows she is pregnant but 
does not tell anyone; or a pregnant person appears genuinely not to be aware 
she is pregnant. 
 
Concealment may be an active act or a form of denial where support from 
appropriate carers and health professionals is not sought. This can become apparent 
at any stage of the pregnancy. Concealment of pregnancy may be revealed late in 
pregnancy; in labour; or following delivery. The birth may be unassisted and may 
carry additional risks to the child and mother's welfare. 
 
In all cases where a young person /pregnant person arrives at the hospital in labour 
or following an unassisted delivery, which has been the result of a concealed 
pregnancy, an immediate referral must be made to Children's Social Care. Please see 
Maternity Protocol: MP013 Safeguarding Children and Child Protection for further 
information. 
 
The baby should not be discharged until a Strategy Meeting has been held and 
relevant assessments undertaken. This Strategy Meeting must consider the initiation 
of a psychiatric assessment. 
 
Where the referral is received out of hours in relation to a baby born as the result of 
a concealed pregnancy, the Emergency Out of Hours Service will take steps to 
prevent the baby being discharged from hospital until Children's Social Care have 
been informed and given their approval for discharge, in most instances this would 
be after a Child and Family Assessment has been undertaken. The baby should not 
be discharged out of hours. 

5 For Service users coming in from Outside the UK (Migrant Service users ): 
 
If a pregnant person has had no previous full medical examination in the UK the 
midwife should make an urgent referral for a full medical examination with the GP 
in order that a full medical history can be undertaken and clinical assessment 
made of their overall health using an interpreter if necessary. The referral date and 
GP appointment date and time must be documented on the pregnant person ’s 
BadgerNet record . Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 10 of 33 

6 Communication and Language Support: 
6.1 Service users for whom English is not their first language 
6.1.1 The Midwife should assess the need for an interpreter at the first 
booking appointment and if required make arrangements with the 
interpreting service for the booking appointment. 
6.1.2 It is not acceptable for a family member to act as the interpreter 
because there can be confusion about medical terminology or the 
potential for misrepresentation of information. 
6.1.3 The use of an interpreter needs to be documented on BadgerNet 
and a plan made for future antenatal visits, labour and birth and the 
postnatal period. If referral to the hospital is necessary the 
interpreting service should be arranged for the time of the 
appointment. 
6.1.4 The interpreting service can be arranged by midwives and doctors or 
delegated to support staff. Reception staff should also be made aware 
of the importance of the need to plan for future visits. 
6.1.5 48 hours ‘notice is required to arrange the attendance of an 
interpreter. 
6.1.6 Contact the service either on line at www.sussexinterpreting.org.uk or 
through the relevant community midwives office stating the language 
you require. Please give as much detail of the specific language or 
dialect as possible. 
6.1.7 If there needs to be more than one session booked please complete 
the booking form (available on the UHSUSSEX Intranet). 
 
RSCH & PRH Sussex Interpreter service 
Office hours Out of office hours & Sat/Sun 
01273 702 005 07811 459 315 
01273 380013 
Fax 01273 234 787 

6.2 Service users with other communication difficulties 
BSL: British Sign Language 
Non Emergency: 08445 938443 
Emergency: 07947 714040 
Online booking: www.actiondeafness.org.uk 
6.3 For service users with mental health difficulties please see Maternity 
Protocol MP014: Service users with Mental Health Problems . Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 11 of 33 
 
7 Identification of Service users with Risk Factors and Reviewing 
Previous Notes: 
7.1 Timing of risk assessments: Risk assessment should be undertaken at booking 
by the midwife. At each point of contact with a health professional this initial 
risk assessment should be reviewed and risk status altered accordingly with 
appropriate referrals and individual plan of care as required. This should be 
clearly documented on BadgerNet . 
 
7.2 Following booking the community midwife should complete an Antenatal 
Clinic Lead Midwife referral on BadgerNet . This referral has details of medical, 
social, psychiatric and previous and current obstetric history that will have 
been gathered from communication between the midwife and pregnant 
person at the booking appointment. A risk assessment will be made based on 
the information given. A list of the medical conditions to be considered 
(including anesthetic and psychiatric history), factors from previous 
pregnancies, lifestyle history as part of the risk assessment are in Appendix D. 

7.3 The referral will be reviewed by the A/N lead midwife who will identify risk 
factors (see Appendix D for list) and offer service users appointments in 
antenatal clinic to meet with the obstetric team, or specialist midwife as 
appropriate (see Appendix D for list of types of referrals). An appointment will 
be generated by the ward clerks, put on the maternity computer system and 
sent to service users by post with an appointment time, date and location. 
 
7.4 The process for arranging the availability of health notes from previous 
pregnancies that are required for review by clinicians: all service users notes 
from previous pregnancies are requested from the main medical library and 
sent to the maternity unit storage for easy access. 
7.4.1 At RSCH the ward clerks input the booking data and request the 
previous obstetric notes to be sent to L13 RSCH 
7.4.2 At PRH the midwife or ward clerk inputs the booking data and request 
the previous obstetric notes to be sent to the maternity office 2nd 
Floor PRH 
7.5 Identification which service users ’s health notes from previous pregnancies 
are required for review by clinicians: If service users are referred to ANC (i.e. 
service users that have been referred to the obstetric antenatal clinic for an 
obstetric or anaesthetic review due to identified risk factors during the 
booking process) the previous obstetric notes will be pulled by the ward clerks 
ready for their clinical appointment where they will be reviewed by the 
clinician. Should risk factors occur during pregnancy the notes can be accessed 
by clinicians or ward clerks internally within the maternity unit. Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 12 of 33 

7.6 If service users have identified neonatal risk factors e.g. family history or 
inherited metabolic disorders such as MCADD, a referral to a Neonatal 
Consultant should be generated for care planning and discussion regarding 
the implications of this risk factor (in line with NPSA - rapid response alert 
NPSA/2011/RRR002) 
7.7 If service users have identified Child Protection issues the previous obstetric 
notes will be reviewed by the Child Protection Lead during the antenatal 
period (see MP013: Safeguarding Children and Child protection for more 
detail on process). 
7.8 If service users arrive on labour ward or DAU with complications clinicians 
can access and review the previous obstetric notes by asking the ward 
clerk to identify and pull the notes for review (daytime) or by accessing 
the notes themselves (night -time). 
7.9 If previous pregnancy/birth has occurred in another maternity unit (and there 
is an indication to review them during the current pregnancy) clinicians should 
attempt to request a copy of them from the unit where they are held. This 
attempt should be documented on BadgerNet . 
7.10 Risk assessment for pre-eclampsia : 
A risk assessment relating to pre -eclampsia should be undertaken by 
midwives at booking. (NICE 2013). Service users will be deemed to be high, 
moderate or low risk of developing pre -eclampsia. Community midwives will 
advise the service users on their risk assessment outcome. This will be 
documented on BadgerNet . 
 
Risk assessment in relation to prevention of developing pre- eclampsia: 
 
Service users at high risk of developing pre-eclampsia 
Risk Factors (any of the following) Plan of care 
 Hypertensive disease during a previous 
pregnancy If any of these risk factors 
present: 
1. Advise to take 150mg 
aspirin daily in the evening 
from 12 weeks gestation 
until 36 weeks of 
pregnancy. 
2. Advise consultant review in 
ANC at 16 weeks Chronic hypertension 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Autoimmune disease 
(e.g. systemic lupus erythematosis or 
antiphospholipid syndrome) 
 Type 1 or 2 Diabetes 

Service users at moderate risk of developing pre-eclampsia 
Risk Factors (any 2 of the following) Plan of care 
 First pregnancy If any 2 of these risk factors 
present 
1. Advise to take 150mg Aged 40 or over 
 Pregnancy interval of more than 10 years Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 13 of 33 

 BMI of 35 kg/m² or more at first visit 
(offer referral to Consultant ANC at 34/40 as 
per protocol) aspirin daily in the evening 
from 12 weeks gestation 
until 36 weeks of pregnancy. 
2. Continue usual care 
pathways (refer to ANC 
should signs / symptoms of 
pre-eclampsia become 
apparent) Family history of pre-eclampsia 
 Multiple pregnancy 
(offer referral to Consultant ANC at 16/40 as 
per protocol) 

Service users who are deemed high risk or with 2 moderate risk factors 
Community midwives will provide both verbal and written information 
recommending service users to take 150mg aspirin daily in the evening 
from 12 weeks gestation until 36 weeks of pregnancy. 
7.10.1 Service users will be given 2 choices that will be clearly outlined 
in the leaflet: 
• To buy the aspirin themselves and self -medicate appropriately as 
instructed (packet of Aspirin costs about 25p) 
• Use tear off slip in Aspirin leaflet to be collected from any pharmacy, 
needs to be signed by community Midwife 
7.10.2 Service users at high risk of developing pre eclampsia will also be 
offered a referral to a consultant ANC by 16 weeks for a review and 
plan of care. 
7.10.3 Service users at moderate risk can continue with the usual care 
pathway unless there is a deviation from the norm and a referral is 
indicated. 
7.10.4 A plan of care outlining the above will be clearly documented on 
BadgerNet . 
 
8 Missed Appointments: 
Please refer to Maternity protocol MP017: DNA appointments 
 
9 The notes and antenatal booking visit: 
 
9.1 The first antenatal contact or 'booking' visit is the most important and detailed 
of all visits and gives an opportunity to assess general health and to start 
making forward -looking plans for pregnancy, birth and parenthood. It is 
considered to be part of the clinical risk assessment process. The following 
should be considered and documented as part of the risk assessment: 
 
9.1.1 Medical conditions - see Appendix D for conditions to be considered / 
referred Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 14 of 33 

9.1.2 Anaesthetic risks - see Appendix D for conditions to be considered / 
referred 
9.1.3 Psychiatric history - see Appendix D for conditions to be considered / 
referred 
9.1.4 Factors from previous pregnancies - see Appendix D for conditions to 
be considered / referred 
9.1.5 Lifestyle factors - see Appendix D for conditions to be considered / 
referred 
9.1.6 Identification of service users who will decline blood / blood 
products ref MP053: Obstetric Haemorrhage ) 
9.1.7 Appropriateness of place of birth (based on risk assessment) 
9.1.8 Following the risk assessment there should be the development of an 
individual management plan for service users in whom risks are 
identified. The Midwife should document the risk assessment and 
individual management plan and make the appropriate referrals, 
recording dates / times of appointments on the pregnant person ’s 
BadgerNet record . 
 
9.2 All maternity care will be documented on the BadgerNet system. All service 
users will have access to their own maternity record via the badgernotes 
app. Service users can access their maternity notes via the app on their 
phones or on a computer via the internet. 
9.3 The Maternity BadgerNet records are designed to be multi -disciplinary. All 
professionals who provide maternity care should document this within the 
BadgerNet records. 
9.4 For service users who do not have access to the internet or a mobile 
phone, all information entered onto BadgerNet should be printed and 
given to the pregnant person to carry as a handheld record. 
9.5 The BadgerNet maternity records include: 
9.4.1 booking data and pre conception details as appropriate 
9.4.2 clinical test results including ultrasonic scans, antenatal screening 
tests 
9.4.3 subsequent antenatal visits and examination 
9.4.4 antenatal in-patient summaries, blood test report 
9.4.5 Documented individualised antenatal risk assessment that is regularly 
reviewed throughout pregnancy 
9.4.6 Development of an individualised management plan for service 
users in whom risks are identified during the clinical risk 
assessment. 

10 Calculating the EDD (Estimated Delivery Date) Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 15 of 33 
 Refer to Appendix B 

11 Responsibilities of relevant staff groups at booking: 
 
11.1 It is the responsibility of the midwife undertaking the booking assessment to 
ensure that: - 
11.1.1 The midwife completes antenatal booking form on BadgerNet . If a 
pregnant person has completed some of the data on the form prior 
to the appointment, the midwife must check all details on the form 
with the pregnant person to ensure full and accurate completion. 
11.1.2 An accurate history is taken and documented using the 
BadgerNet system. 
11.1.3 A full risk assessment must be recorded and referrals made 
appropriately. The risk factors will be reviewed at subsequent 
antenatal appointments and at the onset of labour. 
11.1.4 Give the pregnant person an overview of the antenatal schedule 
(Appendix A ) and how the information & notes are intended to be 
used. 
11.1.5 Ensure the pregnant person knows who their named midwife is and 
that this is documented on BadgerNet , how to contact a midwife and 
is aware of the correct urgent/non urgent contact numbers. 
11.1.6 Give the leaflets (or information about accessing leaflets) and discuss 
the information contained therein in line with the schedule of care 
(below). All discussions should be documented fully on BadgerNet . 
11.1.7 Encourage the pregnant person to read the information and guidance 
information within their BadgerNet records and to consider and 
document their preferences for labour and birth and to document any 
questions she wishes to discuss. This should be reviewed and actioned 
at every subsequent point of contact. 
11.1.8 Ensure service users are signposted to Trust website and social 
media pages for further information. 

12 Responsibilities of all Health Professionals: 
12.1 Give the leaflets (or information about accessing leaflets) and discuss the 
information contained therein in line with the schedule of care (below). All 
discussions should be documented fully in the handheld notes. 
12.2 Health professionals who take blood/specimen tests are responsible for full 
documentation, the follow up of results within 10 days and subsequent 
action/referrals are made where appropriate. Health professionals who 
provide care to service users at any point are responsible to ensure all 
blood/specimen tests are followed up, documented, reviewed and action 
taken where appropriate. 
 
13 To be completed at booking visit: Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 16 of 33 

Antenatal Booking 
Assessment • Completed at the time of booking by the midwife on the pregnant person ’s 
BadgerNet record 
• This includes the pregnant person ’s social, medical (including anaesthetic), 
obstetric history and an assessment of mental health 
• This includes documentation of the booking and risk assessment. It 
also provides a structured approach for ongoing care provision both 
antenatally and in labour. 
• A referral to the Antenatal Clinic Lead Midwife via BadgerNet on 
completion of the booking assessment which will be reviewed to 
generate appointments with obstetric and anaesthetic teams. 
 
Maternity Risk 
Assessment • The booking documentation on the BadgerNet system offers a 
thorough risk assessment of a pregnant person 's social, lifestyle, 
medical (including anaesthetic), obstetric and mental health risk 
factors 
• If any risk factors are identified an individualised management plan should 
be formulated and documented clearly on BadgerNet . A referral may be 
indicated as part of this management plan and this need should be clearly 
communicated via ANC Lead Midwife referral on completion of the 
booking assessment . 
• The risk assessment and management plan should be reviewed at each visit 
and adjusted if indicated 
Appropriate 
Screening Referral 
Form • UHSUSSEX Scan request form 
• Quadruple Test Form 
• UHSUSSEX combined screening form 
Blood Test Forms • For all tests obtained with consent 
• Ensure family origin details are included on antenatal screening booking 
blood form 
 
Other Referrals that 
may be required at 
booking • Antenatal Screening Coordinator 
• Smoking Cessation Referral Form 
• If risk factors identified refer to ANC 
• Dietician & DAU for GTT (as per Obesity Protocol) 
• One Stop Clinic (if substance use disclosed) 
• Young person’s pregnancy 
• Mental Health Team 
• Claude Nicole Clinic 
• Social Services Referral Form 

14 Schedule of Care: 
The schedule of antenatal care should be holistic and encompass the needs and wishes 
of the pregnant person . It should be stressed that these are the minimum and if 
service users require additional consultations they should be encouraged to make the 
appointments. ( See Appendix A for detail ) Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 17 of 33 

14.1 Leaflets, information and discussion 
Leaflets can be accessed via the badgernotes app or service users can be advised to 
access them via the trust Website where they can be downloaded. Service users 
who do not have access to the internet should be given paper copies of the leaflets. 
This should be documented on BadgerNet 
14.2 Leaflets (or information about accessing leaflets) should be given routinely at 
the times identified (see Appendix A) and documented in the maternal notes. 
14.2.1 The following leaflets (or information about accessing leaflets) should 
be given as follows (where clinically indicated) alongside a verbal 
discussion. This should be documented in the maternal notes: Vaginal 
Birth After Caesarean (VBAC) Leaflet – to be given post -natally to 
service users who have has a first LSCS when discharged home. To be 
given to all service users who have had a previous LSCS when booking 
for subsequent pregnancies at booking. 
14.2.2 Aspirin In Pregnancy leaflet 
14.2.3 Fetal Movements leaflet / Information 
14.2.4 Homebirth leaflet 
14.2.5 Caesarean Section leaflet – to be given to service users at time of 
booking a planned LSCS 
14.2.6 External Cephalic Version (ECV) leaflet – to be given to service users 
when a breech presentation is discovered any time after 34 weeks of 
pregnanc y: With a discussion of options 
14.2.7 Declining Blood and Blood products leaflet – at the time this issue is 
identified 
14.2.8 General Anaesthetic leaflet: 
All service users having a planned LSCS when this is 
decided and booked 
All service users with known Placenta Praevia as soon as identified 
All service users with known factors that will make them at 
high risk of requiring a general anaesthetic 
14.2.9 Care of the Perineum leaflet (perineal repair) – given to all service 
users who suffer a 3rd and 4th degree tear during the initial postnatal 
period prior to discharge home 
 
14.3 Responsibility of staff groups about information giving and leaflets: Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 18 of 33 

14.3.1 Midwife providing care should ensure that all leaflets and information 
that is required has been given (or directed to via the website) at the 
appropriate time and format. If this has not occurred the midwife is 
responsible for providing the information when possible. Any leaflets 
/ information given should be documented by the midwife in the 
BadgerNet notes. 
14.3.2 Other health professionals such as obstetricians, phlebotomists and 
physiotherapists are responsible for giving leaflets relevant to the 
specific care they are providing at the time. Any leaflets / information 
given should be documented by the health professional in the 
BadgerNet notes. 
 
14.4 Process for providing information to service users who have 
communication or language support needs: 
 
14.4.1 Leaflets in other languages are available viaTrust website ”. 
14.4.2 Leaflet can also be explained using an interpreter at an appointment. 
14.4.3 Service users with other communication difficulties: midwives should 
make an individual assessment of their requirements and 
provideinformation in a format that is acceptable for the pregnant 
person . A Team leader can provide support and advice for midwives 
and service users about information giving and care planning. 
14.4.4 Health professionals should document fully all discussions and 
information given, including any leaflets, in the BadgerNet notes. 

15 Named Midwife, choice of care and continuity of care: 
15.1 It is the midwife’s responsibility, at initial contact, to inform the pregnant 
person of the name of the midwife who will have overall responsibility for her 
community based care. The name of the midwife and the community team 
should be documented on BadgerNet at this first contact. The service users 
will be able to view this on the badgernotes app. 
15.2 Midwives in GP surgeries can only see service users registered to that practice. 
15.3 If a pregnant person requests to be transferred to another named midwife she 
can contact the community manager via the community midwives office (each 
site) for discussion. Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 19 of 33 

15.4 Continuity of care is what we ideally want to provide at UHSUSSEX NHS Trust. 
In order to achieve this each community midwife is attached to a GP surgery 
and will be the named midwife there. This midwife will, with the exception of 
annual leave, sickness or mandatory training, provide regular antenatal care 
for the service users linked to that GP surgery. Cover will be provided by 
another community midwife in the same team when required. Where service 
users request more flexibility with antenatal appointments in the community, 
continuity of the named midwife will be affected, and service users may be 
seen by a number of different midwives in that community team. 
 
16 Notes: 
The schedule is a guide for the minimum standard of care in an uncomplicated 
pregnancy. The recommended number of appointments is between 6 and 11 and 
multiparous service users are likely to need less than primiparous service users . A 
function for each appointment should be identified. 

17 Symphysis Fundal Height (SFH) measurement: 
From 24 weeks gestation the Symphysis Fundal Height (SFH) measurement (See 
Appendix E ) should be used to assess fetal growth. The SFH measurement should be 
entered into BadgerNet during documentation of the antenatal assessment. The 
measurement will be automatically plotted on the intergrowth chart which is 
available to view on BadgerNet . 
17.1 Service users with a single SFH which plots BELOW the 10th centile or serial 
measurements which demonstrate slow or static growth by crossing lower 
centiles (a distance of approx. 3cms) should be referred ultrasound (USS) 
measurement of fetal growth via the PANDA Portal (RCOG, 2013). 
17.2 Service users with a SFH measurement of ≥ 3cm MORE than gestation in 
weeks should NOT be referred for an USS providing there are no other risk 
factors (NICE, 2008). The midw ife is to check for glycosuria : If positive refer for 
GTT. If negative continue with normal A/N care pathway. 
17.3 Service users in whom measurement of SFH is inaccurate (for example: BMI 
> 35, large fibroids, hydramnios) should be referred for serial assessment of 
fetal size using ultrasound (RCOG, 2013). 
17.4 If polyhydramnios is suspected from clinical review and abdominal palpation 
service users should be referred in to DAU for an urgent obstetric review and 
ultrasound scan (ideally the scan should be performed within 48hours of 
referral being received). 
17.5 Routine listening in or auscultation is unlikely to have any predictive value and 
is not recommended. However, it is acknowledged that many service users 
will 
request FH auscultation and this should be discussed and service users ’s 
informed choice supported and documented. 
 
18 Referral of service users for additional care Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 20 of 33 

18.1 Service users should have the opportunity to discuss any screening tests and 
their consent must be documented. All service users should be offered a 
dating scan before 13 weeks. See Maternity Protocol: MP002 Antenatal 
screening: Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme 
 
18.2 If service users have identified neonatal risk factors e.g. family history or 
inherited metabolic disorders such as MCADD, a referral to a Neonatal 
Consultant should be generated by the midwife providing care for care 
planning and discussion regarding the implications of this risk factor (in line 
with NPSA - rapid response alert NPSA/2011/RRR002). 
18.3 Service users who have had previous gastric band surgery should be referred in 
to see a Consultant Obstetrician in Antenatal Clinic to discuss the implications 
and plan pregnancy and delivery care. 
18.4 Service users who have IVF pregnancies should be offered a referral to be 
seen at a Consultant led antenatal clinic by 16 weeks gestation. The referral 
should be made by the midwife with the pregnant person ’s consent. 
18.5 All service users to be weighed again, using calibrated scales, at 34 -36/40 
gestation to enable correct weight for drug calculation around the time of 
birth should it be thought necessary. This should be documented in the 
maternity notes. 
18.6 CO monitoring should be offered at booking and at 36/40 for non smokers and 
at every appointment for smokers (appendix G). 
18.7 Mental health issues should be discussed using the recognised guidelines. See 
Maternity Protocol: MP014 Service users with Mental Health problems . 
 
18.8 Domestic violence should be sensitively discussed with all service users 
during an unaccompanied visit. See Domestic Abuse UHSUSSEX Trust policy . 
 
18.9 From 42 weeks, service users who decline IOL should be offered increased 
antenatal monitoring consisting of at least twice weekly CTGs and ultrasound 
examination of maximum amniotic pool depth. See Maternity Protocol: MP033 
Induction of Labour . 
 
18.10 All service users who have an uncomplicated singleton breech pregnancy at 
36 weeks in primigravida and 37 weeks in a multiparous should be offered 
ECV. See Maternity Protocol: MP046 Breech & ECV. 
 
18.11 If service users with risk factors make informed choice to plan labour and 
birth at home the community midwife should inform the Maternity Care 
Choices Midwife maternity.care.choices@UHSussex.nhs.net who will make 
contact with the service users and offer a meeting/discussion to plan care. Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 21 of 33 

19 Process of referral of service users in whom risks are identified 
during the clinical risk assessment: 
19.1 A referral should be made for an obstetric review if risk factors ( Appendix D ) 
are identified at booking or at any point during pregnancy. The reason for the 
referral and the appointment time/date should be documented clearly in the 
maternal notes. 
19.2 This can be done via the BadgerNet Antenatal Clinic Lead Midwife referral 
on completion of the booking assessment . If referral is urgent telephone ANC 
directly and ask to speak to the AN lead midwife to prioritise 
appointment. 
19.3 The Antenatal Clinic lead midwife referral should be reviewed by the A/N 
lead midwife who will arrange for an appropriate appointment to be made 
for the service users in an obstetric clinic. A letter will be sent with the ANC 
appointment details to the pregnant person at her home address in the 
post. 
19.4 During antenatal period (after booking) 
This can be done by the midwife or GP telephoning the Antenatal clinic to 
make an appointment at the next available appropriate consultant led clinic. 
The reason for the referral and the appointment time/date should be 
documented clearly on BadgerNet . 

20 Reasons for Referral: 
 
20.1 If a risk factor is detected during completion of the risk assessment or at any 
review of that assessment, a referral should be offered if appropriate; the risk 
factor should also be discussed in relation to her antenatal care, intrapartum 
care planning (including place of birth) and potentially postnatal care planning 
to produce an individualised care plan. 
20.2 All referrals, risk assessment and individualised management plans should be 
clearly documented on BadgerNet by the health professional making the 
plan with the pregnant person . 
20.3 Please ensure these service users are booked prior to their hospital 
appointment. Some of the reasons for referral are listed in the Appendix D. Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 22 of 33 

21 Process for referral back to Midwifery Led Care: 
21.1 Service users who are reviewed by the obstetric team and then deemed to 
be low risk should be referred back to MLC. 
21.2 The obstetric review should be documented on BadgerNet with an 
individualised plan of care in to include written instructions that the 
pregnant person should receive midwifery led care. 
21.3 Service users should be asked to make an appointment with her 
community midwife within a specified period of time and documented in 
the maternal notes. 

22 References: 
 
Nursing and midwifery council (2004) Midwives rules and standards. NMC, London 
Department of Health 2007 Choice , access and continuity of care in a safe service. 
 
Maternity Matters DoH, London 
 
NICE (2008) Antenatal Care – routine care for the healthy pregnant pregnant 
person . RCOG: London 
 
Loughna P, Chitty L, Evans T, Chudleigh T (2009) Fetal Size and Dating: charts 
recommended for clinical obstetric practice. Ultrasound , 17(3):161 -167 < 
http://www.bmus.org/policies -guides/pg -fetalmeas.asp > 
 
NHS Antenatal and Newborn Screening Programmes (2007) Antenatal Screening – 
Working Standards for Down’s Syndrome Screening . Exeter, pg.50. < 
http://fetalanomaly.screening.nhs.uk/standardsandpolicies > 
 
NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme (2010a) CRL Recommended Criteria for 
Measurement of Fetal Crown Rump Length as part of Combined Screening for Trisomy 
21 within the NHS in England 
http://fetalanomaly.screening.nhs.uk/standardsandpolicies > 
 
NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme & Kirwan D (2010b) 18+0 to 20+6 Weeks Fetal 
Anomaly Scan National Standards and Guidance for England . Exeter, pg 13. < 
http://fetalanomaly.screening.nhs.uk/standardsandpolicies > 
 
NICE [2008] Antenatal Care: Routine care for the healthy pregnant woman. Clinical 
Guideline 62. RCOG, London 
http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/11947/40145/40145.pdf Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 23 of 33 

PanSussex Child Safeguarding Document 
http://pansussexscb.proceduresonline.com/chapters/p_concealed_preg.html?printMe.x 
=16&printMe.y=14 
 
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. (2013). Small -for-Gestational -Age 
Fetus, Investigation and Management. Green -top Guideline No. 31. 
Published: 22/03/2013 Available online at: 
https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/gtg_31.pdf Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 24 of 33 

Appendix A - Antenatal Care Schedule in Uncomplicated Pregnancy 
1 Timings of risk assessments 
2 Development of individualised management plan 
3 Appropriate and process of referral 
4 All discussions & leaflets provided should be documented by the person giving them in 
the maternal hand held notes 

All 
service 
users 
 
Booking 
By 10 
weeks 
following 
e-referral • Establish relationship with pregnant person through effective, sensitive 
and open communication 
• Discuss diet and lifestyle – folic acid, food hygiene etc. 
• Smoking cessation referral if necessary 
• Record weight, height, BMI 
• Give booking form to complete before next appointment 
• Give Maternity Services Guide 
• Discuss, document and enable access to information and leaflets on: 
o NSC ‘Screening Tests For You and Your Baby’ (antenatal screening 
tests) booklet 
o Combined screening in pregnancy 
• Risk assessment: 
o Medical history/conditions (including anaesthetic & psychiatric 
history) 
o Previous pregnancies 
o Lifestyle history 
o Identification of service users who will decline blood & blood products 
• Identify service users that may need referral to specialist midwife, 
obstetric or other care – See Appendix D 
• Complete risk assessment & action/refer for further care as required 
• NB at PRH there is no 8 week appointment – all information is given at 
booking appointment around 10 weeks 
• Complete BadgerNet notes & action /refer for further care as required 
if not already undertaken 
• Ascertain gestation and estimated due date (EDD) by last menstrual period 
(LMP) 
• Highlight any communication barriers and ensure appropriate measures are 
taken to ensure accurate communications can take place at all appointments 
• Identify service users who will decline blood and blood products. 
Document clearly and offer referral to obstetrician in ANC 
• Booking blood tests should be taken by ten weeks – blood group, Rh status, 
screening for anaemia, haemoglobinopathies (according to Family Origin 
Questionnaire), red-cell alloantibodies, hepatitis B, HIV, syphilis 
• Hepatitis C Screening for the following service users : 
• Recreational drug use which includes snorting and decl ines referral to One 
Stop Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 25 of 33 

 • IVDU / Ex – IVDU (including steroids) and declines referral to One Stop 
• Contact of Hepatitis C (partner or sharing home with) 
• Sex worker 
• Ex-prisoner 
• Sexual assault 
• Booking Midwife to check ALL results within 10 days and action abnormal 
findings OR repeat samples . Results to be promptly documented on 
BadgerNet and published to maternity notes 
• GTT for high risk service users (refer MP018 Diabetes in Pregnancy) 
• Offer MSU 
• Offer Chlamydia screening if pregnant person <25 
• Discuss: 
➢ Issues surrounding depression and mental health issues in pregnancy (see 
UHSUSSEX mental health guidance) 
➢ Domestic abuse if alone (see UHSUSSEX guidance). Give leaflet 
➢ Antenatal care schedule 
➢ Place of birth options 
➢ Maternity benefits 
➢ Medications in pregnancy – provide with Prescription Exemption form if not 
already provided by GP 
➢ Risk assessment for service users at risk of pre -eclampsia and 
appropriate information and advice give and documented 
➢ Nutrition including Vit D, Healthy Start vitamins 
➢ A/N Screening 
▪ Offer and arrange screening for Downs syndrome, Adwards & Pataus 
▪ Offer and document consent and arrange 20 week structural anomaly scan 
• Consider social or CP issues 
• Risk assessment of VTE documented 
• Calculate BMI and offer referrals where required (see MP011 Obesity ) 
• Offer Carbon Monoxide screening to all service users . Offer smoking cessation 
referral to all service users with reading of >3ppm. Direct all service users to 
UHSUSSEX maternity website for more information about smoking in pregnancy 
• Discuss, risk assess, document and enable access to information/ leaflets 
on: 
➢ Where the baby will be born (place of birth options) 
Inform service users that we are a cross site and she may be asked to attend 
another unit at busy times 
➢ Types of delivery (how the baby will be born) 
• Develop Individual care plan with the pregnant person and document in 
BadgerNet records 

16 weeks 
All • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• Fetal Movement Leaflet and advise 
• A/N Screening: 
• If Quad test required – make an appointment with the AN screening team / 
DAU. Test to be carried out in DAU 
• If undertaken, check the service users has received her combined screening 
result 
– follow up if not received 
• Review and document booking blood results Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 26 of 33 

 • If Hb <11 investigate and consider iron supplement. (Haematology Protocol 
TBC) 
• If Rh –ve, discuss implications. Give forms for 28 week blood tests 
• Discuss and enable access to information and leaflets on: 
➢ Anti D in pregnancy (ensure appointment has been booked) 
• BP & proteinuria check. 
 
25 weeks 
Primips 
only • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• BP & proteinuria check 
• Measure Symphysis -Fundal Height 
• Discuss: Fetal Movements 
Birth options 
• Review Diabetic Screening for high risk service users 
 
28 weeks 
All • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• Check BP, proteinuria, SFH, FM 
• Offer screening for: 
➢ Anaemia and antibodies 
• Ensure appointment made if necessary for anti-D 
• GTT for high risk service users refer to (MP018 Diabetes in Pregnancy) 
• Give Mat B1 form (from 20 weeks onwards) 
• Follow up Safeguarding referral if appropriate/required 
• Consider Place of Birth (offer Home Birth option for low risk service users ) 
• Discuss and enable access to information and leaflets on: 
➢ Home birth (as appropriate) 
➢ Water birth (as appropriate) 
• Give information about parentcraft classes 
• Follow up any Safeguarding referral’s if appropriate/indicated 
 
31 weeks 
Primips 
only 
(MW) • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• Check BP, proteinuria, SFH, FM 
• Discuss and document 28 week blood results – if Hb <110g investigate and 
consider iron supplement (refer to Haematology Protocol TBC) 
• Has Anti D appointment happened if rhesus negative? 
 
34 weeks 
All • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• Check BP, proteinuria, SFH, FM 
• Document blood results for multips 
• Discuss labour, birth plan, coping with pain 
• Follow up Safeguarding referral if appropriate/required 
• Discuss, document and enable access to information and leaflets on: 
➢ Fetal heart monitoring in labour 
➢ Coping with pain / labour (pain management in labour including regional 
anaesthesia) 
➢ Perineal massage/ care in preparation for birth Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 27 of 33 

 ➢ Breastfeeding 
• Follow up any Safeguarding referral’s if appropriate/indicated 
• If the pregnant person is wanting a homebirth a chat/risk assessment to 
be booked preferably by named midwife 
➢ Complete home birth form on BadgerNet 
➢ For service users with risk factors planning a home birth: send summary of 
home 
Birth risk assessment to PMA 
 
36 weeks 
All • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• Check BP, proteinuria, SFH, FM 
• Palpate for presentation and refer if suspected malpresentation 
• Re-weigh using calibrated scales and document in maternal notes 
• Discuss: 
o Breastfeeding o newborn screening 
o care of the newborn o postnatal self-care 
o vitamin k o baby -blues 
o postnatal depression 
• If CP issues, check care plan in notes 
• Offer Carbon Monoxide screening to all service users . Offer smoking 
cessation referral to all service users with reading of >3ppm. Direct all 
service users to UHSUSSEX maternity website for more information 
about smoking in pregnancy 
 
38 weeks 
All • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• Check BP, proteinuria, SFH, FM 
• Discuss options for management of prolonged pregnancy 
 
40 weeks 
 
Primips 
only • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• Check BP, proteinuria, SFH, FM 
• Further discussion of management of prolonged pregnancy 
• Discuss, document and enable access to information and leaflets on: 
o Induction of Labour 
• Offer membrane sweep for low risk service users and VBAC service 
users with no additional risk factors 
41 
All not yet 
delivered • Review risk assessment & action/refer if required 
• Review individual care plan 
• Check BP, proteinuria, SFH, FM 
• Offer membrane sweep 
• Offer and arrange IOL Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care (RSCH PRH only ) 
MP001 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Page 28 of 33 

Appendix B - Calculating the EDD: 
 
1. EDD should be calculated by USS performed at UHSUSSEX (CRL is the gold standard 
[up to 14+1 weeks]) rather than LMP1,6. This is for all pregnancies including IVF / ICSI 
pregnancies. 
 
2. However where service users conceived by IVF/ICSI and there is a discrepancy 
between the scan date and IVF date, the pregnant person should be referred to a 
consultant obstetrician for a final decision about EDD. The agreed EDD should be 
clearly documented in the pregnant person ’s notes by the consultant. 
 
3. Service users who decline all scans should have the EDD calculated by LMP. In these 
cases the potential problems of using an EDD calculated by LMP should be discussed. 
Using an EDD calculated by LMP increases the likelihood of induction for post 
maturity. In addition it creates difficulties when advising on management / prognosis 
where labour occurs prematurely, especially around the limits of viability 
 
4. The optimal time for calculating EDD by scan is between 10+0 and 14+1 weeks. EDD 
calculated by scan between these gestational limits supersedes EDD calculated from 
LMP and scans before 10+0 weeks. In practice the dating scan is usually performed 
between 11+2 and 14+1 weeks [i.e. at the time of the NT scan] 
 
5. If a pregnant person has two scans between 10 and 14 weeks, the scan at the time 
of the NT should be used 
 
6. If a pregnant person has a scan before 10+0 weeks, an EDD is given but this is 
recalculated at the NT/dating scan [11+2 to 14+1 weeks] 
 
7. If a pregnant person declines combined screening, a dating scan is offered ideally at 
12 weeks, although a scan at any gestation between 10+0 and 14+1 will provide an 
accurate EDD 
 
8. Service users booking later than 14 weeks or who are found to be over 14 weeks 
at the time of the first scan will have their EDD calculated by head circumference 
[HC] at their first scan 
 
9. NB In expected peri-viable deliveries EDD should be agreed between obstetric, 
midwifery and neonatal teams. This discussion and plan should be clearly 
documented in the maternity notes and signed by the lead professionals present for 
the discussion 
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals Page 29 of 33 
 Use EDD from NT scan Offer 
scan 
YES Offer accepted? NO 
Use EDD generated by 
earliest scan 
(Using head 
circumference) Use EDD from USS between 10 & 14 
weeks 
If a pregnant person has had 2 scans 
in this time frame then use the EDD 
generated at the NT scan Use EDD 
by LMP Gestation >14 weeks Gestation between 10–14 weeks 
NB If delivery is likely around 22-25 weeks 
• Discussion may be indicated between maternity / neonatal services and family 
regarding action plan and agreed EDD 
• This discussion must be clearly documented in the records and signed by the 
lead professional Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care 

Appendix C - Calculating the EDD flow chart 

USS performed between 10 & 14 weeks? 
YES NO 

 Has had scan in pregnancy? 
NO YES 
 NT scan performed? 
 
YES NO 
 
MP001 
Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care MP001 
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals Page 30 of 33 

References 
• Loughna P, Chitty L, Evans T, Chudleigh T (2009) Fetal Size and Dating: charts 
recommended for clinical obstetric practice. Ultrasound , 17(3):161 -167 < 
http://www.bmus.org/policies -guides/pg -fetalmeas.asp > 
 
• NHS Antenatal and Newborn Screening Programmes (2007) Antenatal Screening – 
Working Standards for Down’s Syndrome Screening . Exeter, pg.50. < 
http://fetalanomaly.screening.nhs.uk/standardsandpolicies > 
 
• NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme (2010a) CRL Recommended Criteria for 
Measurement of Fetal Crown Rump Length as part of Combined Screening for 
Trisomy 21 within the NHS in England < 
http://fetalanomaly.screening.nhs.uk/standardsandpolicies > 
 
• NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme & Kirwan D (2010b) 18+0 to 20+6 Weeks 
Fetal Anomaly Scan National Standards and Guidance for England . Exeter, pg 13. < 
http://fetalanomaly.screening.nhs.uk/standardsandpolicies > 
 
• NICE [2008] Section 4.6 Gestational age assessment p73-77 in Antenatal Care: 
routine care for the healthy pregnant woman.[Guideline CG62] RCOG, London 
http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/11947/40145/40145.pdf 
 
• NHS England 2019 Saving Babies’ Lives v.2 Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care MP001 
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals Page 31 of 33 

Appendix D - Types of Referrals: 
 
Medical – refer to obstetric clinic and relevant specialist midwife (MW) 
• Diabetes & endocrine disorders 
• Epilepsy 
• Cystic fibrosis 
• Severe asthma 
• Transplant 
• Kidney disease 
• Cardiac conditions 
• Autoimmune disorders inc lupus 
• Haemoglobinopathies 
• Chronic hypertension 
• Antiphospholipid syndrome 
• Metabolic disorders 
• Previous thrombo -embolic disease / high or intermediate risk of VTE at booking or at 
any stage risks are identified or changed during pregnancy (via the VTE risk assessment 
form) 
• Psychiatric disorders (see MP014 Mental Health Protocol for further guidance) 
• HIV/Hepatitis B/Hepatitis C 
• Female Genital Mutilation 
• Obesity (BMI of 30 or above) or low weight (BMI of 17 or below) 
• Previous malignant disease 
• Adverse or allergic reactions to anaesthesia 
• Spinal problems (eg scoliosis) 
• Service users who have made an informed decision to decline blood products 
• Anaesthetic issues / any problems that may affect the ability to administer general or 
regional anaesthetic 
• Service users at high risk of pre-eclampsia 
 
Pregnancy -related (previous or current) – refer to obstetric clinic and relevant specialist MW 
• IVF pregnancy (refer to be seen by 16 weeks) 
• PIH 
• Oligohydramnios / Polyhydramnios 
• IUGR (below 5th centile or below 2.5kg) 
• Previous large baby (above 95th centile or above 4.5kg) 
• Previous uterine surgery including caesarean section 
• Previous shoulder dystocia 
• Previous LSCS 
• Previous PPH (see MP53 Obstetric Haemorrhage for detail) 
• Multiple gestation 
• Previous stillbirth or neonatal death 
• Malpresentation from 36 weeks 
• Previous preterm birth 
• Severe pre-eclampsia, HELLP or eclampsia Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care MP001 
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals Page 32 of 33 

• Three or more recurrent miscarriages 
• Puerperal psychosis 
• Rhesus immunisation or other blood group antibodies 
• Grandmultiparity (more than 6 pregnancies) 
• Baby with congenital or structural abnormality 
 
Social / lifestyle related – refer to appropriate specialist midwives 
• Substance misuse 
• Homelessness 
• Teenage pregnancy 
• Domestic violence 
• Mental health or Learning difficulties 
• Disability 
 
Referral to Anaesthetic Clinic: 
 
A past medical history of any anaesthetic 
problems Have had previous difficulties with, or 
complications of, spinal/epidural anaesthesia or 
general anaesthesia Allergy to suxamethonium; 
Known suxamethonium apnoea. History or family 
history of malignant hyperpyrexia 
Respiratory Problems Severe asthma; cystic fibrosis; pulmonary 
embolus on anticoagulants; history of 
pneumothoraxes 
Neurological Problems Any neuromuscular disease e.g. muscular 
dystrophy; multiple sclerosis; focal neurological 
signs; Poorly controlled epilepsy; Spina Bifida 
Muscular -skeletal Problems Scoliosis; Harrington rods; Rheumatoid arthritis / 
Still’s Disease. Connective tissue disorders 
associated with cardiac abnormalities eg 
Marfans, Ehlors Danlos 
Endocrine problems Unstable thyroid disease 
Haematological problems Idiopathic thrombocytopaenia purpura (ITP); 
sickle cell disease; congenital spherocytosis; Von 
Willibrand’s Disease 
Renal Disease Renal transplant 
Allergies/ Drug sensitivities / Drug abuse Multiple allergy syndromes; allergies to local 
anaesthetics; Known scoline apnoea, history of 
intravenous drug abuse 
Airway Problems Known difficult intubation; obvious anatomical 
features suggestive of a difficult intubation e.g. 
bucked teeth, receding jaw; reduced neck 
movement 
Rare But Serious Medical Conditions Malignant disease Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care MP001 
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals Page 33 of 33 

Known Obstetric Conditions That Pose An 
Increased Risk Placenta praevia 
Raised BMI above 50 Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care MP001 
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals Page 34 of 33 

Appendix E: Calculating Symphysis Fundal Height Measurement: 

Definition: 
 
Symphysis -fundal height (SFH) measurement refers to the distance (measured in 
centimetres) over the abdominal wall from the top of the uterus (fundus) to the upper 
border of the symphysis pubis. This measurement is taken along the longitudinal axis of the 
uterus without any correction of the tape measure to the midline of the abdomen, using a 
non-stretch tape measure which remains in continuous contact with the skin surface of the 
abdomen. 
 
Process for SFH measurement: 
 
1. Ensure pregnant person has an empty bladder 
2. Ensure that the pregnant person has given her consent, is comfortable and lying 
in a semi - recumbent position 
3. Prior to SFH measurement, the midwife should palpate the pregnant person ’s pregnant 
abdomen to check the baby’s size, its position and presentation, the volume of amniotic 
fluid around the fetus, and to identify the uterine fundus 
4. The (metric) measurement scale on the tape measure should always be placed face 
downwards against the pregnant person ’s abdomen to prevent the practitioner from 
making a subjective or biased assessment. 
Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care MP001 

Appendix F – Criteria for Booking Growth Scans 
 
General growth scans at 30 and 34 weeks . Previous IUGR 
Previous Stillbirth Uterine anomalies 
Anti-phospholipid syndrome/ Thrombophilia Maternal age over 40 years at booking Service 
users on anti-epileptic medication 
 
Conditions with different schedule of care 
Parvovirus B19 infection – 2-3 weekly from 10 weeks until 10 weeks post infection. After 18 weeks gestation, refer for MCA velocities 
Pre-existing Diabetic – 24, 28, 32, 36 weeks Essential Hypertension - 28 and 32 weeks 
Substance misuses - Growth scan and review at 30 weeks gestation BMI ≥35 - single scan with clinic appointment at 34 
weeks gestation 
Mild fetal hydronephrosis at the anomaly scan – Repeat scan at 34 weeks gestation Mild/moderate PIH diagnosed before 34/40 - single growth 
scan, AFI and UA at 34 weeks. No need to repeat if normal 
Severe PIH – Growth scan, AFI and UA repeated not less than fortnightly SROM – Only if evidence on speculum 
Post Dates – AFI only 
Reduced Fetal movements – After 2nd episode 
Maternal Medical conditions – as requested by consultant Gestational Diabetes – as requested by 
Consultant Suspected polyhydramnios 
 
Multiple pregnancies: 
Monochorionic twins: 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 28, 32, 36 weeks 
Dichorionic twins: 24, 28, 32, 36 weeks 
Trichorionic triplets: 24, 28, 32, 34 
Triplets with monochorionicity: 2 weekly from 16 weeks to 34 weeks. 
 
Growth scans NOT indicated routinely. IVF 
Single episode of PV bleeding Obstetric cholestasis 
Mild/moderate PIH diagnosed after 34/40 Previous large baby/ traumatic delivery Larges for 
dates 
Anxiety/ maternal reassurance 
Fibroids unless close to cervix then single follow -up scan at 36 weeks Increased NT in early pregnancy 
Unexplained recurrent miscarriage Presentation – refer to DAU for scan 2 vessel cord 
Previous premature labour where the size was normal for gestation Provision and Schedules of Antenatal Care MP001 
 APPENDIX G