# Extracted from: MP002 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme SR Sept.pdf
# Guideline ID: mp002-fetal-anomaly-screening-programme-sr-sept
# Content length: 100461 characters
# Processing date: 1750066901.0581622

Fetal Anomaly 
Screening 
Programme 

Maternity Protocol: MP002 
Date agreed: June 2022 
Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 
 
University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 2 of 54 

Guideline Reviewer: Helen Green and Karen Gregory 
Version: 3.1 
Approval Committees: Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme Steering Group 
Women Services Safety and Quality Committee 
Date agreed: June 2022 
Amended Date: May 2022 
Review date: November 2022 
Cross reference: MP001 Provision & Schedule of Antenatal Care 
US005 Ultrasound 1st Trimester Scan 
GP010 Termination of Pregnancy Under 14 Weeks 
MP073 Pregnancy Loss >14 Weeks. Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 
University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 3 of 54 Contents 
1.0: Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Section A: Screening for Down’s, Edwards’ and Patau’s syndrome .......................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
2.0 Screening for Down’s, Edwards’ and Patau’s syndrome ................................ ... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
3.0 Combined Screening ................................ ................................ .......................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.0 Combined Screening: Results process ................................ ............................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5.0 Quadruple Test ................................ ................................ ................................ .. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.0 Screening: Special Cases ................................ ................................ .................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
7.0 Pre-Natal Invasive Testing ................................ ................................ .................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
SECTION B - Fetal Anomaly Ultrasound Programme ................................ .................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
8.0 Fetal Anomaly Ultrasound Programme ................................ .............................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
9.0 The objectives of the 18+0 to 20+6 weeks anomaly scan are to 29 ................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
10.0 Referral process following suspected fetal anomaly on ultrasound scan .......... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
12.0 Continuing a pregnancy after a diagnosis of anomaly ................................ ....... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
14.0 Auditable Standards ................................ ................................ ........................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
15.0 Staff training and education ................................ ................................ .............. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
16.0 Governance ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
17.0 References ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Appendix A – UHSussex East Contacts ................................ ................................ ........ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Appendix B - External Contacts ................................ ................................ ................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Appendix C - Abbreviations ................................ ................................ ........................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Appendix D - Best Practice: Areas for discussion prior to mid-trimester anomaly scan ............ Error! Bookmark not 
defined. 
Appendix E - Fetal Abnormality Communication Form ................................ ............... Error! Bookmark not defined. 

 Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 
University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 4 of 54 
 
Key Principles 
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. 
Professional judgment may be used in the application of a protocol. 

Scope 
This protocol applies to: 
• All pregnant women and people 
 
Responsibilities 
Midwives & Obstetricians 
• To access, read, understand and follow this guidance 
• To use their professional judgment in application of this protocol 
 
Management Team 
• To ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and 
National recommendations 
• To ensure the protocol is accessible to all relevant staff 
• To ensure the protocol is available to service users on requestFetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 5 of 54 
1 Introduction 
The NHS National Screening Committee (NSC) published recommendations for Fetal Anomaly 
Screening Programme (FASP) May 2009. Further guidance can be found in Service Specification 
No.16: NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme – Screening for Down’s, Edwards’ and Patau’s 
Syndromes [Trisomy 21,18 and 13] [Public Health England [PHE] 2018a], Service Specification 
No.17: Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme – 18+0 – 20+6 week fetal anomaly scan [PHE 2018b] 
and national programme standards [PHE 2019a]. 
 
Screening for triplet and higher order multiple pregnancies does not come under the remit 
of the NSC, therefore refer to NICE guidance on AN care for Multiple pregnancy - The 
management of twin and triplet pregnancies in the antenatal period [NICE 2011] 
 
The leads for the Antenatal Screening programme can be found in Appendix A 
 
2 Section A: Screening for Down’s, Edwards’ and Patau’s syndrome 
 
2.1 Screening for Down’s, Edwards’ and Patau’s syndrome 
The UK NSC recommends that all pregnant women and people are offered 
screening to assess the chance of the baby being born with Down’s [T21], Edwards’ 
[T18] and Patau’s [T13] syndromes [ PHE 2018a]. 
 
2.2 Aims and Objectives 
2.2.1 The aims and objectives of the screening programme are: 
2.2.2 To offer all eligible women and people a screening test to assess the 
chance of the baby being born with Down’s, Edwards’ or Patau’s 
syndromes 
2.2.3 To provide appropriate accessible information for women and people so 
that they are able to exercise informed choice about their screening 
options and pregnancy management 
2.2.4 To facilitate choice in appropriate diagnostic testing and pregnancy 
management 
 
2.3 Screening tests offered at UHSussex East 

 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 6 of 54 Table 2.2 [PHE 2018a] 
 
Screening Test Time at which test can be undertaken 
Combined screening test [nuchal translucency 
scan and maternal or parental blood test for 
two biochemical markers] 
T21 & T18/13 Only to be performed where CRL [crown rump 
length] is between 45mm and 84 mm inclusive. 
This correlates to a gestational age of 11+2 to 
14+ 1 weeks. 
 
Quadruple screening test 
[maternal or parental blood test of 4 
biochemical markers] T21 only Where CRL is greater than 84mm the 
pregnancy is dated by HC. Screening can be 
performed between 14+2 weeks and up to a 
maximum gestation of 20+0 weeks inclusive] 

2.4 The eligible population and offer of screening 
 
2.4.1 Women and people should be booked for antenatal care as early as 
possible, and preferably before 10 weeks; this means that all screening 
options are available to them allows time for further diagnostic testing if 
required and ensures they have time to consider decisions about continuing 
their pregnancy. 
2.4.2 All women and people in the eligible population should be offered the 
appropriate screening test by the midwife at booking according to the 
criteria below. 
2.4.3 The midwife must emphasise that all screening tests are optional. 
2.4.4 Women and people have choice over which conditions they are 
screened for. These options are explained further in section 2.6 
2.4.5 For Down’s syndrome the eligible population for screening is all pregnant 
women and people under 20+0 weeks gestation as confirmed by 
ultrasound scan. See table 2.2 
2.4.6 For Edwards’ and Patau’s syndrome screening, the eligible population are 
pregnant women and people less than or equal to 14+1 weeks gestation 
by ultrasound scan. See table 2.2. 

2.4 Eligible populations and offer of screening [National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence [NICE] 2011, PHE 2018b, PHE 2018c] 
 
Screening for 
Down’s 
syndrome Singleton pregnancy Twin pregnancy Triplet or higher 
order multiple Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 7 of 54 
CRL: 45-84mm 
inclusive 
[correlates to GA 
of 11+2 – 14+1 
Weeks] 
Offer combined 
screening. 
 
Options: 
• T21 and combined 
chance for T18/13 
• T21 alone 
• T18/13 alone 
Offer combined 
screening. 
 
Options: 
• T21 and combined 
chance for T18/13 
• T21 alone 
• T18/13 alone 
Offer screening by 
NT and maternal or 
parental age alone 
Options: 
• T21 and 
combined 
chance for 
T18/13 
• T21 alone 
• T18/13 alone 
 
14+2 – 20+0 
Weeks 
Were CRL 
greater that 84mm 
or more with an 
HC between 101 - 
172mm Offer quadruple test. 
Screens for T21 and/or 
T18 only. Offer quadruple test 
Screens for T21 and/or 
T18 only. No screening 
available although 
mid-trimester 
anomaly scan 
screens for T18/13 
20+1 – 22+6 
Weeks 
[where CRL is 
over 84mm and 
pregnancy dated 
on HC] No screening available 
although mid-trimester 
anomaly scan screens for 
T18/13 No screening available 
although mid - 
trimester anomaly 
scan screens for 
T18/13 No screening 
available although 
mid-trimester 
anomaly scan 
screens for T18/13 
2.5 Pre-Test information and the offer of screening 
2.5.1 All women and people should be given verbal and written information about 
screening for T21, T18 and T13 at the first contact or booking visit by the 
midwife. The trust uses the Public Health England [PHE 2019b] national 
patient information leaflet ‘Screening tests for you and your baby’. This 
includes the section ‘Screening tests during your pregnancy: Down’s 
syndrome, Edwards’ syndrome and Patau’s syndrome’. The leaflet may be 
posted to the woman or person prior to the first appointment. The midwife 
must document in the digital notes that the leaflet has been given/directed 
to the leaflet online. 
2.5.2 Copies of ‘Screening tests for you and your baby’ are available in some 
other languages, easy -read versions for people with learning difficulties, 
and mp3 audio files for those with sight loss and can be downloaded via the 
PHE website: Screening tests for you and your baby (STFYAYB) - GOV.UK 
(www.gov.uk) . If the leaflet is not available in the language required from the 
national website, it is possible to ask for the leaflet to be translated via the 
trusts Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Team. 
2.5.3 Interpreting services [including sign language] should be used for 
communicating with parents who are not fluent in English at all stages of 
the screening pathway. Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 8 of 54 2.5.4 Women and people booking before 14 completed weeks of pregnancy 
should also be given the UHSussex East information leaflet ‘Information 
about Combined Screening in pregnancy’ by the midwife at booking. This is 
also available on the intranet and at the Trust’s website for pregnant 
women and people : https://www.bsuh.nhs.uk/maternity/ 
 
2.5.5 Women and people booking after 14 weeks of pregnancy or found to be 
more than 14 weeks and 1 day at the time of dating scan are too late for 
the combined screening test [see section 2.4 ]. These women and people 
[singleton and twin pregnancy only] should be offered the quadruple test 
and directed to the information in the leaflet ‘Screening tests for you and 
your baby’ [PHE 2019b] 
2.5.6 Any woman or person can be referred direct to the Antenatal Screening Co -
ordinator or Screening Support Midwives [referred to as screening midwives 
throughout remainder of document] for further information and discussion 
about screening and diagnostic tests [contacts Appendix A]. 
 
2.5.7 The midwife at booking should clearly document any discussions that have 
taken place in the digital notes and the woman or person’s decision to 
accept [consent to screen] or decline screening. 
2.5.8 A woman or person should only have one screening test. A woman or 
person cannot have both the combined and quadruple tests 
2.5.9 It is the responsibility of the midwife who discusses antenatal screening at 
pre- booking or booking to ensure that the estimated date of delivery is 
correctly calculated and screening tests arranged at the appropriate 
gestation where requested. If there are any doubts about gestation a dating 
scan should be performed as soon as possible to accurately date the 
pregnancy before arranging the screening tests. 
2.5.10 Some women and people will opt to have non-invasive pre -natal testing 
[NIPT] which is currently only available in the private sector. NIPT is a 
screening test and so will not detect all babies with Down’s, Edwards’ or 
Patau’s syndromes. Therefore, where women and people have had NIPT, 
they MUST still be offered either the combined or quadruple screening test 
[according to gestation] as part of their NHS care. This applies even when 
the NIPT result was low chance. The rationale for this is that combined and 
quadruple screening tests may detect some babies with these conditions 
that NIPT may miss and vice versa. 
 
2.6 Offering women and people choice over which conditions they are screened for 
[PHE 2018c, PHE 2018d] 
2.6.1 With first trimester combined screening women and people can 
choose to have screening for: 
• All three conditions [T21 and T18/T13] 
• T21 alone 
• T18/T13 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 9 of 54 • None of the conditions 
2.6.2 Where screening for trisomy 18 and 
trisomy 13 is accepted, the chance is 
given as a single combined chance for 
the two conditions 
2.6.3 The community midwife should 
document that combined 
screening for all three trisomies 
have been offered in the digital 
notes under ‘Blood Tests, Results 
and Actions’(see form below) 
2.6.4 
2.6.5 Where a woman or person declines combined screening following the offer this 
should be documented by the community midwife (see form below) 
2.6.6 
2.6.7 
2.6.8 The choice of screening options should also be recorded on the combined 
screening form. This may be recorded by the midwife at booking, the 
sonographer at scan or by the Antenatal Screening Support Worker [ASSW] 
who takes the blood. The ASSW must only document the woman or 
person’s choice on the combined screening request form if it has already 
been documented in the digital notes by a midwife previously [as per 
2.6.3]. 
2.6.9 With the second trimester quadruple test, women and people can choose 
to have screening for: 
• T21 alone 
• No conditions 
2.6.10 The woman or person’s choice is documented at the time the blood test is 
taken on the quadruple test form as well as in the digital notes. 
Screening consent Accept Decline 
Combined 
screening 
 
Quadruple 
test 
 
 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 10 of 54 2.6.11 Women and people should be made aware that regardless of which 
conditions they accept or decline screening for [on either the combined or 
quadruple test], if they later opt for invasive testing the result will always 
test for T13, T18 AND T21. 
 
3 Combined Screening 
 
3.1 Arranging a combined screening test 
3.1.1 If English is not the woman or person’s first language, it is the midwives 
responsibility at booking to inform the ultrasound appointments team at the 
time of arranging the scan of the need for an interpreter and the language 
required. The ultrasound appointments team will arrange for an interpreter 
to be present for the scan. 
3.2 NT Scan: Role of sonographer in the combined screening process 
3.2.1 The scan is performed according to trust ultrasound policy [for further 
information please refer to US005 Ultrasound 1st Trimester Scan . 
 
3.2.2 The sonographer will confirm with the woman or person prior to 
undertaking the NT scan, that they have consented to combine screening. 
3.2.3 The sonographer allocates a unique barcoded number at the time of NT 
scan and scans this barcode into Viewpoint [software programme]. This 
number, known as the ‘RXH number’, is unique to the pregnant woman or 
person and the clinical episode. The sonographer then produces two sticky 
labels containing this barcoded number: one of which is affixed to the 
combined screening request form, the second is inserted into the specimen 
bag so that it may be affixed to the sample bottle at time of blood test. This 
system alerts the laboratory to expect a sample for this woman or person 
for this clinical episode. When the laboratory does not receive a sample 
within 3 working days of date of scan, the laboratory will contact the 
screening midwife to action follow up. This acts as a failsafe to ensure that 
the lab receives a blood sample for all women and people who have 
entered the screening programme having had a NT scan. 
3.2.4 The sonographer imports a copy of the scan report from Viewpoint to the digital 
notes and gives a copy to the woman or person . 
3.2.5 Following the NT scan, the sonographer completes the combined screening 
request form by ensuring there are three correct patient identifiers on the 
form and entering details relating to the ultrasound scan. Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 11 of 54 3.2.6 The sonographer gives the woman or person their combined screening 
request form and advises them to attend for the blood test and weight in 
the antenatal clinic immediately after. 
 
3.3 Blood Test and Weight: The role of the Antenatal Screening Support Worker [ASSW] 
 
3.3.1 The] Antenatal Screening Support Worker [ASSW] will normally see the woman or 
person in ANC immediately after the scan to complete the screening test. This role 
may also be undertaken by a midwife. At this appointment they will: 
3.3.2 Check all the details on the combined screening request form with the woman or 
person to ensure it is correct and complete any missing information. 
 
3.3.3 Weigh the woman or person, recording the weight on the combined screening 
request form in kilograms. Heavy clothing/footwear should be removed prior to 
weighing. 
 
3.3.4 Take a blood sample in a gold topped [clotted] bottle [according to trust 
venepuncture policy] completing all patient identifiers on the sample bottle. Sticky 
bloodhound patient labels may be used but details must be checked with the 
woman or person first. 
 
3.3.5 Where women and people require other bloods taking at the same time as the 
combined screening, then the combined screening sample must be taken first. 
This is because EDTA additives from pink and purple bottles can affect the 
markers in the blood if there is contamination of the combined sample bottle. 
 
3.3.6 Affix the label containing the unique barcode of the ‘RXH number’ to the sample 
bottle as provided by the ultrasound department [see section 3.4.1]. 
 
3.3.7 Send the sample with request form direct to the laboratory at whichever site the 
woman or person was screened at, noting that samples should be processed by lab 
staff within 6 hours of the sample being taken. 
 
3.3.8 Document in the digital notes that combined screening has been accepted 
and blood has been taken with informed consent using the ‘Blood Tests, 
Results and Actions’ form opened by the community midwife. 
3.3.9 Ensure the woman or person is aware of the results process and knows how to 
contact the screening midwives if they wish to discuss the test or results in more 
detail [see contacts in Appendix A ]. 
 
3.3.10 If the woman or person has any questions at this appointment that the 
ASSW cannot a n s w e r, then they should be referred direct to the screening 
midwives. 
 
3.3.11 The ASSW will keep a daily record of all blood samples taken for combined 
screening and cross check this with the list of women and people expected for 
scan. If any women and people attended for scan but failed to attend for blood Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 12 of 54 test then the ASSW will alert both the lab and the screening midwives to action 
follow up. 
4 Combined Screening: Results process 
4.1 Blood samples are processed in UHSussex East pathology laboratory at the RSCH 
site. Samples taken at PRH are sent to the PRH laboratory where they are 
forwarded to the RSCH lab. The samples are processed and results generated 
Monday through to Friday. 
4.2 The biochemists are responsible for calculating the chance. 
4.3 Results should usually be available within 3 working days of the blood sample being 
received by the laboratory. 
4.4 Results are categorised as being high chance or low chance using the cut-off of 
1 in 150 which is defined according to PHE guidance [2018a] 
 
High chance = 1 in 2 to 1 in 150 [inclusive] 
Low chance = greater than 1 in 150 
4.5 The Laboratory Screening Co-ordinator [LSC] will process the results according to 
whether they are high or low chance. 
4.6 It is the community midwife’s responsibility to confirm that the woman or person 
has received their result [either high or low chance] and ensure it has been 
documented in the digital notes at the next antenatal check [usually 16 weeks] 
[BSUH NHS Trust 2018]. 

5 Low chance results 
5.1 The Laboratory Screening Co -ordinator sends a copy of the low chance result to the 
woman or person with a covering letter within 2 weeks [10 working days] of the test 
[PHE 2018a]. 
 
6 High chance results 
6.1 The Laboratory Screening Co -ordinator contacts the screening midwives by email to 
inform them of a high chance result. In all cases the screening midwife confirms 
with the Laboratory Screening Co-ordinators by email that the result has been 
received and is being actioned [PHE 2018a]. 
6.2 The screening midwife contacts the woman or person by phone to inform them of 
the result, discuss options and arrange follow up care. The first attempt to contact 
the woman or person will usually be within 1 working day of receiving the result. Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 13 of 54 6.3 Discussions with the woman or person can take place over the phone or in person 
according to their preferences. All women and people with a high chance result are 
offered a hospital appointment with a screening midwife or consultant to discuss the 
test result in more detail, within 3 working days of the result being issued [PHE 
2018a, PHE 2019a]. 
6.4 Documentation of all discussions should be made by the screening midwife or doctor 
in the digital notes. 
6.5 All women and people with a high chance result should be offered information 
about the support group ARC [Antenatal Results and Choices] [see contacts in 
Appendix B] 
 
6.5.1 All women and people with a high chance result should be offered invasive 
[diagnostic] testing. The woman must be informed that these tests carry a 
chance of miscarriage [PHE 2018a]. 
6.5.2 All women and people with a high chance result should also be offered the 
Non Invasive Prenatal Test (NIPT) in line with PHE 3 year pilot 
commencing 1/6/21. This is not available on the NHS for low chance 
combined Screening and Quadruple test results. See Algorithm 7.0 
6.6 All women and people with a high chance result should be informed that further 
testing is optional – they do not have to have any further testing and if they decline 
diagnostic testing then we will not be able to diagnose Down’s syndrome until after 
birth. However, while the 20 week mid-trimester anomaly scan is not a screening 
test for Down’s syndrome, it is a screening test for Edwards’ and Patau’s syndrome 
and may detect features of either condition [PHE 2018b]. 
6.7 If a woman or person requests NIPT screening, then the Antenatal Screening 
Midwives must discuss the test with them and explain that it is not diagnostic. The 
blood test can be taken at both hospital sites by the screening Team and logged 
onto the NIPT screening IT portal linked to St Georges, where the sample will be 
processed and the result reported. The woman or person must be advised that if a 
low chance NIPT is reported they are not able to have diagnostic testing on the NHS. 
If a high chance NIPT is reported the woman or person will be advised they can have 
a diagnostic test to confirm the result either locally or tertiary depending on test 
requested and availability. See Algorithm 6.9 
6.8 If a woman or person requests invasive testing, then this should be arranged by the 
screening midwife or doctor for the next available appointment [with regard to the 
gestational limits of the chosen test i.e. CVS or amniocentesis: see Algorithm 
10.1 ]. Where there is no availability locally, then women and people may be 
referred to the tertiary centre in London. [Note multiple pregnancies will always be 
referred to Kings College Hospital, London 
6.9 When the increased risk is for Trisomy 13 (Patau’s syndrome) or Trisomy 18 
(Edwards’ syndrome) the option of detailed fetal anomaly scans as an alternative to 
CVS or amniocentesis should be discussed with the woman or person. 
6.10 When a woman or person declines invasive testing after a high risk result, the Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 14 of 54 midwife or doctor should document details of the discussions that have taken place 
as follows: 
 
6.10.1 Where women and people are seen for a face -to-face discussion, details 
of that discussion will be documented in the digital notes [clearly stating 
the woman or person’s decision to decline a diagnostic test]. 
6.10.2 Where women and people opt for telephone discussions, a copy of the 
result with a covering letter should be sent to them by the screening 
midwife. The covering letter should summarise the discussions that have 
taken place and the woman or person’s decision to decline a diagnostic test. 
Copies of this letter should be sent to their GP and scanned and uploaded to 
the digital notes. 
6.10.3 Women and people who decline further testing should be made aware 
that they can change their mind in the future and should be given the 
screening midwives’ phone number in case they wish to discuss and/or 
arrange testing later. 
6.10.4 The antenatal screening midwives will cross check all high chance results 
with the laboratory screening co -ordinator on a weekly basis to ensure all 
high chance results have been received and actioned. A record of this cross 
check is recorded on the database maintained by the screening midwives as 
a record of all high chance results and outcomes. 
 
7 Quadruple Test 
Eligibility [PHE 2018a, PHE 2018c] 
7.1 The quadruple test can be performed between 14+2 and 20+0 weeks inclusive. 
When gestational age is 14+ CRL greater than 84mm ( with an HC between 101 - 
172mm 
7.2 The quadruple test is only available to women and people with singleton and twin 
pregnancies who request screening for Down’s syndrome but are over 14+1 weeks 
[by HC] and so too late for the combined test. This might be because of late 
booking, late diagnosis of pregnancy or the pregnancy being more advanced than 
anticipated. 
7.2.1 Women and people requesting screening who are too late for combined 
screening at the time of the dating scan should be referred to the screening 
team immediately to be counselled about the quadruple test, and to 
complete the process. Where women and people choose to take time to 
consider their options or if there is no one to take the blood, then the 
woman or person must be given an appointment to return to the ANC at a 
later date. 
7.3 The quadruple test is not available to women and people with triplets or more [NICE 
2011]. Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 15 of 54 7.4 The quadruple test is a screening test for Down’s syndrome. It is not a screening test 
for Patau’s or Edwards’ syndrome. 
7.5 Whilst the quadruple test may detect women and people at increased chance of 
having a baby with neural tube defect [NTD], it should not be recommended 
specifically for this purpose. The recommended screening test for NTD is the mid-
trimester anomaly scan [PHE 2018b]. 
 
7.6 Pre-test information [see also section 2.5] 
 
7.6.1 Women and people considering the quadruple test should be 
referred to the PHE [2019b] leaflet: ‘Screening tests for you and your baby’ 
as well as the information on the trust website [BSUH NHS Trust No date], 
available at: https:// www.bsuh.nhs.uk/maternity/your - 
pregnancy/screening -tests -pregnancy/. 
7.6.2 Women and people with twin pregnancies must be referred for further 
discussion with the screening midwife team prior to screening in order to 
explain the discrepancy in detection rates between monchorionic and 
dichorionic twins [PHE 2018c]. 
 
7.7 Taking the quadruple test 
 
7.7.1 Where women and people have accepted the offer of a quadruple test, the 
midwife should complete all sections of the quadruple test request form. 
The form may also be completed by an ASSW where the woman or person 
has already consented to screening after counselling by a midwife. 
7.7.2 The woman or person must have a dating scan to confirm the exact 
gestation prior to the blood test and details of the scan must be recorded on 
the request form. 
7.7.3 All quadruple tests are to be taken within the hospital antenatal clinic or 
Maternity Assessment Unit [MAU] at either PRH or RSCH. The test may 
be taken by a member of the screening team, ANC or MAU staff. 
7.7.4 A gold topped [clotted] blood sample is taken by the midwife or ASSW, 
according to UHSussex East venepuncture policy. They should document 
that blood has been taken with consent in the digital notes using the 
‘Blood Tests, Results and Actions’ form opened by the community 
midwife. 
7.7.5 At the time the sample is taken, the woman or person should be weighed 
and the weight recorded on the form in kilograms. Heavy clothes/foot wear 
should be removed prior to the weight. 
7.7.6 Samples are sent with the completed request form to UHSussex East 
pathology where they are then forwarded to the Clinical Biochemistry Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 16 of 54 Department at Oxford University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust (Oxford 
Labs) for processing. 
7.7.7 A record of all women and people having the quad test is maintained by the 
screening team on a shared database. The results are later entered onto 
this database to ensure all women and people having a quadruple test 
receive a result. 
7.7.8 ASSWs will email the lead at UHSussex East laboratory to inform them that 
a quadruple test has been taken. They then know a sample is being sent. 
 
7.8 Quadruple test results process 
 
A record of all women and people having the quad test is maintained by the 
screening team on a shared database. The results are later entered onto this 
database to ensure all women and people having a quadruple test receive a result . 
The database is checked every week during the Wednesday failsafe check and any 
missing results are then discussed with the laboratory. 
 
7.8.1 Results are categorised as being high chance or low chance for Down’s 
syndrome using a cut -off of 1 in 150 which is defined according to PHE 
guidance [2018c]. 
7.8.2 Staff at Oxford Labs process the results according to whether results are 
low or high chance. 
7.8.3 It is the community midwife’s responsibility to confirm that the woman or 
person has received the result at the next visit following sample taking and 
that the result along with any follow up care is documented in the digital 
notes. 
7.8.4 Women and people should be informed to expect a result within 2 weeks 
of having the test taken. If they have not received a result by 2 weeks, they 
should be advised to call the screening midwives to follow up the results. 

7.9 Low chance results 
 
7.9.1 Low chance results are uploaded to the LifeCycle portal by the Oxford 
Labs. This can then be accessed by the UHSussex East screening 
midwives and laboratory screening co -ordinator. 
7.9.2 The UHSussex East laboratory screening co-ordinator sends a copy of the 
result with a covering letter to the woman or person within 2 weeks of the 
test. 
 
7.10 High chance result [for Down’s syndrome] Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 17 of 54 7.10.1 High chance results are also uploaded to the LifeCycle portal by the Oxford Labs . 
This can then be accessed by the UHSussex East screening midwives and laboratory screening co -
ordinator. 
7.10.1 7.10.2 The antenatal screening midwives are responsible for checking the 
LifeCycle portal daily and acknowledging the receipt of a high chance result 
within the portal. If the high chance result is not acknowledged within 2 
working days then the Oxford Labs will email the generic antenatal 
screening email address to alert the screening midwives that a high chance 
result is awaiting acknowledgement and actioning. 
7.10.2 The screening midwife contacts the woman or person by phone to inform 
them of the result, discuss options and arrange follow up care. The first 
attempt to contact the woman or person will usually be within 1 working 
day of receiving the result. 
7.10.3 Discussions with the woman or person can take place over the phone or in 
person according to the woman or person’s preferences. All women and 
people with a high chance result are offered a hospital appointment with a 
screening midwife or consultant to discuss the test result in more detail, 
within 3 working days of the result being issued. 
7.10.4 Documentation of all discussions and women and people’s choices 
regarding further testing should be made by the screening midwife or 
doctor in the digital notes. 

 7.10.5 All women and people with a high chance result should be offered invasive 
[diagnostic] testing by amniocentesis. The woman or person must be 
informed that these tests carry a risk of miscarriage. All women and people 
with a high chance on the Quadruple test should also be offered the Non Invasive 
Prenatal Test (NIPT) in line with PHE 3 year pilot commencing 1/6/21. This can be 
taken up to 21+6 weeks gestation. See Algorithm 6.9 for pathway. Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 18 of 54 
7.10.6 All women and people with a high chance result should be informed that 
further testing is optional – they do not have to have any further testing and 
if they decline diagnostic testing then we will not be able to diagnose Down’s 
syndrome until after birth. 
7.10.7 If a woman or person requests invasive testing, then this should be arranged 
by the screening midwife or doctor for the next available appointment as 
per section 7. 
7.10.8 All women and people with a high chance result should be informed of the 
support group ARC [Antenatal Results and Choices] see in Appendix B. 
 
7.10.9 Where women and people decline invasive testing after a high chance 
result, the midwife or doctor should document details of the 
discussions that have taken place as follows: 
 
• Where women and people are seen for a face -to-face 
discussion, details of that discussion will be documented in the 
digital notes [clearly stating the woman or person’s decision to 
decline a diagnostic test] and a copy of the result scanned and 
uploaded to the digital notes. 
• Where women and people opt for telephone discussions, a 
copy of the result with a covering letter should be sent to the 
woman or person by the screening midwife. The covering 
letter should summarise the discussions that have taken 
place and the woman or person’s decision to decline a 
diagnostic test. Copies of these documents should be 
scanned and uploaded to the digital notes. 

7.10.10 Women and people who decline further testing should be made 
aware that they can change their mind in the future and should be given 
contact numbers for the screening midwives in case they do so. 
 
8 Screening: Special Cases 
8.1 Multiple pregnancies [NICE 2011, PHE 2018c] 
8.1.1 All women and people with multiple pregnancies should be offered 
screening according to the number of fetuses and chorionicity as detailed in 
this section 
 
8.1.2 Pre-test counselling in a twin or triplet pregnancy should include the 
following additional information [NICE 2011]: 
• The greater likelihood of Down’s syndrome in a twin and triplet 
pregnancy 
• The different options for screening Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 19 of 54 • The false positive rate is higher than for a singleton 
• The likelihood of being offered invasive testing is higher than for a 
singleton 
• The greater likelihood of complications for invasive testing 
• The physical risks and psychological implications in the short and long 
term relating to selective fetal reduction 
 
8.1.3 At the initial scan where multiple pregnancy is diagnosed the ultra -
sonographer should assess viability, gestational age and chorionicity. This 
should be documented on the USS report and imported from Viewpoint 
to the digital notes. 
8.1.4 All triplets and higher order multiples should be referred to a consultant 
obstetrician at the next available appointment for early discussion about the 
plan of care and options available. 
8.1.5 Major congenital malformations will be assessed at the fetal anomaly scan 
undertaken as per section 8 below. 
8.1.6 The woman or person should be referred, by the sonographer, midwife or 
GP to the screening midwives or senior grade obstetrician if they wish to 
discuss any aspect of screening further. 
 
8.2 Twin pregnancies [NICE 2011, PHE 2018c] 
 
8.2.1 Women and people booking prior to 14+1 weeks, with a viable twin 
pregnancy, should be offered combined screening by the midwife at 
booking. 
8.2.2 In monochorionic twin pregnancies, the chance of Down’s syndrome, 
Edwards’ and Patau’s syndromes at combined screening will be calculated 
per pregnancy. 
8.2.3 In dichorionic twin pregnancies, the chance of Down’s syndrome, Edward’s 
and Patau’s syndromes at combined screening will be calculated for each 
fetus. 
8.2.4 After 14+1 weeks and up to and including 20+0 weeks, women and people 
with twin pregnancies should be referred to the screening midwife team to 
discuss the quadruple test as per section 5. 
 
8.3 Triplets and higher order multiples [NICE 2011, PHE 2018c] 
 
8.3.1 Women and people booking prior to 14+1 week with a triplet or higher 
order multiple pregnancy should be offered screening for Down’s syndrome Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 20 of 54 by the health professional at booking. Screening for Edwards’ and Patau’s 
syndromes is not possible in a triplet or higher order multiple pregnancy. 
8.3.2 Neither the combined screening test nor quadruple test can be used to 
assess the chance of Down’s syndrome in a triplet or higher order multiple 
pregnancy. Therefore chance is assessed using maternal or parental age and 
NT alone where CRLs in all fetuses fall between 45 and 84mm [see 
Algorithm 10.4 : Calculating chance assessment by NT alone]. The 
sonographer should measure the NT on all fetuses according to local 
ultrasound policy [BSUH 2017]. 
8.3.3 In monochorionic triplet pregnancies the chance of Down’s syndrome 
will be calculated per pregnancy. 
8.3.4 In dichorionic and trichorionic triplet pregnancies, the chance of 
Down’s syndrome will be calculated for each fetus. 
 
8.4 Referral to Kings College Hospital, Fetal Medicine Unit should be offered if: 
• chance assessment for Down’s syndrome is high in one or more of 
the foetuses 
• the NT measurement is 3.5mm in one or more of the foetuses 
• the sonographer is unable to record a NT for one or more of the foetuses 
 
8.5 Vanishing twin pregnancies [PHE 2018c] 
8.5.1 Combined screening 
8.5.1.1 When ultrasound shows that there is an empty second pregnancy 
sac, the biochemical markers appear no different to those in a 
singleton pregnancy and the combined screening test can be used 
to calculate the chance. 
8.5.1.2 When the ultrasound shows that there is a second sac containing a 
non-viable fetus [sometimes called a ‘vanished’ twin], it is possible 
that this could contribute to the maternal or parental biochemical 
markers for many weeks. In such cases the chance calculation 
should be based on maternal or parental age and NT alone [see 
Algorithm 10.4 : Calculating chance assessment by NT alone]. 

8.6 Quadruple screening 
8.6.1 When ultrasound shows there is an empty second pregnancy sac or there is 
a second sac containing a non -viable fetus (sometimes called a ‘vanished’ 
twin), the biochemical markers appear no different to those in a singleton 
pregnancy and the Quadruple test can be used. 
 
8.7 Calculating chance assessment by NT alone 
 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 21 of 54 8.7.1 Chance is calculated by NT alone in the following circumstances only: 
triplet or higher order multiple pregnancy OR vanishing twin pregnancy. It 
is the sonographer’s responsibility to inform the woman or person that 
chance assessment can only be made by NT alone and give the reason 
why. If the woman or person has further questions they can be referred to 
the screening midwives. 
8.7.2 The sonographer should document why the chance is to be calculated by 
NT alone on the scan report and import the scan report from Viewpoint 
to the digital notes. 
8.7.3 The chance assessment for Down’s syndrome screening must be 
undertaken by the laboratory, even if based on ultrasound findings alone 
[PHE 2018c]. In such cases the sonographer informs the woman or person 
that combined screening is not possible and that the chance will be 
calculated on NT alone. 
8.7.4 Immediately after the scan, the sonographer must refer the woman or 
person to a member of the screening team [either midwife or ASSW] as the 
request form must still be completed in full. 
8.7.5 The midwife or ASSW sends the completed combined screening request form 
to the laboratory screening co -ordinators by internal post [or hand delivers] 
and informs the laboratory screening co-ordinators, screening midwives and 
biochemists by email that a calculation is required on NT alone and that the 
request form has been sent to them. 
8.7.6 The laboratory staff – either lab screening co -ordinator or biochemist, 
informs the screening midwives by email when the results are ready for 
reporting. 
8.7.7 Low chance results: The screening midwife sends a copy of the result 
with a covering letter to the woman or person. 
8.7.8 High chance results: The screening midwives inform the woman or 
person as for combined screening [section 4.3]. 
 
8.8 Increased nuchal translucency [NT]: Greater than or equal to 3.5mm 
8.8.1 A NT measurement of 3.5mm or above is a significant pregnancy scan 
finding [where CRL is between 45 -84mm inclusive]. It is associated with an 
increased chance of fetal cardiac and syndromic problems as well as 
chromosomal aberrations [PHE 2018c]. 
8.8.2 Women and people found to have an NT measurement of 3.5mm or more 
should be referred by the sonographer to the screening midwives or fetal 
medicine consultant [as per Algorithm 10.4 ] for further discussion and 
offered further tests [as detailed in section 6.6.3] even if screening for 
Down’s, Edwards’ and Patau’s syndrome has been declined [PHE 2018c]. 
 
 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 22 of 54 Major cardiac defects in chromosomally normal fetuses 
Souka et al 2004 
Nuchal translucency (mm) Major cardiac defects 
below 95th centile 0.16% 
2.5 – 3.4 1% 
3.5 – 4.4 3% 
4.5 – 5.4 7% 
5.5 – 6.4 20% 
6.5 or more 30% 
 8.8.3 Discussion of scan findings may take place over the phone or face -to-face 
according to woman or person’s preference. When discussion of findings do 
not take place immediately after scan then women and people should be 
offered an appointment for further discussion within 3 working days. 
8.8.4 These women and people should be offered the following tests: 
8.8.4.1 Combined screening 
To complete the testing process. An increased NT measurement 
does not automatically mean that the chance assessment for 
Down’s syndrome will be increased. The combined screening 
result can therefore help women and people decide both whether 
to h a v e a diagnostic test and decide which diagnostic test is right for 
them. 
8.8.4.2 Invasive [diagnostic testing] for chromosome anomaly regardless of 
the chance for Down’s syndrome. 
Women and people do not have to wait for the result of the 
combined screening test before having invasive testing although 
in most cases this should be available by the time of the invasive 
test. In these cases the laboratory will perform both PCR for 
common trisomies AND either a CGH array or full karyotype [the 
laboratory will decide which test to perform based on the results 
of the PCR]. Women and people should be advised of the 
limitations of diagnostic tests and informed that such tests are 
designed to test for chromosome abnormalities and so will not 
detect genetic disorders [unless specifically requested in women 
and people who are known to be at chance of having a baby with 
a specific genetic disorder]. 
8.9 Fetal cardiac scan. 
Refer women and people to the Fetal Cardiac Unit, Evelina Children’s Hospital, 
St Thomas Hospital, London [see contacts in appendix B]. The earliest 
gestation at which this can be performed is 14 weeks. 
8.10 Fetal anomaly scan 
As per routine policy at 20 - 20+6 weeks gestation 
 
8.11 The chance of fetal cardiac defect in relation to the size of the NT may be discussed 
with the woman or person as given in table below Major cardiac defects in 
chromosomally normal fetuses [Souka et al 2004]. 

Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 23 of 54 8.11.1 If an anomaly is detected at any stage, referral should be made according to 
the policy: Antenatal detection of fetal anomaly. See Algorithm 10.8 . 
 
8.11.2 If all the test results are normal, then the woman or person should be 
advised that the most likely outcome is a normal baby, however, no test can 
exclude all anomalies and the chance of there being a syndromic problem is 
slightly above the background chance. 
8.11.3 All women and people with an increased NT measurement should be 
advised of the support group ARC [see contacts in appendix B] and be given 
the contact number for the antenatal screening midwives. 
8.11.4 The midwife or doctor should document information given at every stage 
along with acceptance or decline of tests and subsequent results in the 
digital notes. 
 
8.12 Nuchal measurement 3.0mm to 3.4 mm inclusive 
 
8.12.1 Where the NT is between 3.0mm and 3.4mm inclusive, and the chance of 
T21, T18 and T13 is assessed as high, then women and people should be 
informed that if they opt for invasive testing the laboratory will conduct a 
full CGH array as well as rapid PCR test for common trisomies. 

8.13 Pre-Natal Invasive Testing 
8.13.1 An amniocentesis is available at UHSussex East at the RSCH site for 
singleton pregnancies. However women and people should be 
referred to London when there is no local availability. 
8.13.2 All women and people with multiple pregnancies who request an invasive 
test should be referred by the screening midwife or consultant to the Harris 
Birth right Unit at Kings College Hospital as these cases require the expertise 
of a tertiary level fetal medicine unit [PHE 2018a]. 
8.14 Pre-test information 
8.14.1 All women and people considering invasive testing should be offered a copy 
of the UHSussex East leaflet ‘CVS and Amniocentesis’ prior to the test. This 
is available in hard copy or on the trust’s website 
https://www.bsuh.nhs.uk/maternity/leaflets/ 
 
8.14.2 All women and people considering invasive testing should have a discussion 
about the purpose, benefits, limitations and implications of invasive testing 
with a screening midwife or senior grade obstetrician before the 
appointment for the test is made. Pre -test discussion should include the 
following: 
 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 24 of 54 • Risk of miscarriage associated with both CVS and amniocentesis 
• Gestation at which tests can be performed 
• What exactly is being tested for and what information these results will 
provide about their unborn baby, emphasising that no test can rule out 
all chromosome and genetic disorders 
• Pre and post -test care including results process, signs of miscarriage 
and who to contact if any concerns after the test 
• Options if anomaly diagnosed which may include continuing the 
pregnancy, continuing and putting the baby up for adoption, and 
termination 
8.14.3 Discussion may take place face -to-face or over the phone. The discussion 
and decision to accept or decline the test should be documented in the 
digital notes. 
8.14.4 Where the blood group of the woman or person is not known, this should 
be taken prior to the appointment for invasive testing so that women 
and people who are rhesus negative can be offered anti -d post 
procedure. 

8.15 HIV and hepatitis B testing pre procedure 
8.15.1 HIV and hepatitis B testing should be arranged prior to the test and results 
s h o u l d be available at the appointment. 
8.15.2 Women and people who are HIV / Hep B positive should discuss the risk of 
vertical transmission with a fetal medicine consultant/GUM consultant 
prior to making a decision about proceeding with the test. 
8.15.3 If women and people have declined screening for blood borne viruses, the 
doctor should discuss the potential risks of infection to the fetus if positive 
and that discussion documented in the digital notes (RCOG 2010]. 
 
8.16 Arranging an appointment 
8.16.1 CVS and amniocentesis are available at RSCH and appointments are 
arranged via the screening midwives. 
 
8.17 Gestation limits [RCOG 2010] 
8.17.1 Amniocentesis should be performed after 15+6 weeks of gestation. 
8.17.2 CVS should not be performed before 11+0 weeks of gestation. 
8.18 At the CVS/amniocentesis procedure Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 25 of 54 8.18.1 It is the responsibility of the consultant performing the test to ensure the 
woman or person has given their informed consent and that this is 
documented in the digital notes. 
8.18.2 The sample must be labelled with the women and people details and these 
checked with the woman or person prior to sending the sample. 
8.18.3 The consultant should ensure the sample request form is completed in full 
and is sent with the sample to the Genetics Laboratories at Guy’s and St 
Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust via courier. 
8.18.4 The consultant should document that the procedure has taken place in the 
digital notes to include indication, number of uterine insertions, bloody 
taps or any complications. 
8.18.5 It is the consultant’s responsibility to ensure rhesus negative women and 
people have been offered anti -d to prevent rhesus isoimmunisation, and 
where accepted, administered as per protocol [Cross reference with anti d 
policy] prior to leaving the unit. 
8.18.6 Agreement should be reached between the consultant and the woman 
or person about how the test results will be given [see section 7.8]. 
8.18.7 The midwife or consultant seeing the woman or person post procedure 
should ensure they have their correct telephone number for results 
documented in the digital notes. 
8.18.8 The woman or person should be given the contact number for the screening 
midwives in case of any concerns post procedure and to follow up results if 
necessary. 
8.18.9 The woman or person should also be advised who to contact in case of 
any complications post procedure [normally Maternity Assessment Unit 
[MAU : RSCH ] or Day Assessment Unit DAU: PRH ]. Symptoms to report 
include: 
 
• Feeling generally unwell (shivery, nauseous, abdominal discomfort) 
• Pyrexia 
• Persistent bleeding from the vagina 
• Persistent lower abdominal/back pain 
• Clear watery type loss (not urine) from the vagina 
• Offensive smelling discharge from the vagina. 
 
8.19 Sample transport 
8.19.1 All samples are sent by courier to Guys Hospital cytogenetic centre 
[contacts for both Courier Company and lab in contents]. 
8.19.2 The consultant taking the sample is responsible for informing administration 
staff that a sample has been taken and requires couriering. Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 26 of 54 8.19.3 Samples should be packaged according to UN P650 Packaging Instruction for 
Diagnostic Samples Sample bottles should be wrapped in absorbent 
material and inserted into a secondary watertight plastic container. Outer 
packaging must include the secondary packaging and request form and 
addressed correctly. The outer packaging should be clearly marked URGENT 
DIAGNOSTIC SPECIMEN FRAGILE HANDLE WITH CARE along with the 
following symbol: 
 
UN 3373 

8.19.4 Where samples are not sent immediately after the procedure, they should 
be stored in a refrigerator overnight and sent at the first opportunity the 
following day. Samples cannot be left in the refrigerator over the weekend 
as the sample will have deteriorated during this time and so unusable. 
 
8.20 Results process 
8.20.1 PCR results for trisomy 13, 18 and 21, and where indicated X and Y, will 
usually be available in 3 working days. Women and people should be 
informed that it is not always possible to obtain a rapid PCR result and in 
which case they will need to wait further testing. 
8.20.2 The cytogenetic laboratory will decide whether further testing by CGH array 
or full karyotype is indicated, according to clinical history. Women and 
people should be advised that results for either test may take up to between 2 
and 3 weeks. 
8.20.3 Tests for specific gene disorders may take longer and requires liaison with 
staff at the cytogenetic laboratory so that the woman or person can be 
advised of the likely timeframe for results. 
8.20.4 Women and people have the option as to how they receive their results. 
They can opt for a phone call or can come into the hospital and receive 
the results in person. The woman or person’s preferred option should be 
documented on the request form and in the digital notes. Guy’s 
cytogenetic laboratory will email the results to the antenatal screening 
shared NHS net email account. These results are password protected. 
8.20.5 Women and people are informed of their results by either a screening 
midwife or senior grade obstetrician. Results [whether normal or abnormal] 
should never be given out to women and people by non - registered 
professionals or anyone who does not fully understand the result and its 
implications or the indication for invasive testing. 
 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 27 of 54 8.21 Normal results 
8.21.1 Where results are given over the phone, the woman or person should be 
given the option of a follow up appointment to discuss the result in more 
detail with a specialist screening midwife or senior grade obstetrician. 
8.21.2 It is the responsibility of the professional who informed the woman or 
person of the result to document that the result has been given in the 
digital notes. 
8.21.3 In all cases a confirmatory letter is sent to the woman or person by the 
obstetrician who performed the test within 1 week of the result being 
received by the hospital. 
8.22 Anomaly results 
8.22.1 Discussions can take place over the phone or face -to-face at the hospital 
according to the woman or person’s preference. 
8.22.2 In all cases the woman or person is offered an appointment to come up to 
hospital to discuss the results in more detail and arrange appropriate 
follow -on care. 
8.22.3 See section 10 for care to be offered after diagnosis of fetal anomaly 
 
Section B 
Fetal Anomaly Ultrasound Programme 

1 Fetal Anomaly Ultrasound Programme 
Aims and Objectives The main aim of the NHS screening programme for Fetal Anomaly 
Ultrasound is to offer all pregnant women and people in England a minimum of two 
ultrasound scans. 
1.1 The first is an early ultrasound scan, undertaken after 8 weeks gestation and used 
mainly for confirming viability, dating the pregnancy and assessing early fetal 
development. In most cases, where women and people consent to screening for 
Down’s, Edwards’ and Patau’s syndromes, this will be undertaken at around 12 
weeks of pregnancy as part of the combined screening test. Refer to dating of 
pregnancy protocol for further clarification of dating pregnancy – for further 
information please see US005 1st Trimester ultrasound Scan 
 
1.2 The second ultrasound scan is carried out during mid -pregnancy between 18+0 to 
20+6 weeks of the pregnancy to screen for a range of structural anomalies. This scan 
is known as the anomaly scan which is the term used throughout this document. At 
UHSussex East women and people should be referred for the anomaly scan ideally 
between 20+0 and 20+6 weeks. For further information please see US004 Ultrasound Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 28 of 54 Anomaly Scan 

1.3 The objectives of the 18+0 to 20+6 weeks anomaly scan are to [PHE 2018b]: 
1.3.1 Ensure access to a uniform screening programme which conforms to an 
agreed level of quality. 
 
• Offer screening to eligible women and people in England to 
identify anomalies that are life limiting 
• Identify anomalies which may benefit from antenatal treatment 
• Identify anomalies which require early intervention following delivery 
• To facilitate choice in appropriate diagnostic testing and pregnancy 
management, including continuation of the pregnancy or termination 
1.4 Pre-test information [PHE 2018b] 
1.4.1 The eligible population includes all women and people booking prior to 
23+0. All women and people in the eligible population are offered an 
anomaly scan. This is ideally performed between 20+0 and 20+6 weeks [see 
section further for late bookers]. 
1.4.2 It is the midwife’s responsibility to discuss and offer the scan at the pre - 
booking or booking appointment, emphasising that this is a screening test 
and is optional. Algorithm 10.1 details the issues that should be considered 
during pre-test discussion. 
1.4.3 All women and people should be given written information, ideally prior to 
being offered screening. The trust uses the PHE [2019b] national patient 
information leaflet ‘Screening tests for you and your baby’. This includes 
the section ’11 physical conditions (20 -week scan). This leaflet is available 
via the digital notes patient portal. . 
1.4.4 Copies of ‘Screening tests for you and your baby’ are available in some 
other languages, easy -read versions for people with learning difficulties, 
and mp3 audio files for those with sight loss and can be downloaded via the 
PHE website: Screening tests for you and your baby (STFYAYB) - GOV.UK 
(www.gov.uk) . If the leaflet is not available in the language required from the 
national website, it is possible to ask for the leaflet to be translated via the 
trusts Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Team. 
1.4.5 Discussion should take place with a translator for those women and 
people not fluent in English. 
1.5 Women and people booking after 20+6 weeks, who haven’t had an anomaly scan 
elsewhere, should be referred for a scan by the midwife at booking at the next 
available appointment. Women and people booking late should be aware that 
depending on gestational age, not all fetal structures will be clearly seen and a full 
anomaly scan may not be possible. The sonographer will advise the woman or person 
at the time of scan Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 29 of 54 1.6 Any woman or person can be referred direct to the antenatal screening midwives for 
further information and discussion about screening and diagnostic tests. 
1.7 The midwife at booking must document in the digital notes that screening has 
been offered and the acceptance of [consent to screen] or decline of the test. 

2 Arranging the anomaly scan 
 
2.1 In most cases the ultrasound department will give the appointment for the anomaly 
scan to the woman or person when they attend for their dating scan. Otherwise, 
the USS booking team will send a letter to the woman or person with the 
appointment details. Alternatively the midwife or doctor can call the ultrasound 
booking line direct to arrange the scan. 
2.2 If English is not the woman or person’s first language, it is the midwives 
responsibility at booking to inform the ultrasound appointments team at the time of 
arranging the scan, of the need for an interpreter and the language required. The 
ultrasound appointments team will arrange for an interpreter to be present for the 
scan. 
2.3 Rescans 
 
2.3.1 The woman or person should be offered a single further scan at 23 weeks of 
pregnancy to complete the screening examination if the image quality of the 
first examination is compromised. Common reasons for poor image quality 
include: 
• Increased maternal or parental BMI 
• Suboptimal fetal lie 
• Uterine fibroids 
• Abdominal scarring 
 
2.3.2 If after the second scan the assessment of fetal anatomy remains 
incomplete, the woman or person is told by the sonographer that 
screening is incomplete and this should be recorded on the scan and 
the scan imported from Viewpoint to the digital notes by the 
sonographer [PHE 2018b]. No further scans for the purpose of routine 
assessment of fetal anomaly are indicated. 
2.4 Results process 
2.4.1 Where no anomaly is identified: it is the responsibility of the sonographer 
to inform the woman or person of the results after the scan and import 
the scan from Viewpoint to the digital notes [see ultrasound policy]. The 
sonographer should emphasise that ultrasound scan cannot exclude all 
anomalies. 
2.4.2 Where anomaly is suspected or identified, the sonographer should inform Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 30 of 54 the woman or person of the scan findings and import the scan from 
Viewpoint to the digital notes . It is the responsibility of the sonographer to 
arrange referral for further opinion and care according to Algorithm 10.8 
‘Antenatal detection of fetal anomalies’. 

3 Referral process following suspected fetal anomaly on ultrasound scan 
3.1 Role of sonographer 
3.1.1 Fetal anomaly may be suspected on scan at any gestation. The referral 
process is the same regardless of gestation. 
3.1.2 If the sonographer suspects an anomaly on scan, a second opinion should be 
sought. This may be with another sonographer or fetal medicine consultant. 
3.1.3 The sonographer will inform the woman or person of the scan findings 
before they leave the ultrasound department and advise the woman or 
person of the follow up that has been arranged. 
3.1.4 All women and people with suspected fetal anomaly should be given the 
following contact numbers by the sonographer at the time the anomaly is 
diagnosed: 
• The mobile number for the screening midwife team 
• The helpline number for the support group Antenatal Results 
and Choices [ARC] [details in contacts list in Appendix B]. 
3.1.5 The sonographer who has performed the scan where fetal anomaly is 
suspected should refer direct to the screening midwives. Ideally the referral 
is made in person or by phone. Messages can be left on the screening mobile 
answerphone. In all cases the sonographer should also email details to the 
antenatal screening midwives and sonographer audit leads for audit 
purposes. 
3.1.6 It is the responsibility of the referring sonographer to ensure that the 
referral has been received and actioned by the screening midwife / 
obstetrician. 
3.1.7 If no screening midwife is available and the sonographer feels an immediate 
review is required, then the sonographer should refer to Maternity 
Assessment Unit [MAU] / DAU or labour ward. The midwives can then refer 
the case to the on-call obstetric team. 
3.1.8 The type of follow -up offered will depend upon the type of anomaly 
suspected: see Algorithm 10.8 

3.2 Follow -up of referral of suspected fetal anomaly 
 
3.2.1 Once referral has been received, the screening midwife will liaise with the Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 31 of 54 fetal medicine team/ consultant obstetrician to arrange appropriate follow 
up. The screening midwife will inform the woman or person of options for 
follow up and arrange appointments according to the woman or person’s 
choice. Options for follow up depend upon the type of anomaly suspected: 
see Algorithm 10.8 
3.2.2 Where women and people decline further management, the decision should 
be recorded in the digital notes and continue with routine antenatal care. In 
such cases the woman or person should be given contact details in case 
they change their mind in the future and requests follow up at a later stage. 
Additionally the screening midwife will inform the GP, community midwife, 
obstetric consultant and neonatal team that an anomaly has been 
suspected on ultrasound scan but that the woman has declined follow -up. A 
copy of this letter will be scanned and uploaded to the digital notes to a l e r t 
teams prior to birth that an anomaly was suspected but follow -up declined 
and hence has not been confirmed. 
3.2.3 Where women and people accept further management but further 
screening does not identify an anomaly, then this is recorded in the woman 
or person’s digital notes and they continue with routine antenatal care 
3.2.4 Where women and people accept further management and an anomaly is 
confirmed then refer to section 10. 
 
3.3 Referral to a tertiary centre 
 
3.3.1 Referral to a tertiary centre may be recommended at any stage of 
pregnancy. The centre to which a woman or person is referred will vary 
according to the reason for referral and occasionally the woman or 
person’s preference. 
3.3.2 Regardless of which centre a woman or person is referred to, the referral 
process is the same. The professional making the referral will: 
 
• Call the tertiary centre to discuss the case, ensure referral is 
appropriate and make the appointment. 
• Complete a referral form according to tertiary centre guidance. 
Copies of screening results, blood results and scan reports 
should be attached if relevant the referral and any additional 
documents should be emailed to the appropriate address. A 
copy of the referral should be scanned and uploaded to the 
digital notes. 
• Discuss the reasons for referral with the woman or person 
along with information about what to expect including any 
additional procedures that may be offered. 
• Give the appointment to the woman or person, or inform them if 
the tertiary centres are going to call them direct with an 
appointment. Directions to the centre should also be given. Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 32 of 54 • Ensure the woman or person knows who to contact at 
UHSussex East after they have been seen at the tertiary centre 
to arrange local follow up. All women and people should be 
given the telephone number of the screening midwives for 
further advice and information as necessary. 
• Document the reason for referral, discussion with the woman or 
person, and follow up arrangements in the digital notes . 
 
3.4 Care following confirmation of anomaly by ultrasound scan or prenatal diagnosis 
3.4.1 Anomaly may be confirmed by ultrasound alone, either in-house or at a 
tertiary referral centre. In some cases confirmation can only be made 
following additional tests such as amniocentesis or CVS. 
3.4.2 The professional giving the diagnosis of anomaly, whether confirmed by 
scan or prenatal testing, should ensure the woman or person is aware of 
the exact diagnosis and its implications, recognising that in some instances 
referral to specialists may be indicated for a fuller explanation [section 
10.1.3]. 
3.4.3 Referral to specialist services should be offered according to the anomaly 
detected and the woman or person’s preference. Such services may include 
genetic counselling, neonatal services, paediatric services, nurse specialists 
[e.g. cystic fibrosis or cleft - nurse specialists], physiotherapy and specialist 
health visitor for children with disability. The offer of, acceptance or decline 
of referrals should be clearly documented in the digital notes. 
 
3.4.4 Discussion may include the following according to the anomaly diagnosed: 
• Treatment or surgical options [where available] 
• Likely prognosis 
• Short and long term support for the child and family 
• Effect on pregnancy or birth management 
• Continuing the pregnancy, continuing and adoption or termination. 
 
3.5 Women and people should be advised of appropriate support groups relevant to the 
condition diagnosed. 
3.6 All women and people should be informed of the support group Antenatal Results 
and Choices [ARC]. They provide support when an anomaly is diagnosed 
prenatally, for parents with an on -going pregnancy or for those who choose 
termination, via helpline, website and written information leaflets. 
3.7 Written information should be offered pertaining to the condition where available. 
Leaflets on a selected number of conditions are available from the FASP 
screening programme website. 
The diagnosis, details of all discussions and outcomes of discussion must be 
documented in the digital notes. 
 
 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 33 of 54 4 Continuing a pregnancy after a diagnosis of anomaly 
4.1 Where the woman or person opts to continue the pregnancy, on-going care is co -
ordinated by the screening midwives and/or fetal medicine consultant. This will 
include verbal and written referral and plans of care with the neonatal and specialist 
teams as required. All communication and referrals should be clearly documented in 
the digital notes. 
4.2 Where women and people continue their pregnancies and there is a possibility that 
neonatal treatment may be necessary, they should be either offered an 
appointment with a neonatologist and, if neonatal surgery may be required, a 
paediatric surgeon to discuss postnatal care. Such cases are ideally referred to the 
Joint Paediatric Antenatal Clinic [known as the Joint Clinic]. All cases must be 
discussed with either the fetal medicine consultant or the screening midwife prior to 
booking an appointment in the Joint Clinic. 
4.3 The Joint Clinic is held once every month in the antenatal clinic in Sussex House. 
Copies of all correspondence should be filed in the hospital notes and sent to the 
GP, TMBU and Consultant Paediatrician at the Royal Alexandra Children’s ’ 
Hospital. The screening midwives will liaise with the community midwife and 
health visitor where necessary. 
4.4 Where women and people are unable to attend an appointment in the Joint Clinic 
or require urgent review with the neonatal or paediatric teams, then ad hoc 
appointments can be made with the consultants direct. 
4.5 The Joint Clinic is for women and people who have decided to continue their 
pregnancy. It is not appropriate to refer women and people who remain undecided 
about continuing and are looking for further information about the anomaly in 
their baby prior to making a decision. These women and people often require more 
time than is available at Joint Clinic and so require ad hoc appointments arranged 
on an individual basis. 
4.6 The antenatal and birth management plan should be discussed with the woman or 
person by the professional making the plan and clearly documented in the digital 
notes . In addition, a set of notes will be issued antenatally for the baby by the 
neonatal team and will inc lude a neonatal management plan 
4.7 When the woman or person is admitted to delivery suite the midwife in charge of 
the woman or person’s care should refer to the obstetric registrar who should 
familiarise themselves with the birth plan and inform the neonatal team and 
obstetric consultant. If appropriate, the neonatal staff should inform the on-call 
neonatal surgeon and should ensure that the appropriate staff and equipment are 
present at the birth. 
4.8 Postnatally it is important that any problems with the baby are communicated from 
the neonatal unit to the staff working on the post natal ward caring for the mother 
or birthing parent and baby. 
4.9 The neonatal/ paediatric teams are responsible for ensuring that postnatal follow up 
is arranged for the baby and communicated to the parents. 
 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 34 of 54 
5 Opting for termination following a diagnosis of an anomaly 
 
5.1 Where the woman or person opts for termination, this may take place within 
UHSussex East or be referred to MSI Reproductive Choices according to gestation and 
method of termination chosen. For further information see protocol GP010 
Termination of Pregnancy Under 14 Weeks and MP073 Pregnancy Loss >14 Weeks. 
See Algorith 6.8 Termination of Pregnancy for Fetal Anomaly and Life Limiting 
Conditions 

 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 

University Hospital’s Sussex NHS Trust East Page 35 of 54 
6 Algorithms 
 
The following algorithms deal with the different elements of the FASP in accordance with 
PHE guidance 
 
6.1 First trimester screening for Down’s syndrome: Information process 
 
PRE BOOKING: Patient information leaflet ‘Screening tests for you and your baby’ to be given to all women 
and people prior to or at booking. .2 Copies are available in some other languages, easy -read versions for 
people with learning difficulties, and mp3 audio files for those with sight loss and can be downloaded via the 
PHE website: https:// www.gov.uk/government/publications/screening -tests-for-you-and-your- baby -description -in-brief 

BOOKING: Emphasise all tests are optional. Women and people can choose from 
screening for all three conditions [T21/T18/ T13] OR T21 alone OR T18/ T13 alone 
Screening is gestation dependent / CRL measurement 
Ascertain gestation [refer for dating scan if unsure of dates]. 
Discuss and offer screening [explaining difference between screening and 
diagnostic tests] Refer to screening midwives if further advice required. 

Screening test 
accepted Screening test 
declined Booking too late for any 
screening test [≥20+1 weeks] 

See following 
flow charts: 
 
13.2 
combined 
screening 
 
13.5 quadruple 
test Document that 
screening was 
offered and declined 
in hand held notes. 
 
Give contact number 
for screening 
midwives if further 
discussion required. Offer appointment with 
obstetrician or screening 
midwife to discuss further. 
 
Offer and arrange for 
anomaly/ dating scan if no 
evidence of having been 
scanned at another hospital 
 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme 
Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 

6.2 First trimester combined 
screening 
MP002 
 
• Woman or person has opted for combined screening - Document discussion and decision over which conditions they request 
screening for in digital notes. 
• Nuchal scan can only be performed when CRL is between 45 – 84mm inclusive [equivalent to 11+2 and 14+1 weeks 
gestation] 
 
Attends for scan: CRL 45-84mm inclusive: NT measured. 

Viable singleton 
pregnancy, 
NT < 3.5mm 
No obvious 
anomaly Viable multiple 
pregnancy ‘Vanished twin’ – two sacs 
seen but only one fetus 
viable Viable pregnancy: 
NT ≥3.5mm or 
other abnormality Non -viable 
pregnancy 

Refer to ANC for 
completion of 
combined screening 
test: 
-weight 
-blood test 
-check all details 
completed on form 
Sonographer measures NT on all fetuses 
and gives the woman or person the PHE 
leaflet 
‘Screening for Down’s syndrome in multiple 
pregnancy’. 
TWINS : Refers to ANC to complete 
combined screening 
TRIPLETS OR MORE : Combined screening 
not possible. Chance calculation from NT 
alone. Sonographer sends request form to 
lab and emails Laboratory Screening Co-
ordinator to advise that a chance calculation 
is required from NT alone. Also: 
• Refer to screening 
midwife / 
obstetrician 
• Follow multiple 
pregnancy referral 
protocol 
Second 
sac 
empty 

Refer to 
ANC for 
completion 
of 
combined 
screening 
test [weight 
and blood] Second 
sac 
contains 
fetus with 
no FH 

Combined 
screen not 
possible. 
Chance to be 
calculated 
from NT 
alone. 
Sonographer 
informs lab. Refer to ASC 
for discussion. 
 
1. NT 3.5mm or 
above: 
increased 
chance of 
cardiac/ 
other defect 
[PHE 2018c]. 
Refer to 
chart 1:4 
 
2. Other 
abnormality 
detected. 
Refer to 
chart 1:8 
Refer to 
Gynae team / 
Early 
Pregnancy 
Unit. 
 
Women or person has received results: 
 
•Ensure parents understand that a 
low chance result doesn’t exclude 
Down’s syndrome or other 
anomaly 
•Invasive testing available to 
ANYONE regardless of chance 
•Refer to ASC or Consultant for 
further discussion if required 
•Documentation in notes 
Women or person has not received 
results: 
 
•Contact Lab co -ordinator on 
x64406 
•Discuss results with women or 
person accordingly and 
document in notes 
•If no results for any reason 
discuss with screening midwives 
for urgent follow up and offer of 
Quad test 
Invasive testing 
Requested 
 
•Arrange next available 
appointment 
•Give trust leaflet ‘CVS 
and amniocentesis’ 
Pre-test. 
•Document decision in 
notes 
Invasive testing declined 
 
Document decision in notes if 
counselling has taken place over the 
home, send copy of result with a 
letter summarising discussions and 
women’s or person’s decision. 
Ensure women or people know how 
to contact screening midwives if 
changes mind or have any further 
questions. 
 
Routine 16 week antenatal check: MW ensures women and people 
have received their results and it is documented in notes 
Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 
 
6.3 Combined screening results process 
 
Chance assessment generated in the laboratory 

Lower likelihood result [< 1:150] Higher likelihood result [1:150 or higher] 

• Copy of result and covering letter generated by Viewpoint - posted to 
woman or person by Lab Screening Co-ordinator 
• Woman or person receives results within 2 weeks [10 working days] 
of test. 
• Letter contains contact number for screening midwives if further 
advice needed. • Result, available in 3 working days of test, are faxed 
/phoned to screening midwife by lab screening coordinator 
• Woman or person contacted with result [further discussion 
can take place over phone or at hospital appointment 
according to woman or person’s preference]. 
• Offer invasive testing. 

Routine 16 week antenatal check: 
Midwife ensures woman or person has received their result. 

University Sussex Hospitals NHS Trust East Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 

6.4 Increased NT - 3.5mm or above 
[Based onPHE 2018c] 
 
NT 3.5 mm or more at nuchal scan 
Refer direct to screening midwife / fetal medicine consultant to discuss implications and arrange follow - 
up. [Note: should continue to complete combined screening process]. Document discussion and actions 
taken at all stages. 

Discuss with woman or person that increased NT is associated with: 
• Chromosomal anomaly [regardless of chance on combined screening] – NT over 3.5mm 
associated with chromosomal anomaly independent of combined screening result. Discuss 
invasive testing direct [no need to await combined screen result – however in most cases 
the result will be available before the test] 
• Syndromic anomalies 
• Cardiac anomalies 

Accepts invasive testing Declines invasive testing 

Abnormal PCR / 
full karyotype: 
Discussion with 
obstetrician/ screening 
midwife/ geneticist/ 
paediatrician as 
appropriate 
Normal PCR and 
full karyotype 

Cardiac anomaly 
diagnosed? 
Care followed up by 
Fetal Medicine 
Consultant/cardiolo 
gy team at Evilina Offer fetal cardiac scan [14 -16 
weeks] at Evelina Children’s 
Hospital [St Thomas’s Hospital] 

No cardiac anomaly 
on scan 
Parents opt 
for TOP Continuing 
pregnancy Ensure 20 week 
anomaly scan 
arranged. Arrange 20 week 
anomaly scan: 
screening midwife to 
review scan results. 
 
Care managed by 
fetal medicine and 
paediatric team: 
Also offer 
• fetal cardiac scan [14-16 
weeks] at Evelina 
Children’s Hospital 
 
• routine 20 week anomaly scan 
Normal 20 week scan: inform parents that 
most likely causes of increased NT have been 
ruled out. The most likely outcome is a 
healthy baby. However cannot rule out all 
anomalies, unusual genetic syndromes and 
those anomalies undetectable on scan. 
Chance of these is slightly above background 
chance. Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 

Result available to woman or person 
[via screening midwife] within 3 
working days of receipt of sample in 
lab [PHE 2019a] 
Woman or person contacted with 
result [usually by phone]. 
Offered further discussion in ANC 
with obstetrician / ASC. 
Offer invasive testing. 
Document result/ decision in notes. 
 
Women or people 
declining 
amnio will be sent a 
copy of the result with 
a letter summarising 
their results, decision 
and with details of who 
to contact for further 
information. 
 
Amnio 
accepted 
Amnio 
declined 
Arrange test at next available appointment 
See Chart 1:6 
 
6.5 Second trimester serum screening: Quadruple test [singleton and twins only] 
 
Scan confirms CRL > 84mm and so too late for combined screening: After discussion [see chart 1:1] woman or 
person has chosen to have quadruple test. Document discussion and decision in digital notes. Advise that bloods 
should be taken between 14+0 weeks and 20+0 weeks inclusive [as dated on HC]. Complete quadruple test request 
form – all sections must be completed. All samples for quadruple test to be taken at hospital. 

Singleton 
Gestation 
14+0 to 
20+0 
weeks 
inclusive Twins Gestation: 14+2 to 
20+0 weeks inclusive 
 
Ref for discussion with 
screening midwife to discuss 
differences in DR between MC 
and DC twins 

Blood taken [yellow topped bottle - clotted sample]. Weigh woman or person and record on 
quadruple test request form. Complete quad test form fully. Document in digital notes that blood 
has been taken. Ensure woman or person is aware of results processes. 

Low chance : 
Likelihood of Down’s syndrome < 
1:150 High chance : 
Likelihood of Down’s syndrome ≥ 1:150 Raised AFP 
[>2.5 
MoM] 

• Result uploaded from Oxford labs to 
LifeCycle portal and lab screening 
co-ordinators who send copy of result 
with a covering letter to the woman 
or person within 2 weeks of test . 
• MW ensures result has been received 
at next AN check and documents 
results in digital notes. Ensure parent s 
realise that although reported as 
‘screen negative’ – thus not excluding 
Down’s syndrome. 
• Refer to screening MW if further 
 questions 

. 

 Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 

6.6 Mid-Trimester Fetal Anomaly Scan 

PRE BOOKING: Patient information leaflet ‘Screening tests for you and your baby’ to be 
given to all women and people prior to booking.This includes the section ’11 
physical conditions (20-week scan). Also available to download fromScreening 
tests for you and your baby (STFYAYB) - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) 

BOOKING: Pre - test discussion at least 24 hours pre -scan 
Document that discussion has taken place in digital notes. 

Consents to having a mid-trimester anomaly 
scan; document consent in digital notes and 
arrange appointment ideally 20 -20+6 
weeks. 
Declines mid -trimester 
anomaly scan 

Document that screening 
was offered and declined 
in digital notes. 
Give reasons for decline. 
Scan 
complete Scan incomplete : eg views not obtained due 
to poor visibility/ fetal lie: Offer one rescan at 23 
weeks Give contact number for 
screening midwife if 
further discussion 
required. 

2nd Scan 
complete 2nd Scan incomplete due to fetal lie or poor views: no further 
scans should be offered to check fetal anatomy. Sonographer 
informs woman and documents that screening incomplete. 
No further scans for the routine assessment of fetal anomaly. 

No anomaly detected Anomaly detected 

Routine midwifery 
care See chart 1:8: 
‘Referral process for ultrasound diagnosis of suspected 
fetal anomaly’ Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 

6.7 Referral processes for ultrasound diagnosis of suspected fetal anomaly 

Anomaly detected on ultrasound scan 

Sonographer refers to Screening Midwife 
[if not available leave voice mail/email – responsibility of 
sonographer to ensure message received] 

Suspected cardiac 
Anomaly Suspected Cleft Other anomaly 

1. Immediate 
referral to Fetal 
Cardiology Unit at 
Evelina Children’s 
Hospital, St 
Thomas’ Hospital. 
 
2. Arrange f/u 
with fetal 
medicine team 
at UHSussex 
East if 
anomaly 
confirmed 
 
3. Ensure woman or 
person has 
contact details 
for Screening 
Midwives 
 
4. Document in 
notes 1. Refer to Clinical Nurse 
Specialist for South Thames 
Cleft Service [via Peanut 
Ward at East Grinstead 
Hospital]. They will contact 
woman or person within 24 
hrs of referral. 
 
2. Arrange appointment with 
fetal medicine team at 
UHSussex East next 
available appointment 
 
3. Ensure woman or person 
has contact details for 
Screening Midwives, Clinical 
Nurse Specialist, cleft team 
info sheet, Clapa [Cleft Lip 
and Palate Association] 
leaflet ‘AN diagnosis of cleft 
lip and palate’. 
 
4. Document in notes 1. Discuss with 
Screening 
Midwife or 
consultant. 
They will 
arrange for 
review by the 
local fetal 
medicine team 
and refer for 
further testingFetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 
Algorithm 6.8 Termination of Pregnancy for Fetal Anomaly and Life Limiting Conditions 

Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 

Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 Algorithm 6.9 
 
Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 Algorithm 7.0 
 
Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 

7 Auditable Standards 
 
Based on national programme standards [PHE 2019a] and Key Performance Indicators. The 
data is reported annually in the annual report unless otherwise indicated. 

7.1 First trimester combined screening/ second trimester quadruple test: 
 
7.1.1 Coverage – number of women and people in the eligible population who 
accept screening 
7.1.2 Coverage - number of women and people in the eligible population who 
are tested [by combined screen and by the quadruple test] 
7.1.3 Coverage – number of women and people in the eligible population who 
decline screening 
7.1.4 Completion of laboratory request forms – number of incomplete 
laboratory request forms [combined screening to be reported by Brighton 
Pathology, Quadruple test to be reported by the Wolfson Institute] [KPI 
DATA COLECTED QUARTERLY] 
7.1.5 Test turnaround time – number of samples reported within three working 
days of sample receipt 
7.1.6 Test performance – number of women and people who receive a higher 
chance result [Collected via DQASS – Downs Syndrome Screening 
Quality Assurance Support Service] – screen positive rate. 
7.1.7 Test performance – the number of women and people who receive a 
lower chance result 
7.1.8 Time to intervention – number of women and people with higher 
chance result offered an appointment within three working days 
7.1.9 Intervention – the number of women and people with a high chance 
result who are offered invasive testing and who subsequently accept or 
decline 
7.1.10 Diagnosis: the number of chromosomal abnormalities diagnosed as a 
result of post screening diagnostic testing 
7.1.11 Detection rate for Down’s syndrome 
7.1.12 Detection rate for Edwards’ and Patau’s syndrome 
7.1.13 Outcomes for pregnancies diagnosed with chromosomal abnormality Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 7.2 Invasive testing 
 
7.2.1 Number of CVS/amniocentesis per operator 
7.2.2 Indications for invasive testing 
7.2.3 Conditions diagnosed by invasive tests 
7.2.4 Pregnancy loss rate per operator 
 
7.3 Mid-Trimester Ultrasound Scan 
 
7.3.1 Coverage – identify the number of women and people who 
accepted screening and were tested. 
7.3.2 Number of abnormalities diagnosed - as defined by the National Standards 
[PHE 2019b] 
7.3.3 Time to intervention - Local referral: number of women and people with 
suspected abnormality seen within 3 working day 
7.3.4 Time to intervention - Tertiary referral: number of women and 
people with suspected abnormality seen within 5 working days 
7.3.5 Specific cardiac abnormality reporting: Report the number of babies with 
confirmed Transposition of Great Arteries [TGA], Atrioventricular 
SeptalDefect [AVSD], Tetraology of Fallot [TOF] and Hypoplastic Left Heart 
Syndrome [HLHS]. 
7.4 Summary of Failsafes 
 
7.4.1 All women and people accepting combined screening have had a result. 
Every Wednesday, a member of the screening midwife team performs a 
failsafe check to ensure that all women and people who had a NT 
recorded on Viewpoint in the preceding week, have had a chance 
calculated. This ensures that every woman or person who accepted an NT 
measurement at the time of scan has had a screening result whether this 
was calculated by NT alone OR NT and blood test. The findings of this 
failsafe are documented on the combined screening database. Missing 
results are actioned. 
 
7.4.2 All high chance combined screening results have been actioned. Every 
Wednesday, a member of the screening team checks all high risk results 
on Viewpoint from the preceding week to ensure these have been 
actioned. In addition the screening team performs a cross -check of all 
high chance results with the laboratory screening co -ordinator. The 
findings of these two failsafe checks are documented on the combined 
screening database Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 
 7.4.3 All women and people accepting quadruple screening have had a result. 
The screening team record the names of all women and people who have 
had a quad test on a database. This database is accessible to members of 
the screening team and the laboratory screening co-ordinator. The 
screening midwives check the database every Wednesday to ensure all 
results have been received for women and people who had screening the 
preceding week and that high chance results were actioned. 
 
8 Staff training and education 
 
8.1 Specific cardiac abnormality reporting: Report the number of babies with 
confirmed Transposition of Great Arteries [TGA], Atrioventricular Septal Defect 
[AVSD], Tetraology of Fallot [TOF] and Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome [HLHS]. 
 
8.2 All midwives / screening MCAs new to the trust should: 
• Complete the UK NSC e-learning screening module. 
• All band 5 midwives must complete the UK NSC e -learning screening 
module as part of their competencies before they can apply for a band 6. 
8.3 All midwives must attend a yearly update on the fetal anomaly screening 
programme as part of their mandatory education update sessions 

9 Governance 
 
9.1 All midwives must attend a yearly update on the Fetal Anomaly Screening 
Programme as part of their mandatory education update sessions 
9.2 All incidents related to fetal anomaly screening are reported via the trusts internal 
reporting system known as DATIX. 
9.3 All incidents related to fetal anomaly screening should also be reported to the 
Antenatal screening co-ordinator who will complete a SIAF [Screening incident 
assessment form] in order to notify the Regional QA the Screening and 
immunisations lead. 
 
9.4 For further information relating to management of incidents please refer to the 
protocol : MD085 Maternity & Gynaecology Risk Management Strategy . Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme MP002 
 
10 References 
 
Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals [BSUH] NHS Trust [No date] Screening tests during 
pregnancy. Website. Accessed 05/08/2019. Available at: 
https://www.bsuh.nhs.uk/maternity/your -pregnancy/screening -tests -pregnancy/ 
 
Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals [BSUH] NHS Trust [2017] US005 Ultrasound 1st 
Trimester Scan. May 2017. 
 
Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals [BSUH] NHS Trust [2018] MP001 Provisions and 
Schedules of Antenatal Care. March 2018 
 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) [2011] Multiple pregnancy: antenatal 
care for twin and triplet pregnancies. Clinical guideline number 129. Available at: 
https:// www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg137 
 
Public Health England [2018a] NHS public health functions agreement 2018 -19. Service 
specification no.16: NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme -Screening for Down’s Syndrome, 
Edwards’ Syndrome and Patau’s Syndrome (Trisomy 21, 18 & 13). Available at: 
https:// www.england.nhs.uk/wp -content/uploads/2017/04/Gateway -ref-07837 -180913 - 
Service -specification -No.-16-NHS -FASP -Trisomy -screening -2018 -19.pdf 
 
Public Health England [2018b] NHS public health functions agreement 2018 -19. Service 
specification no.17: NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme -18+0 -20+6 week fetal anomaly 
scan. Available at: 
https:// www.england.nhs.uk/wp -content/uploads/2017/04/Gateway -ref-07838 -180913 - 
Service -specification -No.-17-NHS -FASP -Fetal -anomaly -scan.pdf 
 
Public Health England [2018c] NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme. Down’s syndrome, 
Edwards’ syndrome and Patau’s syndrome screening. Handbook for Laboratories. Valid from 
August 2018. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ 
data/file/749746/Fetal_anomaly_screening_programme_laboratory_handbook_revised_FIN 
AL_12.10.18.pdf 
 
Public Health England [2018d] NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme Handbook. Valid from 
August 2018. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data 
/file/749742/NHS_fetal_anomaly_screening_programme_handbook_FINAL1.2_18.10.18.pdf 
 
Public Health England [2019a] Fetal anomaly screening standards valid for data collected 
from 1 April 2018. PHE publications gateway number: GW -369. Available at: 
https:// www.gov.uk/government/publications/fetal -anomaly -screening -programme - 
standards/standards -valid -from -1-april -2018 Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 
 Public Health England [2019b] ‘Screening tests for you and your baby’ leaflet. PHE publications 
gateway number: GW -389. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data 
/file/800673/Screening_tests_for_you_and_your_baby.pdf 
RCOG [2010] Green -top Guideline No. 8 Amniocentesis and Chorionic Villus Sampling June 2010 
Souka et al [2004] Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. Sited in Chapter 3 – Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype in The 11- 
13+6 weeks scan. Edited by Nicolaides K, Fetal Medicine Foundation, London p 71 -94 Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 
 Appendix A – UHSussex East Contacts 
UHSussex East designated programme leads for 
maternity services Midwifery: Karen Gregory – 
Antenatal screening co -ordinator 
Obstetrics: Win KhineConsultant obstetrician 
 
Leads for ultrasound and laboratory 
Ultrasound: Julie Allen and Sharon Cook – Superintendent 
sonographers 
 Laboratory: Nik Hawes and Tamsyn Cromwell - Biochemists 
 
Antenatal Screening Co-ordinator at UHSussex East [cross site] 
Karen Gregory 
karen.gregory12@nhs.net Mobile: 07876 357 423 
Office: 01273 696955 ex62755 
 
Antenatal Screening Support Midwives [UHSussex East] 
RSCH and PRH 
Melanie Sander: melanie.sander1@nhs.net 
Rosie Darling: rosemary.darling@nhs.net 

Mobile:07876 357423 
RSCH office: 01273 696955 ex67477 
PRH office: 01444 441881 ex 65404 

Trust shared antenatal screening NHS net email account: 
bsu-tr.antenatalscreening@nhs.net 

Fetal Medicine Consultants at UHSussex East 
Sec: 01273 696955 ex64031 
 
Laboratory Service Leads 
Nil Hawes , Tasmyn Cromwell Tel: 01273 696955 ex64234 
 
Laboratory Screening Co-ordinator 
Karen Hilton Tel: 01273 696955 ex64406 
 
Ultrasound Department: 
Service Managers 
Emma Cockburn/Julie Allen ex67450 
 
RSCH: Lois Southon Scan Department 01273 696955 ex67450 
Appointments 
ex64575 
EPAC ex64402 
PRH: ANC ultrasound department 01444 441881 
ex68042 
EPAC [Horsted Keynes Ward] ex65685 Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
 
 Appendix B - External Contacts 

MSReproductive Choices 
Brighton Treatment Centre 
175 Preston Road 
Brighton 
BN1 6AG 

Cytogenetics [used by PRH and RSCH] 
Cytogenetics Laboratory, Genetics Centre, Guys Hospital, 5th Floor Tower Wing, Great Maze 
Pond, London, SE1 9RT 
Tel: 020 7188 1709 
Fax: 020 7188 1697 
 
Fetal Cardiac Referrals 
Fetal Cardiology Unit, 1st Floor, Evelina Children’s Hospital, St Thomas’ Hospital, Lambeth 
Palace Road, London, SE1 7EH 
Tel: 020 7188 2308/ 020 7188 9201 Fax: 020 7188 2307 
 
Genetic Counselling: 
Where you refer to depends on the woman or person’s address/post code. If in doubt either 
genetics department will advise. 
 
RSCH: generally refer to Guys and St Thomas’s 
Genetics Counseling Department, Genetics Centre, Guys Hospital, 5th Floor Tower 
Wing, Great Maze Pond, London, SE1 9RT 
Tel: 0207 188 1364 
 
PRH: generally refer to St Georges 
Genetics Counselling Department 
Tel 0208 725 0957 
Fax 0208 725 3444 
 
Quadruple Test Laboratory 
Antenatal Screening Co -ordinator: Rhiannon Marr 
 
Clinical Biochemistry Department 
Level 4 
John Radcliffe Hospital 
Headley Way 
Headington 
Oxford 
OX3 9DU 
 
Tertiary Fetal Anomaly Referrals [includes multiple pregnancy invasive testing] 
Harris Birthright Research Centre, Suite 9, 3rd floor, Golden Jubilee Wing, Kings College 
Hospital, Denmark Hill, London, SE5 9RS 
Tel: 0203 299 3040 FAX: 0203 299 3898 Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 56 of 61 
 Appendix C - Abbreviations 
 
ASC Antenatal Screening Co-ordinator 
AFP Alpha -fetoprotein 
AN Antenatal 
ANC Antenatal Clinic 
ARC Antenatal Results and Choices 
ASSW Antenatal Screening Support Worker 
CVS Chorionic Villus Sampling 
DNA Did not attend 
GP General 
Practitioner HCA Health Care 
Assistant MW Midwife 
NT Nuchal Translucency 
PCR Polymerase Chain Reaction [rapid chromosome 
test] PRH Princess Royal Hospital 
RACH Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital 
RSCH Royal Sussex County Hospital 
SCD sickle cell disorders 
TOP Termination of pregnancy 
USS Ultrasound scan 
NIPT Non Invasive Prenatal Testing Fetal Anomaly Screening MP002 
University H ospital Sussex NHS Trust East Page 54 of 54 
 
 Pre-test discussion should ideally explore the following areas: 
 
• The scan is optional [this is an ‘opt-in’ screening test] 
 
• The nature, purpose, benefits, risks, consequences and timescales of ultrasound 
 
• Purpose of scan [to check fetal development and so may detect structural anomalies and soft 
markers for chromosomal abnormalities, position of the placenta] 
 
• Ultrasound scans will not detect all abnormalities ['a normal scan does not guarantee a 
normal baby']. Likewise, some anomalies may be detected but these may not cause a serious 
problem in the baby 
 
• Some anomalies may lead to the offer of prenatal diagnosis. In some cases, where structural, 
lethal or inherited abnormality is diagnosed, there may be the choice to continue or end the 
pregnancy 
 
• Referral process if an abnormality is detected. Occasionally referral for a second opinion may 
 
be recommended, to a specialist fetal medicine centre Appendix D - Best Practice: Areas for discussion prior to mid -trimester 
anomaly scan