# Extracted from: MP015 Substance Use in Pregnancy.pdf
# Guideline ID: mp015-substance-use-in-pregnancy
# Content length: 72335 characters
# Processing date: 1750066901.2056777

Substance Use in 
 Pregnancy 

Maternity Protocol: MP015 
 
Date agreed: April 2022 

 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 2 of 37 

Guideline Reviewer: Jo Sinclair 
Manager responsible: Anna Ferguson 
Version: 4 
Approval Committee: Women’s Safety and Quality Committee 
Date agreed: April 2022 
Amended Date: 
Review date: April 2025 
Cross reference: MP012: Safeguarding children & Child Protection 
MP006: Antenatal Screening: Hep B 
MP061: Maternity Smoking Cessation Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 3 of 37 
 Contents 
1 Antenatal Care ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 4 
1.1 Initial Assessment: ................................ ................................ .......................... 4 
1.2 Drug and Alcohol Service ................................ ................................ ............... 5 
1.3 Substance Use Midwives /One Stop Clinic ................................ ...................... 5 
1.4 The One Stop Clinic ................................ ................................ ........................ 6 
1.5 Documentation ................................ ................................ ............................... 7 
1.6 Care Pathway – One Stop Clinic ................................ ................................ ..... 8 
1.7 One Stop Clinic Process regarding Specific Substances ................................ . 9 
1.8 Management of missed appointments ................................ ........................ 10 
2 Intra -Partum care ................................ ................................ ................................ 11 
3 Post -natal Care ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 14 
4 Training ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 17 
5 Monitoring Compliance ................................ ................................ ...................... 18 
6 References ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 18 
7 Contributors ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 19 
Appendix A - Contact Details ................................ ................................ ...................... 20 
Appendix B – Overall Aim ................................ ................................ ........................... 20 
Appendix C - Overview and background information ................................ ................ 22 
Appendix D – Breast /chest feeding ................................ ................................ ............. 23 
Appendix E - Alcohol Use in Pregnancy ................................ ................................ ...... 23 
Appendix F - Guidance on hepatitis C and harm reduction (NIHR, 2017 ) .................. 25 
Appendix G - Treatment of opioid dependency in pregnancy ................................ ... 25 
Appendix H: Stimulants ................................ ................................ ............................... 30 
Appendix I : Depressants ................................ ................................ ............................. 32 
Appendix J: Hallucinogens ................................ ................................ .......................... 34 
Appendix K: Approximate detection times ................................ ................................ . 35 
Appendix L: Neonatal Abstinence Scoring System ................................ ..................... 36 

 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 4 of 37 
 1 Antenatal Care 
1.1 Initial Assessment: 
1.1.1 Ask all women and people in a non -judgemental way abou t 
their substance use when taking the booking history . This 
should be as early in pregnancy as possible. This should 
include use of substances and/or alcohol and whether 
prescribed or non -prescribed. Emphasis should be on shared 
care, collaboration, support, guidance and encouragement, 
rather than forced reduction or abstinence. 
1.1.2 During the booking appointment, specific and consistent 
messages regarding advice and harm reduction should be 
applied with regard to the prevention of infection, which 
should be consistent with the key messages ( see appendix ) 
Women and people should be asked about their alcohol use at 
each antenatal contact, and a brief intervention framework 
used when alcohol use is identified. Evidence suggests that a 
brief motivational intervention reduce s the number of drinks 
and the number of heavy drinking days during the postpartum 
period. (see appendix ) 
1.1.3 When a woman or person is no longer using drugs or alcohol 
but there has been exposure during pregnancy, the booking 
midwife shoul d contact the Specialist Midwives or other 
member of the One Stop Team for advice. It is important that 
women and people are provided with consistent advice about 
any substance use ( see appendix on list of substances, their 
effects and treatment options). It is equally important that the 
information given should not be loaded with exaggeration of 
the perceived risks of the drugs 
1.1.4 Any woman or person who disclose s non prescribed substance 
or alcohol use during any time in pregnancy or postnatally 
should be referred to the One Stop Clinic and the local Drug 
and Alcohol Service ( see appendix ) 
1.1.5 Health professionals should be aware of an individual’s mental 
capacity when considering information sharing and gaining 
valid informed consent ( please refer to Mental Capacity Act 
2005 ) 
1.1.6 Inclusive and non -judgem ental language should be used . The 
table below shows some suggested alternatives. 

Previous term Suggested term 
Addiction Dependence Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 5 of 37 
 Illicit use Non -prescribed use 
Substance misuse Substance u se 
Neonatal withdrawal Neonatal dependence 
Street drugs Non -prescribed drugs 
 
1.2 Drug and Alcohol Service 
1.2.1 In work hours : The referrer (midwife or any other appropriate 
professional) should contact the duty nurse at the local Drug 
and Alcohol Service ( see appendix ) 
1.2.2 Out of hours : The referrer should contact the duty nurse at 
the local Drug and Alcohol Service when the service is next 
open ( see appendix ). The referrer should offer basic 
information and advice about harm reduction such as needle 
exchange, safe sexual intercourse, not to abruptly stop certain 
drugs ( see appendix ).Where a woman does not wish to 
discontinue intravenous use, it is important to discuss safer 
injecting technique. 
 
1.3 Substance Use Midwives /One Stop Clinic 
1.3.1 The referrer (midwife or any other appropriate professional) 
should c ontact the Substance Use Midwives by phone or email 
(see appendix ) as soon as possible following disclosure 
1.3.2 If the Substance Use Midwives are not available the referrer 
should contact another member of the One Stop Team ( see 
appendix ) 
1.3.3 The Substance Use Midwives or member of the One Stop 
Team will arrange an appointment for the woman or person 
to attend the next One Stop Clinic, whe re assessment and 
review will take place. 
1.3.4 At the One Stop Clinic the woman or person and their 
substance/alcohol use will be reviewed by the Substance Use 
Midwife and/or member of the One Stop Team and, if 
appropriate, a referral to a consultant obstetrician will be 
made. 
1.3.5 If non -prescribed substance use is identified, the woman or 
person will be offered care in the One Stop Clinic. This will 
include twice -monthly antenatal appointments, home visits as 
indicated, support attending other pregnancy -related 
appointments, additional ultrasounds scans at 30/40 and 
34/40 and referral to support services as required. (April 2022: 
Please note it is our aim to achieve this however due to Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 6 of 37 
 scanning capacity within our units this is currently not 
achievable, to be review with USS department within 6 
months) Targeted postnatal care will also be offered. 
 
 1.3.6 Where the re is non -prescribed use >37 weeks an induction of 
labour (IOL ) should be considered. The decision for IOL will be 
made on a case -by-case basis . Social and lifestyle issues and 
challenges will be assessed alongside maternal and neonatal 
clinical factors. 
1.3.7 The booking midwife should offer and arrange the routine 
scan s as soon as possible by the usual referral processes. 
1.3.8 Where there may be child protection is sues, the appropriate 
documentation should be completed by the identifyin g health 
professional and referral made (please see Maternity Protocol 
MP012: Safeguarding Children and Child Protection ) 
 
1.3.9 The Substance Use Midwives will discuss the option of Long 
Acting Reversible Contraception (LARC) if appropriate, and 
ensure any plan is documented. 
 
1.4 The One Stop Clinic 
 
Women and people who use substances should be encouraged and 
facilitated to attend the One Stop clinic 
1.4.1 Main objectives: 
 Provide support, information, guidance and encouragement. 
Early intervention may help to support the family before 
problems escalate, and may reduce the risks of substance use. 
1.4.2 Target Group: 
• Pregnant women and people with substance use issues 
who live within Brighton and Hove, the Ouse Valley and 
Mid Sussex. 
1.4.3 How it Works: 
• Referrals may be made via professionals when substance 
use is disclosed or known, or by self -referral. 
• The Royal Sussex County Hospital (RSCH) One Stop Clinic 
takes place on the 2nd and 4th Thursday of the month 
between 14:00 - 16:30. There are appointment times, 
though the clinic also has a “drop in” component. 
• At Princess Royal Hospital (PRH) the clinic is on the 1st 
Thursday of the month between 14:00 - 16:30. Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 7 of 37 
 • There is a pre clinic meeting at both sites between 
professionals prior to the One Stop Clinic, where 
information is shared confidentially. 
• Women and people who are substance dependent are 
supported to attend the clinic on a regular basis. 
However, women and people who engage in brief, 
unsustained alcohol or substance use may attend a one -
off appointment if appropriate. Re -referral may 
subsequently be made if necessary. 
• All routine blood tests, including hepatitis C screening, 
and Liver Function Tests where appropriate, will be taken 
with the woman or person ’s consent following 
counselling at One Stop Clinic (please see Maternity 
Protocol MP006: Antenatal Screening: Hepatitis B ). When 
the woman or person is 30 -32/40 pregnant a neonatal 
and maternal /parental care plan is completed by the 
team and discussed with the mother or birthing parent . 
Copies of the plan will be added to the electronic 
maternity system, as will any specialist letters. If the 
neonate needs to be monitored for ne onatal withdrawal, 
e.g. maternal or parental opioid use, the expected length 
of stay will have been discussed with the mother or 
parent during the pregnancy as part of the birth plan. 
• If indicated, the One Stop midwives and other members 
of the team will provide home visits as required. 
1.5 Documentation 
1.5.1 Many women and people choose not to share the details of 
their substance use with their families. 
1.5.2 All issues around substance use should be documented in the 
electronic maternity record, but not in the woman or person’s 
hand held electronic copy if they decline for it to be included 
there. 
 
1.5.3 One Stop booking information sheets and maternal/parental 
and neonatal birth plans will be added to the ‘Scanned 
Documents’ section in the electronic maternity record. 

 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 8 of 37 
 1.6 Care Pathway – One Stop Clinic 

 Disclosure of unsustained 
substance / alcohol use Prescribed opioids or benzodiazapines 
Continued problematic substance use 
1. Refer woman/person to One Stop 
midwives. Provide client with One Stop 
midwives mobile: 07795 498509 
 
2. One Stop midwives will do the booking 
where possible and fast track to the local 
drug and alcohol service. 
Immediate provision of substance use 
service to manage substance use SM will 
contact re 
next clinic 
 One Stop Clinic – multi -agency clinic 
2nd and 4th Thursdays of month – RSCH 
1st Thursday of month – PRH 
Pre-clinic information sharing re: 
Planning/ management of antenatal care 
Management of substance use 
Potential safeguarding issues and possible 
referral to Social Services 
Preparation of individual maternal /parental 
and neonatal birth plans re. substance use 
for labour and following delivery 
Maternal /parenta l prescription plan for 
perinatal period 
Plans are distributed t o appropriate 
agencies and added to maternal /parental 
electronic record. 
 Appropriate 
Unsustained 
drug/ alcohol use Not appropriate 
Care to remain 
with original 
carer 1. Call One Stop midwives to 
discuss case if advice needed 
2. Refer woman/person to One 
Stop if indicated 
3. One Stop team will triage and 
offer appointment if appropriate 
 Disclosure of substance/alcohol use at any time during pregnancy 
Assessment 
finds 
substance 
use more 
problematic 
than original 
disclosure 
Regular One 
Stop Clinic 
attendance Refer back to 
CMW with 
appointment for 
32-34/40 if 
maternal/parental 
neonatal birth plan 
required Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 9 of 37 
 1.7 One Stop Clinic Process re garding Specifi c Substances (April 2022: Please 
note it is our aim to achieve additional 34/40 USS, however due to 
scanning capacity within our units th is is currently not achievable: to be 
review with USS department within 6 months ) 

 Stimulants: 
• Twice monthly review at 
One Stop. Midwife/Drug 
and Alcohol service team 
at each visit. 
• Neonatal review 1st visit & 
34/40 and additionally as 
required 
• 30/40 and 34/40 - growth 
scan and obstetric review 
• 30-32/40 – One Stop Clinic 
maternal /parental/ neonatal 
plan 
 
Cannabis: 
• Where there is heavy use 
regular attendance at 
One Stop Clinic may be 
indicated. 
• Cannabis 
reduction/cessation 
sessions are also 
available. Refer to One 
stop midwives to discuss 
on a case by case basis. Opioids: 
• Twice monthly appts. at On e 
Stop. Midwife/Drug and Alcohol 
service team at each visit . 
• Neonatal review at 1st visit & 
34/40 and additionally as 
required 
• Liaise with prescriber 
• 30/40 and 34/40 – growth scan/ 
obstetric review 
• 30-32/40 – make 
maternal /parental and neonatal 
plan 
 Specific 
substance 
 Unsustained substance use: 
If non -prescribed drugs and/ or 
alcohol used for recreational 
purposes at any time during 
pregnancy 
1. Make referral and/or call to 
discuss with One Stop 
midwives if unsure if 
referral appropriate 
2. One Stop appt will be 
offered if indicated, and 
cmw will be updated Alcoho l: 
• Twice monthly review at 
One Stop . Midwife/Drug 
and Alcohol service team 
at each visit. 
• Neonatal review review 1st 
visit & 34/ 40 and 
additionally as required 
• 30/40 and 34/40 - growth 
scan and obstetric review 
• 30-32/40 – One Stop Clinic 
maternal /parental/ 
neonatal plan 
 Benzodiazpines : 
• Twice monthly appts. at One 
Stop. Midwife/Drug and Alcohol 
service team at each visit. 
• Neonatal review at 1st visit & 
34/40 and additionally as 
required 
• Liaise with prescriber 
• 30/40 and 34/40 – growth scan/ 
obstetric review 
• 30 -32/40 – maternal /parental 
and neonatal plan 
 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 10 of 37 
 
1.8 Management of missed appointments 

 CMW notified and requested 
to follow up 
Further appointment will be 
offered 2nd defaulted appointment 
Joint home visit with Drug 
and Alcohol service key -
worker and One Stop 
midwives or other member 
of One Stop Clinic team 
CMW requested to follow up 
If woman chooses not to 
attend One Stop Clinic this will 
be documented in hospital 
electronic record with 
recommendations re. 
appropriate tests/ treatment for 
baby. If a woman or person 
defaults 3 appts. A re -referral 
from the CMW will be 
necessary One Stop midwives to 
liaise with substance use 
service to arrange to see 
woman /person there when 
they pick up their 
medication/prescription or 
has appointment with key -
worker 
If not in drug treatment 
continued attempts made 
in conjunction with other 
involved service s. Other agencies to be 
notified to encourage 
woman or person to attend 
offered next appointment One Stop midwives will contact woman or person to offer 
appointment . Community Midwife (CMW) will be informed 
 Further appointment for next 
One Stop Clinic will also be 
confirmed by letter Continued 
alcoh ol/substance use Disclosure of recreational 
substance/ alcohol use prior to 
confirmation of pregnancy 
 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 11 of 37 
 2 Intra -Partum care 
If substance use is stabilised, m ost pregnant women and people with 
substance -related issues will go on to have a normal pregnancy, labour and 
delivery of a term baby of normal bi rth-weight (Whitta ker 2003 , WHO 2017) 
All w omen and people should receive the same options of pain relief as other 
women . Please see appendix for consideration where buprenorphine is 
prescribed . 
2.1 A combined maternal /parental and neonatal One Stop Clinic birth plan 
will b e in the Scanned Documents section of the electronic record. This 
plan contains important information and should be followed carefully. 
2.2 If urine toxicology is requested in the birth plan this should be taken 
from mother /parent and /or neonate within 24 hours of birth. 
2.2.1 The midwife providing intrapartum care should ask the 
woman /person to provide a urine specimen following birth 
(ideally the first void but should be within 24 hours of birth) 
2.2.2 The midwife providing postnatal care shoul d, with 
maternal/parental permission, place a urine collection bag on 
the baby and collect a urine specimen (ideally the first, but 
within the first 24hours) 
2.2.3 The woman or person may refus e consent for urinalysis. If 
they refuse consent for the neonate’s urine to be tested, the 
neonatologist must be informed. 
2.3 Avoid s eparating mother /parent and baby wherever possibl e. Unless 
stated otherwise in the child protection records, the parents m ay care 
for their baby as per routine prodecure and be transferred to the 
post natal ward together. 
2.4 Health professionals should c onsult and follow the care plan regarding 
breast /chest feeding. Breast /chest feeding should be encouraged 
unless there are clear contra -indications , which will be documented in 
the One Stop plan. 

 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 12 of 37 
 2.5 Intra -partum care pathway for substanc e use: 

 Woman /person known to the One Stop Team is admitted to Delivery Suite in 
established labour at term 
Plan agreed by members of the One Stop Team at 30 -
32/40 pregnant 
It gives guidance on analgesia during labour/ substitute 
prescription management/ which agencies to notify and 
postnatal management of mother /parent and baby Please inform One Stop midwives of any admission If the woman /person has attended One Stop Clinic, it is important that the electronic 
notes are read carefully. Information re: substance u se history/ safeguarding issues 
and Maternal /Parental & Neonatal care plan will be found in the Scanned Documents 
section 
Refer to 
Maternal /Parental 
& Neonatal Plan 
Breast /chest feeding Refer to plan 
Prescribing of analgesia should not make a difference 
except where buprenorphine is used METHADONE: Usually there are no restrictions 
concerning pain relief in labour 
 
BUPRENORPHINE: When buprenorphine is 
prescribed. EARLY REVIEW by the anaesthetist is 
essential to ensure adequate pain relief is 
achieved. Intra -partum 
analgesia where 
opiate substitute 
therapy is 
prescribed 
 
All women /people considered stable on methadone and 
buprenorphine should be encouraged to breast /chestfeed 
 
Women /people wishing to breast /chest feed and using 
non-prescribed drugs around time of delivery should 
express and discard milk until negative toxicology test 
Women/people prescribed benzodiazepines please see 
individual neonatal plan 
 Continued non -
prescribed drug 
use 
Note – Do NOT administer Naloxone to babies of opiate dependent 
mothers /parents because there is a risk of acute withdrawal Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 13 of 37 
 2.6 Disclosing drug use for the 1st time on admission to hospital: 

 Alcohol 
Abrupt 
cessation NOT 
advised 
Discuss with 
prescriber 
Refer to One 
Stop Clinic 
and Drug and 
Alcohol 
Service Benzodiazepines Stimula nts Opioids Late materna l/parental disclosure of problematic 
substance use 
Advise abrupt 
cessation if not 
physically 
dependent 
 
Refer to One 
Stop Clinic Advise abrupt 
cessation 
 
Refer to One 
Stop Clinic for 
Maternal/ 
Parental 
Neonatal plan 
 Abrupt cessation 
NOT advised 
Discuss with 
prescriber 
If non -
prescribed – 
refer to Drug 
and Alcohol 
Service and One 
Stop 
 
Contact 
Neonatologist/ 
Obstetrician/ 
One Stop 
midwives and 
substance use 
services where 
physical 
dependence an 
issue 

Assess for 
safeguarding 
referral Contact 
Neonatologist 
/Obstetrician/ 
One Stop 
midwives and 
substance use 
services 
Mother /parent 
and baby should 
have 5 day PN 
stay to monitor 
baby for signs of 
withdrawal 
 
Assess for 
safeguarding 
referral 

 Contact 
Neonatologist/ 
Obstetrician 
One Stop 
midwives and 
substance use 
services where 
physical 
dependence an 
issue 

Assess for 
safeguarding 
referral 
 Pregnancy 
Intra-
partum Contact 
Neonatologist/ 
Obstetrician One 
Stop midwives 
and substance 
use services 
 
Withdrawa l may 
occur 2 -6 weeks 
post birth. 
Ensure Health 
visitor is 
informed on 
discharge. 
 
Assess for 
safeguarding 
referral 
 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 14 of 37 
 2.7 Disclos ing drug use for the 1st time on admission to hospital (antenatal 
& postnatal) : 
2.7.1 Admitting health professional should i nform neonatologist , 
obstetrician and the Substance Use Midwives as soon as 
possible. 
2.7.2 Following birth , send urine of either mother or birthing parent 
and neonate to lab for toxicology, so that decisions can be 
made about breast /chest feeding . Consent for toxicology must 
be obtained. If consent is refused for neonate ’s urine 
toxicology, discuss with neonatologist. 
2.7.3 Until lab results are obtained, encourage woman or person to 
express and discard human milk if they want to 
breast /chest feed. 
2.7.4 Keep mother or birthing parent and neonate togethe r unless 
there are significant and objective concerns regarding the 
mother or birthing parent’s ability to provide safe and 
adequate care . 
2.7.5 Health professional providing care to c ontact Drug and Alcohol 
Service (see appendix ) 
• Give details to the Drug and Alcohol Service about the 
woman’s reported substance u se so that they are able 
to advise the about methadone starting dose. The 
normal starting dose is 30mgs daily, which is titrated 
accordingly. 
2.7.6 Health professional providing care to c ontact Manager on call 
if appropriate. 
2.7.7 Inform safeguarding midwife of admission if indicated. 
3 Post -natal Care 
3.1 Although parental problem alcohol and substance use affects families, 
research evidence does not support the assumptio n that parental 
substance use will automatically lead to child neglect or abuse. 
(Scottish Executive 2003) However, these families may need 
considerable help, reassurance and support during the postnatal 
period, as the stress of being a new parent may cause them to be more 
vulne rable to lapse/relapse. Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 15 of 37 
 Children of parents who use non -prescribed drug s and alcohol are 
more likely to be at an increased risk of adverse life experiences and 
poor outcomes. Recent evidence suggests that psychosocial 
interventions that not only target the primary symptoms, but also 
consider the person’s situation from a societal and familial perspective 
(such as motivational interviewing and parent skills training ) may be 
effective in reducing parental substance use at both short -term (6 -
month) and long -term (12 -month) follow -up (McGovern et al, 2021. 
Coch rane Review) 
3.2 Midwife providing postnatal care to e nsure that obstetricians and 
neonatologists are aware of mother or birthing parent and baby. 
3.2.1 Midwife providing postnatal care to l iaise with specialist 
midwives and safeguarding midwife r egarding substance use 
and any potential child protection issues. 
3.2.2 If the woman or person is known to the One Stop Clinic team, 
midwife providing postnatal care should refer to the neonatal 
and maternal and parental care plan in the notes. 
3.2.3 Midwife providing postnatal care should c heck with plan to 
ascertain whether baby needs to be monitored for neonatal 
abstinence syndrome. 
• Where there has been maternal /parental use u ntil the 
time of birth , babies may require observation for signs 
of neonatal abstinence syndrome. 
• See Appendix for Neonatal Abstinence Scoring System 
chart 
 
3.1.5 Any child protection concerns should be do cumented (please see 
Maternity Protocol MP012: Safeguarding Children and Child 
Protection ). 
3.1.6 Breast /chest feeding advice is usually given on an individual basis. 
The huge benefits of breast /chest feeding should not be ignored, 
but must be balanced against any particular risks. Therefore, refer 
to individual care plan. 
3.1.7 If the woman or person continues to use alcohol or non -prescribed 
substances refer to birth plan and discuss with member of One Stop 
Clinic team. 
3.1.8 Women and people who are considered stable and on Opioid 
Substitution Therapy should be encour aged to breast /chest feed. 
Because methadone decreases slowly in the neonate’s blood, the 
onset of any withdrawal symptoms will be slower (usually not until 
24 – 48 hours after the birth) and more predictable. 
3.1.9 The midwife providing care should contact the outreach 
contraception service ASAP , so that the outreach nurse can attend 
and discuss options with the woman or person before discharge. Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 16 of 37 
 3.1.10 Women and people who have used non -prescribed substances 
around the time of delivery should be encouraged to express and 
discard breast /chest milk until the laboratory reports are 
consider ed safe fo r them to breast /chest feed 
3.3 Prior to discharge the midwife providing care should: 
3.3.1 Check with the neonatologist that the baby has had a cranial 
ultrasound scan where there has been maternal /parental 
stimulant use, i.e. cocaine, or alcohol use at any time during 
the pregnancy. 
3.3.2 The midwife providing postnatal care should check that the 
Hepatitis B immunoglobulin for the baby was discussed with 
the mother or birthing parent during pregnancy. Where there 
is consent for the neonate to receive immunoglobulin – 
discuss with neonatologist who will arrange the vaccination 
and follow up (please see Maternity Protocol MP006: 
Antenatal Screening: Hepatitis B ) 
3.3.3 Contact the neonatal secretaries prior to discharge from 
hospital to arrange future appointments for babies to attend 
the One Stop Clinic for follow up and to complete vaccination 
programme. 
3.3.4 Contact Drug and Alcohol Service this depends upon where 
the woman or person lives ( see appendix ) 
3.3.5 If the woman or person is prescribed Opiate Substitution 
Therapy (methadone or buprenorphine) e nsure that the 
community prescription is recommenced on discharge. This is 
arranged by contactin g the Drug and Alcohol Service ( see 
appendix ) and asking them to re -start the community 
prescription. They will then contact the community 
pharmacy. This must be co mpleted prior to discharge, so that 
the prescription is ready for collection on the day following 
discharge. The Drug and Alcohol Service will then make a 
follow up appointment with the client. 
3.3.1 Aim for a timely discharge so that the woman or person is able 
to receive the next dose as prescribed. If this is not possible 
(for example, if out of hours / unable to contact the Drug and 
Alcohol Service and/or Pharmacy or they are unable to re -start 
the prescription in time) consider other options before 
discharge without OST in place. Suggested options to 
consider: 
 
• Remain as in -patient until after next dose Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 17 of 37 
 • Remain as in -patient overnight to receive morning 
dose prior to discharge 
• Bring forward dose by up to 4 hours if this means 
that the woman or person can receive their dose as 
prescribed 
 
If these options are not possible, then a single dose can be prescribed on a TTO for 
the client to be discharged with. This should be prescribed with the volume written 
in words and figures, you must sign next to the CD drug as well as the TTO signature 
line once printed out (see example below) . The request should go to pharmacy as 
per usual TTO procedure. A narrative should also be included to explain the one -off 
dose, for example: This person is prescribed methadone and the community 
prescription is unable to be recommenced until xx -xx-xx. Therefore this one -off 
dose as a TTO is being requested so that they can be discharged. 
 
Medication Dose/Frequency/ 
Duration/NFD Drug 
Status Comments Indication Dispensing 
Status 
Methadone 1 mg in 
1 mL Oral Liquid 20mg ONCE daily A 
Admitted 
on – to 
CONTINUE One off 
supply 
Drug and 
Alcohol 
Service to 
continue 20ml TWENTY mL 

SIGN AND DATE To 
dispense 
 
3.3.7 Ensure that any child protection plans are followed. 
3.3.8 Ensure the correct details of discharge address and telephone 
number are obtained prior to discharge as this may be a 
different address to the home address, particularly where 
there is a Local Authority plan. 
3.3.9 Give up to date details to Community Midwifery Team and 
Heath Visiting Service. Ensure that targeted postnatal care is 
requested if indicated. 
3.3.10 If the woman or person is moving out of area, ensure that 
information is shared with the new community midwifery 
team . 
(Please be aware of individual opening time s of drug treatment s ervices. 
Plans should be made well in advance where possible so t hat the person 
receives effective and timely drug treatment.) 
4 Training 
 
Please refer to the Training Needs Analysis document for details on staff 
training in relation to this protocol. 
 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 18 of 37 
 5 Monitoring Compliance 
 
Please refer to the Monitoring and Auditing document for details on 
monitoring compliance for this protocol. 
 
6 Reference s 
ACMD (Advisory C ouncil for the Misuse of Drugs) (2003) Report, Hidden Harm: 
Responding to the needs of children of problem drug users . Home Office London 
BMA (British Medical Association) (2007) Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders - a guide 
for healthcare professionals. BMA. London. 
Department of Health (2016) UK Chief Medical Officers’ Alcohol Guidelines Review. 
DoH London. 
Fergie Libby, Campbell Katarzyna A., Coleman -Haynes Tom, Ussher Michael, Cooper 
Sue, Coleman Tim (2019 ) Identifying Effective Behavior Change Techniques for 
Alcohol and Illicit Substance Use During Pregnancy: A Systematic Review Annals of 
behavioral medicine : a publication of the Society of Behavioral Medicine 
Finnegan, L.P. (1991) Treatment issues for opioid -dependent women during the 
perinatal period. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 23(2), 191 -201. 
Jansson, L.M. (2014) Breastfeeding and substance use/misuse: A review of the 
evidence and estimates of risks associated with individual substances in World 
Health Organization (2014) Guidelines for the identification and management of 
substance use and substance use disorders in pregnancy Geneva, Switzerland. 
Jones, H.E. et al (2010) Neonatal abstinence syndrome after methadone or 
buprenorphine exposure. New England Journal of Medicine 363(24): 2320 -2331 
Kramlich Debra, Kronk Rebecca (2015) Relational Care for Perinatal Substance Use: A 
Systematic Review. MCN. The American journal of maternal child nursing 
McCarthy, R., Mukherjee, R.A.S, Fleming, K., Green, J., Clayton -Smith, J., Price, AD., 
Allely, C.S. & Cook, P. (2021) Prevalence of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder in Greater 
Manchester, UK: An active case ascertainment study. Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 2021:45: 
2271 -2281. 
McGovern, R., Newham, J. J., Addison, M. T., Hickman, M., & Kaner, E. F. (2021). 
Effectiveness of psychosocial interventions for reducing parental substance misuse. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, (3). 
Mukherjee, R.A.S., Aiton, N. (Eds) (2021) Prevention, Recognition and Management 
of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders Springer Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 19 of 37 
 National Harm Reduction Coalition Hepatitis C Basics for people who used drugs 
(PWUD) https://harmreduction.org/issues/hepatitis -c/basics -brochure 
NICE (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence) (2010) Pregnancy and 
Complex Social Factors. NICE clinical guideline 110. Developed by the National 
Collaborating Centre for Women and Children’s Health. London. 
NICE (2010 ) Opioid dependence: Scenario: Managing special circumstances: 
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Revised in February 2022 cks.nice.org.uk 
NTA (National treatment Agency) (2004). Women in drug treatment services . DoH. 
London 
Paul Sarah E. (2021) Associations between Prenatal Cannabis Exposure and 
Childhood Outcomes: Results from the ABCD Study JAMA Psychiatry 2021;78:64 -76. 
Platt, L., Sweeney, S., Ward, Z. et al . (2017) Assessing the impact and cost -
effectiveness of needle and syringe provision and opioid substitution therapy on 
hepatitis C transmission among people who inject drugs in the UK: an analysis of 
pooled data sets and economic modeling. Public Health Res. 2017;5(5) Published on 
5 December 2017 doi:10.3310/signal - 000518 
Popova, S., Lange, S., Probst, C., Gmel, G., & Rehm, J. (2017) Estimation of national, 
regional and global prevalence of alcohol use during pregnancy and fetal alcohol 
syndrome: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Lancet Global Health, 5. E290 -
E299. 
CEMACH. (2007) Saving Mothers’ Lives: Reviewing maternal deaths to make 
motherhood safe r. 2003 -2005. Seventh Report. London 
Scottish Executive. (2003). Getting our priorities right: good practice guidance for 
working with children and famili es affected by substance misuse . Download from 
www.scotland.gov.uk 
Whittaker A. (2003). Substance misuse in pregnancy . NHS Lothian. Edinburgh 
 
World Health Organization (2014) Guidelines for the identification and management 
of substance use and substance use disorders in pregnancy Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
Zedler, B., Mann, A., Kim, M., Amick, H.R. (2016 ) Buprenorphine compared with 
methadone to treat pregnant women with opioid use disorder: a systematic review 
and meta -analysis of safety on the mother, fetus and child: Buprenorphine safety 
during pregnancy Addiction 111(12) DOI.10.1111/add.13462 
Contributors 
Dr. Neil Aiton, Dr. Giles Allen, David Annandale, Rob Bradley, Donna Evans RMN , 
Penny Gillis RM, Dr. Rebecca Mal lick, Dr. Mark Paul, Andy Smith , Nichola Tuck RM. Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 20 of 37 
 Appendix A - Contact Det ails 
 
One Stop Clinic Specialist Midwives mobile: 07795 498509 
uhsussex.onestopmidwives@nhs.net 
 
Drug and Alcohol Services 
Brighton CGL (Change, Grow, Live) Drug and Alcohol Service 01273 731900 
Brighton.info@cgl.org.uk Richmond House, Richmond Road, Brighton BN2 3RL 
 
West Sussex CGL 0300 3 038677 westsussex.firststep@cgl.org 
 
East Sussex CGL 0300 3038160 eastsussex.firststep@cgl.org.uk 

Appendix B – One Stop Clinic 
The team consists of : 
Consultant Neonatologist 
Consultant Obstetrician 
CGL Drug and Alcohol service link worker 
Specialist Midwives 
Link Social Worker 
Link Worker from Brighton Oasis Project 
 
The team also have links with other agencies working in the drug use and criminal 
justice fields, and work closely with the Specialist Perinatal Mental Health Service. 
The One Stop midwives attend additional appointments with One Stop clients in 
other services and disciplines wherever possible. 
 
One Stop Clinic aims to 
 
offer a service that is: 
• Accessible 
• Client –friendly 
• Non-judgemental 
 
ensure a multi -disciplinary approach for pregnant women and people who use 
substances and offer : 
• Assessment 
• Advice 
• Support 
• Triage 
• Routine care according to needs 
 
and in doing so aim to improve: 
• Engagement Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 21 of 37 
 • Harm reduction 
• Stabilisation 
• On-goin g support 
• Improvements in drug use 
 
Our primary goal is to engage women and people into maternity or perinatal 
services as early as possible and encourage regular antenatal clinic attendance, with 
an overall aim of improvin g outcomes for women an d people and their babiesSubstance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) 
 MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 22 of 37 
 Appendix C - Overview and background information 
 
The One Stop Clinic focus remains on stability over abstinence, and aims to promote 
non-judgemental care a nd open access. 
 
The key aim of this protocol is to eng age women and people in maternity and 
perinatal services, in order to enable and encourage them to obtain the best possible 
outcomes for themselves and their babies. 
 
Pregnancy may provide an opportunity for a woman or person , her partner and other 
people living in the household, to change patterns of alcohol and other substance use. 
Health workers providing care for women and people with substance use disorders 
during pregnancy need to understand the possible complexity of the woman or 
person’s social, mental and physical issues and to provide the right a dvice and 
support throughout pregnancy and the postpartum period. (WHO, 2014) 
 
Problematic substance use during pregnancy is an important public health issue which 
may affect outcomes for the woman or person and fetus. Pre -term labour, 
miscarriage, placental abruption and small for gestational age are obstetric 
complications which have been associated with wo men and people who are 
substance dependent. (WHO,2014 ) 
 
Some of the substances used in conjunction with life style can affect the menstrual 
cycle . Although women and people with substance use disorders can experience 
secondary amenorrhoea, this does not mean that they no longer ovulate. As a resu lt, 
some women and people may not realise that they are pregnant and will be late in 
accessing maternity care. Another reason for late involvement with services may be 
an associa ted lifestyle, which can make multiple demands on time. However, anxiety 
about judgemental attitudes from health profe ssionals and fear of Social Services 
interven tion have been highlighted as significant reason s why women and people do 
not engage with services (NICE, 2010 ). 
 
Non -disclosure remains a key problem. Anecdotally, substance use is the highest 
undisclosed condition in maternity care. Fear o f stigmatisation can be reduced by a 
maternity service that is accessible, welcoming and where the carers are non -
judgemental, sympathetic and honest. 
 
Historically this client group has had to attend a significantly increased number of 
appointments with a multitude of different professionals. Chaotic lifestyles can make 
engagement more challenging. Difficulties in attending appointments meant 
increased likelihood of “failure” and a negative view of engagement and hence 
stigmatisation. The One Stop Clinic works from the principle that any engagement is 
better than no engagement. It recognises that recovery is a process, not an event, and 
that lapse and relapse are a normal part of that process. 
 
 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) 
 MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 23 of 37 
 Appendix D – Breast /chest feeding 
 
Human milk provides optimal nutrition for the newborn. Enhanced 
maternal /parental -infant attachment through breast /chest feeding may be especially 
important for women and people who may be feeling guilty about their substance use 
and may lack confidence in parenting skills. Evidence of decreased stress response 
and increased vagal tone, indicating better autonomic regulation, in lactating 
compared to non -lactating women and people is salient for substance dependent 
women and people . Stress can be a factor in the development of psychiatric 
symptoms, and has been linked to rel apse to substance use (WHO, 2014). The 
significant and specific benefits of human milk and breast /chest feeding where there is 
substance dependence necessitates a discussion regarding its risks and benefits. 
Maternal /parental functioning, infant functioning and toxicities associated with 
substances used must be considered (Jansson, 2014). 
 
Prescribed methadone and buprenorp hine are not contra -indications to 
breast /chest feeding. 
 
Appendix E - Alcohol Use in Pregnancy 
 
Since 2016 t he official UK recommendation has been that the safest approach is not 
to drink alcohol at all when planning a pregnancy, or pregnant (Department of Health, 
2016) There is no safe level of alcohol use in pregnancy. 
 
The UK is one of four countries in Europe with the highest known rates of prenatal 
alcohol exposure, all of which have rates of over 40% pregnancies exposed to alcohol. 
Recent UK research has confirmed previous estimates that one child per class of 25 to 
30 children in the UK is alcohol affected. The condition is not rare, just rarely 
diagnosed. It is likely to be much more common than for example, autism, where 
much progress has been made in developing diagnostic pathways in recent years. 
(McCarthy R, Mukherjee RAS, Fleming KL et al, 2021) 
 
Alcohol is a teratogen that readily crosses the placenta. In the absence of a 
developed blood filtration system, the fetus is totally unprotected from alcohol 
circulating in the blood system. Prenatal alcohol exposure can affect the fetus in a 
number of ways. The most devastating effects are the intellectual disabilities 
associated with the adverse impact of alcohol on fetal brain development and the 
central nervous system. Damage is irreparable and completely preventable. (BMA, 
2007) Accurate alcohol history taking, early referral and the provision of a brief 
intervention service is recommended. (WHO, 2014) It is imperative that 
maternal /parental alcohol history is comprehensively documented in the 
maternal /parental and infant notes, so that it is available to inform any possible 
paediatric assessment in the future and improve outcomes for children who are 
alcohol affected. 
 
Alcohol Brief Interventions Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) 
 MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 24 of 37 
 Where alcohol use is identified a brief intervention (BI) can be used alongside 
motivational interviewing (MI) to communicate effectively about alcohol. Although 
more research is needed regarding their efficacy in pregnancy, there is substantial 
evidence that BIs are effective in reducing harmful drinking. Even in light of the low -
quality evidence that does exist, the 2014 World Health Organisation (WHO) 
guidelines on BIs strongly recommended that all pregnant women and people who 
are using alcohol should be offered a brief intervention. 
 
An alcohol brief intervention (ABI) is a short, personalised interaction, which takes 
place on one or more occasions. It is designed to give specific information on the 
consequences of alcohol consumption, and in doing so encourage behaviour change. 
 
An ABI should be seen as part of an on -going conversation, and MI should be an 
intrinsic part of the interaction. In practice this means using open -ended questions, 
actively listening to responses and trying to encourage a conversation about 
behaviour change. 
 
What are the key Principles of Motivational Interviewing? 
Express empathy : do not try to resolve a problem or sympathise about it. Empathy 
is best seen as connection between people, where one person takes the perspective 
of the other and recognises the vulnerability of their position. 
Understand discrepancy/ambivalence : acknowledge the conflicting feelings that 
the client may have about their alcohol use. Accept that the issue may not be clear -
cut for the client – that they may have simultaneous and contradictory feelings. 
Roll with resistance and avoid arguing: accept that the client needs to present their 
own reasons for change. 
Support hope and self -determination : ask clients what their reasons are for change 
– don’t tell them why you think they should change. 
 
A starting point could be questions such as: 
‘I have a concern about your alcohol use. I don’t know if you are concerned 
about it too, but would it be ok if I tell you what I think, or is there anything 
else that you would like to ask about, or tell me, first?’ 
 
‘Can I tell you what I know about that?’ 
 
‘There is something I need to tell you here, is that ok?’ 
 
As clients may already feel uncomfortable talking about their alcohol use, asking 
permission is useful in that it is inclusive and non -threatening. It includes the person 
in setting the agenda for the ABI, and in a subtle but very important way it places 
them in control of the conversation. The ABI will obviously need to include clear and Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) 
 MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 25 of 37 
 concise information about alcohol use in pregnancy, but this may be more accessible 
and assimilated when it is given in a spirit of collaboration and respect. 
 
When alcohol use is disclosed an appropriate response to different levels of use is 
important. Firstly, where there is alcohol dependence - that is, where withdrawal 
symptoms are described when use is reduced or stopped - an in -patient programme 
in a specialist unit is indicated. Abrupt cessation of alcohol use where there is 
physical dependence may lead to miscarriage or pre -term labour, and it is important 
that reduction and cessation of use are managed appropriately. Secondly, where 
moderate/heavy alcohol use is described, or where low use is continuing, 
practitioners may feel that referral to a specialist service is required. This could be in 
the form of a specialist substance -use clinic within maternity services, or if this is not 
available, a local drug and alcohol service. Finally, it may be that a specialist service is 
not indicated, or not available, or the person declines referral to it. 
 
Appendix F - Guidance on harm reduction to reduce rates of new hepatitis infection 
for people who inject drugs 
Key Messages: 
• Provide clean needles and syringes 
• Offer safer oral therapy (such as methadone or buprenorphine) 
These 2 services reduced the predicted risk of becoming infected with hepatitis C by 
71%. (NIHR, 2017) 
 
• Give safer sex advice: use condoms and lubrication and get tested for STIs 
• Advise re: HIV, Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C testing 
• Get Hepatitis A and B vaccinations 
• Do not start injecting 
• If currently injecting then if possible change to smoking 
• If unable to stop injecting then aim to reduce harm by avoiding reusing or 
sharing all injecting equipment 
• Use safer injecting practices (this includes all injecting paraphernalia) 
• Use needle exchange system 
• Avoid sharing toothbrushes, razors, nail clippers 
• Use sterile tattoo and piercing equipment 
• Only use personal snorting straws and crack pipes 
• Avoid initiating others (or as a minimum provide them with harm reduction 
advice) 
• Reduce alcohol consumption 
• Get emotional support (National Harm Reduction Coalition, 2017) 

Appendix G - Treatment of opioid dependency in pregnancy 
 
Opioid Substitution Therapy (OST) can remove the risks and harms of non -prescribed 
opioid use. It also has the potential to allow pregnant women and people to focus on Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) 
 MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 26 of 37 
 other aspects of their lives. OST creates a stable in -utero environment for the fetus. 
There is normal fetal growth and development, and pregnancies progress to normal 
length. Breast/chest feeding is not contra -indicated, regardless of dose. Any neonatal 
dependence is treatable. Pregnant women and people who are dependent on opioids 
should be encouraged to use OST rather than attempt detoxification. Pregnant 
women and people who are already taking methadone or buprenorphine for OST 
should remain on that therapy. (NICE, 2022) 
The two types of OST used in pregnancy are methadone (brand name: physeptone) 
and buprenorphine (brand name: subutex) 
Methadone and buprenorphine are not the panacea for opioid dependency, but they 
do provide many benefits for maternal and parental wellbeing, the pregnancy and the 
fetus. Prescription medication , engagement with maternity and perinatal services and 
reduction of non-prescribed drugs can lead to successf ul outcomes during and after 
pregnancy. 
 
Although OST includes a risk of neo natal opioid dependence , opioids are essentially 
non-toxic at stable levels. Cessation of opioids on the other hand carries a higher risk 
of relapse to unstable patterns of short -acting opioid use (for example, heroin) . 
(WHO, 2014) Neither methadone nor buprenorphine have adverse effects on the 
pregnancy or neonatal outcomes – the incidence of neonatal abstinence syndrome 
(NAS) with buprenorphine is similar to methadone and there is some evidence that 
buprenorphine use results in less severe NAS (NICE, 2022) 
 
Reducing OST is generally not recommended in pregnancy or the immediate postnatal 
period. Relapse is more likely following medication -assisted withdrawal than while 
undertaking opioid maintenance treatment (NICE, 2022) 
 
Follow up studies have shown that long -term outcome in women and people who 
enter an OST programme during pregnancy are b etter in terms of pregnancy, 
childbirth and infant development, irrespective of continuing substance use (WHO, 
2014 ). Where appropriate, it is also important to engage the woman or person’s 
partner to participate in enabling and encouraging success in stabilising substance 
use. 
 
Occasionally, when a woman or pe rson is on OST they may continue to use non -
prescribed drugs. This may be a problem when the woman or person is admitted in 
labour. Therefore, it is important that an honest, trusting and non -judgemental 
relationship is established between the woman or person and their midwife. This wil l 
hopefully encourage them to disclose any substance use over and above the 
prescribed medication. Although it is impossible to know the strength and dosage of 
non-prescribed drugs, honest disclosure will enable any treatment to be titrated 
accordingly. 

 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) 
 MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 27 of 37 
 Methadone 
 
Methadone has been the OST of choice in pregnancy since the 1970s. The evidence 
shows that it supports normal fetal growth , birthweight and term pregnancies . 
Methadone is a full agonist at the opioid receptor. There is no ‘ceiling’ effect, and a s 
the dose increases so do the anal gesic effects, and therefore so does the potential for 
adverse effects. 
 
When in labour, women and people should be given their daily dose of methadone as 
usual. Non -pharmacological methods of pain relief (for example, water, TENS, 
mobilisation and relaxation) should be encouraged as they would be in normal labour 
care. Analgesia should also be offered as it would be in normal labour care. 
Additional doses of opioids can be carefully administered. 
 
It is often necessary to increase the dosage of methadone in the third trimester to 
maintain response due to changes in drug distribution, metabolism and clearance. 
In the third trimester it may also be more effective to split the dose rather than 
increase i t. It may occasionally be necessary to increase the dose or split it, from 
once -daily consumption to twice daily -consumption, or both (NICE, 2022) 
 
Breast/chestfeeding should be supported and encouraged when women and people 
are stable on prescribed methadone, and wish to breast/chest feed. 
Morning sickness may lead to the vomiting of methadone soon after it is swallowed 
and may lead to maternal and fetal withdrawal. If a methadone dose is vomited: 
• Within 10 minutes of dosing – consider giving a repeat dose. 
• Within 10 -30 minutes of dosing – consider giving half a repeat dose. 
• More than 30 minutes after dosing – consider giving half a repeat dose only if 
withdrawal occurs. 
• Consider if the entire dose is likely to have been vomited. 
• If there is doubt – assess (or refer to an experienced clinician 4 -6 hours after 
vomitinmg when the effects of methadone should be at their peak, to 
determine whether an additional small dose is required. (NICE, 2022) 
 
Buprenorphine 
Buprenorphine acts as a partial agonist at the opio id receptor and has a p rolonged 
duration of action due to its high affinity for the receptor. The pharmacological 
effects are very similar to methadone, however it has a lower potential for overdose. 
Some women and people prefer buprenorphine because they feel more “clear 
headed” than with methadone. The dosing of buprenorphine in pregnancy is similar 
to that in non -pregnant women and people . As with methadone it is often necessary 
to adjust the dose towards the end of pregnancy; on average the increase is 2mg . 
Recent research has found that buprenorphine is a safe and effective alternative to 
methadone, and suggests that infants born to women and people who received Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) 
 MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 28 of 37 
 buprenorphine had milder symptoms of neonatal opioid withdrawal than those born 
to women and people who received methadone. 
 
There is increasing evidence that due to the drug’s poor bioavailability when taken 
orally, it is unlikely that there is signifi cant systemic absorption from human milk. 
Therefore, breast /chest feeding should be supported and encouraged where women 
and people are stable on prescribed buprenorphine, and wish to breast /chest feed 
(NICE, 2022) 
When in labour, women and people should be given their daily dose of 
buprenorphine as usual. Non -pharmacological methods of pain relief (for example, 
water, TENS, mobilisation and relaxation) should be encouraged as they would be in 
normal labour care. Analgesia should also be offered as it would be in normal labour 
care . 
As buprenorphine is a partial agonist women and people may have reduced analgesic 
benefit from additional opioids , because partial agonists displace pure agonist s (i.e. 
other opioids) on the receptor. This is a dose -related effect and becomes si gnificant 
at level s above 8mg. Additional doses of opioids can be c arefully administered. 
Women and people may require careful supplementation following caesarean 
section/instrumental delivery. Early anesthetist review is recommended. 

Missed doses 
If a woman or person misses several doses of OST , it is important to contact the 
dispenser . Careful liaison should also take place with the prescriber - liaison with the 
Drug and Alcohol Service is important in this situation. It is important to remember 
that u ntreated withdrawal gives a risk of precipitating early l abour. Efforts should be 
made to ensure the prescribed OST remains available in order to protect 
maternal/parental and fetal stability and clinical wellbeing. 

Appendices H to J: Substances 
These appendices provide a brief overview of a limited range of substances. 
 
For a more comprehensive resource please consult the UK Teratology Information 
Service (UKTIS) website TOXBASE. 
 
UKTIS also provides accessible leaflets for non -professionals on their Best Use of 
Medicine is Pregnancy (BUMPS) website. The BUMPS information is easy to Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) 
 MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 29 of 37 
 download and print, and therefore can be a useful source of information for pregnant 
women and people, and families. 
 
www.toxbase.org 
Log in: H2459 
Password: CAY664 
 
BUMPS 
www.medicinesinpregnancy.org 

 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 30 of 37 
 Appendix H: Stimulants 
 
Substance 
/street name Duration of Action Effects on the User Effect on 
Pregnancy /Neonate Effects on Lactation Treatment Options 
Tobacco 
Cigarettes 
 
See Maternity 
Smoking 
Cessation 
protocol for 
comprehensive 
information. 
 Nicotine can reach the 
brain in 7 seconds of 
inhalation of cigarette 
smoke. Duration of 
action is approx. 15 – 
120 minutes Claims to alleviate anxiety and stress 
and promotes relaxation and 
enhances mood. Increase pulse rate 
and tremor, reduces appetite 
 Smoking increases the risk 
of low birth weight, heart 
defects, stillbirth, preterm 
birth, miscarriage and 
Sudden Infant Death Nicot ine is excreted into human 
milk, the amount equating to the 
amount inhaled through passive 
smoking. High levels of ni cotine 
in the blood can cause 
vomiting, diarrhoea, irritability 
and neonatal tachycardia. There 
is some evidence that cigarette 
smoking reduces milk volume. 
Smoking in the presence of the 
infant increases the risk of 
Sudden Infant Death Offer CO testing at booking and 
36/40. Risks should be discussed as 
early in the pregnancy as possible. 
Discuss and refer to Smoking 
Cessation Service if appropriate. 
Caffeine 
 
Coffee 
Tea 
Coca cola 
Chocolate 

2 – 12 hours 
 Restlessness, stomach upset, 
alertness, physical endurance and 
decreased fatigue. Extent of effec - 
variable in different individuals. Can 
be harmful if existing cardiac 
problems. No significant effect unless 
taken in chronic doses, 
which is not generally 
attainable in normal 
consumption 
Minimal amounts of caffeine 
enter human milk , which is 
unlikely to cause a probl em 
unless it is taken in high and/or 
frequent amounts 
 
 No specific treatments available. 
Caffeine free products may be 
used as a replacement 
 
Amphetamine 
 
Speed 
Whiz 
Uppers 
 
Class B 4 – 8 hours Powerful stimulant. General 
excitement, alertness, impulsiveness, 
restlessness, aggression. 
self confidence. BP, headaches. 
appetite. 
 Vaso -constrictor → 
increased risk of pre -term 
birth, placental abruption 
and intra -uterine growth 
retardation (IUGR) . No 
conclusive link to 
congenital malformation. 
 Concentrates in human milk, may 
cause irritability and dis turbed 
sleep in the exposed neonate . 
Long term effects are unknown Advise immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop Clinic 
Pseudoephedrine 
 
Sudafed 4 – 6 hours - 60mgs 
10 – 12 hours - 120 
mgs BP 
Insomnia Decrease s placental blood 
flow and may lead to fetal 
hypoxia Excreted into human milk in small 
amounts. 
May cause irritability and 
disturbed sleep for exposed 
infants Advise immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop Clinic Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 31 of 37 
 
Substance/ street 
name Duration of 
Action Effects on the User Effect on 
Pregnancy /Neonate Effects on Lactation Treatment Options 
Cocaine 
 
Crack 
Cocaine 

Class A Smoking 
crack : 
30 -120 
minutes . 
 
Snorting 
cocaine: 15- 
30 minutes. 
 
IV cocaine: 
immediate 
and peaks 
after a few 
minutes  self confidence, alertness, excitement 
and euphoria and decreased fatigue. 
 
Vaso - constrictor. 
 
Cardiac toxicity = serious adverse effect. 
Perforation of nasal septum and 
rhinorrhoea is associated with regular 
snorting Has powerful vaso -
constrictive properties 
which may cause  
placental blood flow, 
fetal hypoxia → 
perinatal mortality .Has 
been associated with 
spontaneous abortion, 
placental abruption, 
premature labour, 
(IUGR) and Sudden 
Infant Death. Cocaine is excreted into human milk 
and can result in cocaine intoxication 
of the infant: viomiting, diarrhoea, 
irritability, tachycardia and seizures. 
Long term eff ect is unknown. 
Current research looking at cognitive 
behaviour in exposed infants Advise immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop Clinic 
Refer to Drug and Alcohol Service 
MDMA 
Ecstasy, Adam, XTC, 
M, E 

Class A 
7 -8 hours 
 Less hallucinogenic and stimulatory 
effects than amphetamines. 
 
Emotional effects are more pronounced. 
 Vaso -constrictor → 
increased risk of pre -
term birth, placental 
abruption and IUGR No 
conclusive link to 
congenital 
malformation. 
Exposure correlated with 
poorer motor skills in 
infants up to age 2 years May cause irritability in exposed 
infant. 
 
 Advise immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop Clinic 
Refer to Drug and Alcohol Service 
Methamphetamine 
Ice , Crystal 
Class A > 10 – 12 
hours Impaired judgement, pronounced 
stimulatory Has vaso -constrictive 
properties which may 
cause  placental blood 
flow, fetal hypoxia → 
perinatal mortality . May cause irritability in exposed 
infant. Long term effects are 
unknown Advise immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop Clinic 
Refer to Drug and Alcohol Service 
 
Khat 
 
Class C 3 - 4 hours Talkative/ Irritability/anger 
Appetite suppressant 
Psychological dependence Unknown. Chemically 
similar to 
amphetamines. Vaso -
constrictive so may carry 
similar risks as cocaine. 
No supporting data. Unknown Advise immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop Clinic 
Refer to Drug and Alcohol Service 
 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 32 of 37 
 New Psychoactive 
Substances 
“Legal Highs ” 
 
e.g. spice, bath 
salts, Mdat. 
 Various Similar to ecstasy/amphetamines 
dependent on ingredients Unknown. 
Presumed as per 
amphetamines. 
No supporting data. Unknown Advise immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop Clinic 
Refer to Drug and Alcohol Service 
 
Mephedrone 
 
methedrone 
meow meow 
M-CAT 
 
Class B 6 – 8 hours 

 Alert and/or paranoid, confident, 
affectionate and/or anxious, dizzy. 

 Unknown. 
Presumed as per 
amphetamines. 
No supporting data. 

Unknown 
 Advise immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop Clinic 
Refer to Drug and Alcohol Service 

Appendix I: Depressants 
 
Substance / street 
name Duration of Action Effects on User Effect on 
Pregnancy /Neonate Effects on Lactation Treatment Options 
Alcohol 
 Dependant on 
consumption . One unit 
clears the system in 
about one hour. Loss of inhibition, slurred 
speech, general relaxation. 
 
May present with either sense 
of wellbeing or depressed No safe level of alcohol use 
in pregnancy. 
 
Risk of Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome and Fetal Alcohol 
Spectrum Disorder. Freely excreted into human milk. 
Heavy consumption may affect milk supplies. 
Women and people should be advised not to 
breast /chest feed for 2 hours after having an 
alcoholic drink 
Evidenced link between drinking alcohol and 
Sudden Infant Death Advise re. risks of 
alcohol in pregnancy in 
a non -confrontational 
way. Encourage open 
and positive 
communication . Advise 
immediate cessation if 
not alcohol dependent. 
If alcohol dependent 
will require in -patient 
treatment. 
Refer to One Stop 
Clinic 
Refer to Drug and 
Alcohol Service 

 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 33 of 37 
 Benzodiaze pines 
 
Diazepam 
Oxaxepam 
Temaze pam 
Class C Dependant on dose 
and medication type, 
Approx 1 to 3days. Lack of muscle tone, relief of 
anxiety and tension. 
 
Sedative May cause respiratory 
depression, hypotonia, poor 
feeding/ weight gain, 
neonatal dependence Excre ted in small amounts into human milk, H as 
the potential to accumulate in the infant. May 
cause sedation and poor feeding when used in 
high or prolonged doses . Infant may show signs 
of dependence which may not occur until 4 -6 
weeks after birth Do NOT advise 
immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop 
Clinic 
Planned reduction if 
indicated 
Refer to Drug and 
Alcohol Service 
Cannabis 
Marijuana 
Grass, Weed, Dope, 
Pot, Blow, Hemp 
Class B Depending upon the 
method of 
consumption, 
complete elimination 
can take weeks / 
months depending on 
use 
  relaxation and food cravings, 
loss of concentration and time 
orientation. 
Red eyes, tachycardia. 
Can be hallucinogenic 
 Similar to nicotine. 
incidence of IUGR and ↓ 
birth weight 
Some evidence suggests 
cannabis exposure and its 
correlated factors are 
associated with greater risk 
for psychopathology during 
middle childhood (Paul, 
2021) Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) may accumulate in 
the fatty tissue of the neonate. Important to 
avoid smo king in the presence of the infant to 
reduce the risks of Sudden Infant Death . 
 Refer to One Stop 
Clinic for cannabis 
reduction/cessation 
sessions WITH 
CONSENT 
 
Opioids 
Heroin 
Opium 
Morphine 
 
Class A IV = 4 – 6 hours 
If smoked effects may 
be prolonged 
 
 Relief of pain (physical and 
psychological) and anxiety , lack 
of awareness, drowsiness, 
pinpoint pupils. 
Respiratory depression. Blood born viruses 
Injecting abscesses 
May cause IUGR 
May cause neonatal 
dependence 
Acute withdrawal associated 
with spontaneous abortion, 
preterm labour and 
perinatal mortality and 
increased incidence of 
Sudden Infant Death Heroin passes into human milk in sufficient 
quantities and has the potential to cause adverse 
effects in infants. Breast/chest feeding is 
contraindicated when there is non -prescribed 
opioid use. Do NOT advise 
immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop 
Clinic 
Refer to Drug and 
Alcohol Service 

Remember: OST = best 
outcomes for mothers 
and parents and babies 
Opioids 
Codeine 
Co-dydramol, 
dihydrocodeine 
 
Class B 4 – 6 hours Warmth, wellbeing, sleepiness. 
Nausea, constipation, itching. 
Respiratory depression. 
 
May cause neonatal 
dependence 

Codeine phosphate should not be used if 
breast /chest feeding. 
Excreted in varying amounts into breastmilk 
dependent on different rates of maternal 
metabolism. Do NOT advise 
immediate cessation 
Refer to One Stop 
Clinic 
Refer to Drug and 
Alcohol Service 
 
OST may be indicated 
in some cases Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 34 of 37 

Appendix J: Hallucinogens 
 
Substance / street name Duration of Action Effects on User Effect on Pregnancy /Neonate Effects on Lactation Treatment Options 
Volatile Substances 
 
Petrol, Gas, Glue, 
Aerosols, Cans, Butane 
Gas 30 minutes, depending 
upon substance used Euphoria. Chronic use associated 
with concentration, insomnia, and 
nightmares. 
 
Peripheral and central neurological 
damage, renal failure and acidosis 
have been reported Volatile substances cross the 
placental barrier and may 
cause pre -term labour, and 
birth Should not cause a problem 
unless the mother/parent is 
substance affected Advise immediate 
cessation 
Refer to One Stop 
Clinic 
Refer to Drug and 
Alcohol Service 
 
LSD 
 
Trips 
Acid 
 
Class A 10 – 12 hours + Flushing, tachycardia, dry mouth, 
tremors, followed by euphoria, time 
distortion, visual and auditory 
hallucinations and depersonalisation. 
 
Psychosis =chronic problem Limited research Limited research, though LSD, 
even in low doses is extremely 
powerful, rapidly distributed 
through the body after 
consumption. 
 
Breastfeeding should be 
avoided Advise immediate 
cessation 
Refer to One Stop 
Clinic 
Refer to Drug and 
Alcohol Service 

PCP 
Phencyclidine 
 6 hours though effects 
may take several days 
to wear off Thought distortion, exaggerated 
sensation, hallucination affecting 
visual and sensory function and  
pain tolerance Associated with birth defects. 
 
Long term behavioural and 
neurological effects have 
been observed in infants 
exposed to maternal /parental 
PCP misuse Stored in fatty tissue and can 
accumulate and concentrate 
in breast milk 
Therefore, breastfeeding 
should be avoided Advise immediate 
cessation 
Refer to One Stop 
Clinic 
Refer to Drug and 
Alcohol Service 
 
Ketamine 
Special K 
K 
 
Class C 30 – 120 minutes Vaso -dilator 
Analgesic and psychedelic 
properties , hallucinations, agitation, 
dizziness, clonic movements, 
hypertension and tachycardia. No research in pregnancy In view of possible vaso - 
dilation breastfeeding should 
be avoided if used around 
time of birth Advise immediate 
cessation 
Refer to One Stop 
Clinic 
Refer to Drug and 
Alcohol Service 
 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 35 of 37 
 Appendix K: Approximate detection times of some common drugs of use in urine 
 
DRUGS DURATION OF 
DETECTION IN URINE 
 Alcohol Up to 1 day 
 Amphetamines (including MDMA, MDA) 2 days 
 Acetyl morphine (recent heroin ) 24 hours 
 Barbiturates 1-3 days 
 Benzodiazepines 1-3 days 
 Cannabis 7~28days 
 Cocaine 1-3 days 
 Codeine 1-3 days 
 Cyclizine <2 days 
 Dihydrocodeine 1-3 days 
 Methadone 1-3 days 
 
Try to ensure that the specimen belongs to the person. A fresh and warm specimen of urine should always be used . 
Note: 
• Detection times are only very approximate and are dependant upon the dose, frequency, route of administration and urine excretion/ 
dilution. 
• Results can be interpreted in the light of clinical findings, as false negatives and false positives can occur. False positi ves can be caused 
by the use of quinolones or loperamide (imodium). Note that many over -the-counter medicines contain opioids (e.g. codeine). 
Negative results can occur despite the presence of buprenorphine or tramadol, as these drugs do not test as opioid positive on urine 
tests. 
 
 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 36 of 37 
 Appendix L: Neonatal Abstinence Scoring System Adapted from L.P.Finnegan (1986) 
 
Infants displaying signs of withdrawal will score from signs in each of the 3 sections of the scoring chart. 
System Score 
 
C.N.S. Excessive cry 
Continuous cry 2 
3 
Sleeps <1 hour after feed 
Sleeps <2 hours after feed 
Sleeps <3 hours after feed 3 
2 
1 
Mild tremors disturbed 
Mod/ severe tremors disturbed 
Mild tremors undisturbed 
Mod/ severe tremors undisturbed 1 
2 
3 
4 
 
G.I.T. Poor feeding 2 
Regurgitation 
Projectile vomiting 2 
3 
Loose stools 
Watery stools 2 
3 
 
OTHER Sweating 1 
Fever (37.3.to 38.3C) 1 
Fever (38.4 and above) 2 
Frequent yawning (>3 -4 in ½ hour) 1 
Mottling 1 
Nasal stuffiness 1 
Sneezing (>3 -4 in ½ hour) 2 
Nasal flaring 1 
Respiratory rate >60 per minute 
Respiratory rate >60 per minute & 
recession 1 
2 Substance Use In Pregnancy (RSCH PRH only ) MP015 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 37 of 37