# Extracted from: MP055 Perinatal Collapse in Pregnancy & Puerperium.pdf
# Guideline ID: mp055-perinatal-collapse-in-pregnancy-puerperium
# Content length: 58056 characters
# Processing date: 1750066901.5587227

Perinatal Collapse in 
Pregnancy & 
Puerperium 

Maternity Protocol: MP055 
 
Date agreed: March 2022 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 2 of 36 

Author: Win Khine 
Version: 3 
Approval Committee: Women’s Safety and Quality Committee 
Date agreed: March 2022 
Amended date: 
Review date: March 2025 
Cross reference: MP012 Venous Thrombosis 
MP019 Hypertensive disease 
MP034 Vaginal birth after caesarean section (VBAC) 
MP042 Epidurals in Labour 
MP050 Caesarean Section 
MP053 Obstetric Haemorrhage 
MP056 High dependency care 

 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 3 of 36 
 Table of Contents 
Key Principles ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 4 
Scope ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 4 
Responsibilities ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 4 
1 Maternal Collapse in Pregnancy and the Puerperium ................................ ................... 5 
2 Immediate Emergency Resuscitative Management ................................ ...................... 7 
3 Call 2222 Ask for an Maternal Cardiac Arrest or Obstetric Em ergency .......................... 7 
4 Initiate Investigations to Establish a Diagnosis: ................................ ............................ 7 
5 Process for the Use of the Modified Early Obstetric Warning System (MEOWS) ........... 8 
6 Roles and Responsibilities of Staff Groups ................................ ................................ . 11 
7 Specific Management Regimes & Guidance ................................ ............................... 13 
8 Eclampsia ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 20 
9 Intracranial haemorrhage ................................ ................................ .......................... 20 
10 Anaphylaxis ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 20 
11 Other causes ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 21 
12 What is the optimal initial management of maternal collapse? ................................ .. 23 
13 What are the outcomes for mother and baby? ................................ .......................... 27 
14 Documentation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 28 
15 Incident reporting ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 28 
16 Training ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 28 
17 Debriefing ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 28 
18 Auditable topics ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 28 
19 Useful links and support groups ................................ ................................ ................. 29 
20 References ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 30 
Appendix: Activation of Sudden Maternal Collapse Guideline ................................ .............. 31 
Appendix - Adult Resuscitation Algorithm - Resus Council 2021 ................................ ............ 32 
Appendix - Recommended airway equipment ................................ ................................ ...... 33 
Appendix - Post collapse management ................................ ................................ ................ 34 
Appendix : Prompt Card peri -partum Collapse ................................ ................................ ..... 35 
Appendix : Prompt Maternal Cardiac Arrest ................................ ................................ ......... 36 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 4 of 36 
 
Key Principles 
 
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. 
Professional judgement may be use in the application of a protocol. 
 
Scope 
 
This protocol applies to: 
• All seriously ill women 
• All women found collapsed in the peri -partum period 
 
Responsibilities 
 
Midwives & Obstetricians: 
• To access, read, understand and follow this guidance 
• To use their professional judgement in application of this protocol 
 
Management: 
• To ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National 
recommendations 
• To ensure the protocol is accessible to all relevant staff 

 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 5 of 36 
 1 Maternal Collapse in Pregnancy and the Puerperium 
 
 Maternal collapse is a rare but life -threatening event, with a wide ranging aetiology. 
The outcome primarily for the mother, but also the fetus, depends on prompt and 
effective resuscitation. 
 
 Maternal collapse is defined as an acute event involving the cardiorespiratory 
systems and/or central nervous systems, resulting in a reduced or absent conscious 
level (and potentially cardiac arrest and death), at any stage in pregnancy and up to 
6 weeks after birth. Importantly, if maternal collapse which is not as the result of 
cardiac arrest is not treated effectively, maternal cardiac arrest can then occur. 
 
1.1 Causes of Maternal Collapse 
 
Maternal collapse can result from a number of causes. A systematic approach 
should be taken to identify the cause. 
If the cause is reversible, the survival rates are greater and those for which 
specific treatment exists must be rapidly considered. 
 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 6 of 36 

N.B. The immediate resuscitative management of all conditions is the same for any woman who 
collapses before, during, or after labour (Appendix Immediate Resus management ) 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 7 of 36 
 2 Immediate Emergency Resuscitative Management 
2.1 Call for help via emergency bell 
2.2 Check for signs of life (Open airway, check central pulse/respiration) 
3 Call 222 2 Ask for an Maternal Cardiac Arrest or Obstetric 
Emergency giving specific location 
 (Appendix Activation of Sudden Maternal Collapse Guideline) 
3.1 Commence Basic Life support (A.B.C.) 
3.2 Give oxygen via non -rebreathe reservoir face mask 
3.3 Left lateral tilt with slight head down (pregnant women only) 
3.4 Obtain venous access (2 large bore cannulas ) Consider intra -osseous access if 
IV route difficult (available from ED, if not on resus trolley) 
3.5 Initiate fluid resuscitation to correct shock 
3.6 Institute Advanced Life Support (intubation / ventilation / inotropes) for: 
• persistent hypoxia 
• hypotension or 
• reduced level of consciousness 
3.7 Start modified early obstetric warning system chart (MEOWS) 
4 Initiate Investigations to Establish a Diagnosis: 
4.1 Maternal observations – temp, pulse, BP, saturations and respiratory rate 
4.2 Venous blood – U&E/ FBC / Coagulation / cross -match 4 units 
4.3 Arterial blood gases - lactate 
4.4 ECG 
4.5 CVP line – Consider taking a clotted sample for squames in relatation to 
diagnosis of an AFE section 7.4 AFE 
 
N.B Inform the Obstetric and Anaesthetic Consultants on call at an early stage. For ANY 
maternal collapse Obstetric Consultants must attend in person Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 8 of 36 
 5 Process for the Use of the Modified Early Obstetric Warning 
System (MEOWS ) 
5.1 Introduction 
Saving Mother’s Lives2 advocates the use of a modified early warning system in 
maternity care settings to facilitate the prompt recognition of acute illness 
and/or rapid deterioration of a woman’s condition. It is important to note that 
the system will not improve outcomes in isolation; this will only occur if 
interventions subsequently applied are appropriate and timely. 
 
5.2 Use of MEOWS chart2 
5.2.1 All antenatal patients admitted must have MEOWS commenced. 
5.2.2 Postnatal women who have: 
• Prior risk factors identified 
• Developed complications 
• Undergone surgical intervention ( post -surgery MEOWS 
observations for the first 24 hrs ) 
5.3 Exceptions for use 
5.3.1 If Women is in established labour do cument observations on the 
parto gram, if becomes unwell to commence MEOWS 
 
NB: It is essential that pregnant and recently delivered women with 
obstetric and medical complications who are admitted to all clinical 
areas within and outside of maternity are assessed using the MEOWS 
chart 
5.4 Respiratory rate & MEOWS 
5.4.1 Changes in the respiratory rate are often an early warning sign that 
the woman’s condition is deteriorating. 
5.4.2 It is vital to also note the regularity, pattern and description of the 
breathing. 
5.4.3 A change in the respiratory rate is an accurate predictor of 
deterioration in physical condition, often before changes in any other 
parameters are observed. 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 9 of 36 
 5.5 Oxygen saturation & MEOWS 
5.5.1 Sa O 2 monitoring should be available for all high risk women. 
5.6 Temperature & MEOWS 
5.6.1 During labour a slight transient raise in temperature is often observed 
and this may also be seen as a response to epidural anaesthesia. 
5.6.2 However a rise in temperature observed at any other time in the 
pregnancy continuum must be closely observed. 
5.6.3 A marked rise in temperature or a marked fall could indicate an 
impending risk of sepsis. 
5.6.4 The early recognition and appropriate treatment for sepsis is essential 
 
5.7 Heart rate & MEOWS 
5.7.1 Most women have an increased heart rate (of about 20 bpm) in 
pregnancy compared to the non -pregnant state due to the associated 
physiological changes 
5.7.2 The pulse will also increase during periods of strenuous activity 
and/or stress 
5.7.3 A sudden rise in heart rate may be in response to labour, pain, fear, 
anxiety, etc and in isolation (all other parameters are normal) should 
be observed 
5.7.4 A prolonged tachycardia, in conjunction with any other abnormal 
observation, must be treated as potentially very serious 
5.7.5 A slow pulse may result from effective pain relief such as an epidural, 
especially when the woman is relaxed and possibly able to sleep 
5.7.6 However, slower heart rates can also be: 
• Drug induced e.g. such as local anaesthetic toxicity , refer to 
section 7 
• present in cardiac complications 
• in conjunction with a raised blood pressure and sudden loss of 
consciousness could indicate cerebral haemorrhage 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 10 of 36 
 5.8 Blood pressure & MEOWS 
5.8.1 During pregnancy there are natural variation s in BP due to the 
associated physiological changes: e.g. diastolic ma y fall around 
20mmHg from non pregnant state in the first trimester. 
5.8.2 Underlying hypertensive problems/renal disease 
• With these conditions women may not exhibit a first trimester 
drop in blood pressure and may go on to have hypertensive 
problems in this or later pregnancies. 
5.8.3 Pre-eclampsia 
• Some women developing pre -eclampsia may be normotensive 
• In the presence of proteinuria and altered blood profiles women 
should be closely monitored. 
5.8.4 Identifying significant changes in BP 
• The systolic pressure is sensitive to activity, stress and anxiety and 
transient rises up to 150 are considered normal 
• A lower systolic reading is common in pregnancy 
• A sudden decrease in blood pressure especially with a 
corresponding increase in pulse rate may indicate haemorrhage 
• The two BP parameters (diastolic and systolic) are scored 
separately and so if both score in the yellow zone an obstetric 
referral is indicated 
 
NB If the pulse rate > the systolic blood pressure this is highly significant and 
must be referred immediately to an obstetrician. 
5.9 Urine output/testing & MEOWS 
5.9.1 A fluid balance chart must be commenced for all women on a MEOWS 
chart 
5.9.2 Other factors e.g. presence of blood (especially visible blood) may be 
significant especially in women labouring with previous caesarean 
(LSCS) 
5.10 Pain scores & MEOWS 
5.10.1 Pain scores should be assessed ideally with the woman resting using a 
verbal descriptor scale (VDS) which places a numerical value on pain, 
as described by the patient 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 11 of 36 
 5.10.2 Any pain outside that expected of normal labour is abnormal, and this 
should be regularly reviewed and documented, including site, type of 
pain (constant, intermittent, on movement only, sharp, dull, etc) as 
well as the intensity 
5.10.3 Following surgical intervention pain is a normal physiological response 
to trauma but pain assessment is essential to ensure adequate 
analgesia is prescribed and administered. 
5.10.4 Prolonged use of opioid analgesia is of concern and warrants further 
investigation 
5.11 Observation parameters 
The frequency of observations will depend on the condition of the woman . 
 
6 Roles and Responsibilities of Staff Groups 
6.1 Midwives 
6.1.1 Escalate to Matron/Site manager/Manager on call to assist with 
ongoing emergency 
6.1.2 Will provide one to one care and document observations 
6.1.3 Observations and documentation are charted on: 
• MEOWS Chart 
• Maternity notes 
6.1.4 Basic observations of the mother should be recorded regularly 
according to the care plan and include: 
• Oxygen saturation level 
• Pulse and respiratory rate 
• Temperature – frequency according to clinical condition 
• Blood pressure 
• Hourly urine output measurement 
• Level of consciousness (AVPU) 
• Evaluation of pain and sensory levels 
• Blood loss per vagina/wound or drain 
6.1.5 Referral to the Obstetric Registrar should be made if: 
• MEOWS observations trigger one red score 
• MEOWS observations trigger two simultaneous yellow scores Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 12 of 36 
 6.1.6 Urgent r eferral to the Obstetric Registrar (using fast bleep system via 
switchboard) if: 
• There is an obvious clinical deterioration or loss of 
consciousness of the women 
• Two or more of the MEOWS cardio -respiratory parameters are 
recorded in the red zones 
6.2 Obstetricians 
6.2.1 Multidisciplinary plans of care should be documented and regularly 
updated within the maternity notes 
6.2.2 There should be regular Consultant level involvement in care of 
severely ill patients 
6.2.3 Consultant Obstetricians must attend in person all cases of maternal 
collapse and uterine rupture 
6.3 Anaesthetists 
6.3.1 All severely ill pregnant women should be flagged up in the 
multidisciplinary ward round or on admission by the midwife in 
charge to allow anaesthetic team involvement and review. 
6.3.2 The Consultant Obstetric Anaesthetist will liaise with the ITU 
consultant if admission/transfer to ITU/HDU is deemed necessary. 
6.3.3 All discussions and care plans should be documented in the maternal 
notes with planned review times 
6.3.4 Appropriate cases should be reported to UK Obstetric Surveillance 
System (UKOSS) via the lead obstetric anaesthetist 
6.4 All members of the team to consider Critical Care Outreach team for support 
6.5 When to fast bleep the Obstetric Registrar 
 By dialling 2222 if: 
• There is an obvious clinical deterioration 
• Loss of consciousness of the woman 
6.6 Cardiac / pulmonary arrest 
If a cardiac and/or pulmonary arrest is confirmed dial 2222 and notify: 
• Maternal Cardiac Arrest 
• The Consultant Obstetrician and Anaesthetist should be informed 
about the referral as soon as possible and should review the case. 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 13 of 36 
 6.7 Guidance for staff on when to involve clinicians from outside the maternity 
service 
6.7.1 Where women have complications other than common obstetric 
issues, specialist clinicians should be considered as a source of 
information and support. The Obstetrician leading the care should 
consider involving the following specialities if the clinical situation 
warrants it after discussion with the maternity team and Consultant 
on call (unless life threatening when direct referral can be made) . 
6.7.2 Specialist clinicians (usually the on call middle grade or consultant 
level) should be contacted via the hospital switchboard. 

Specialist clinicians Consider involvement when: 
Physicians respiratory and/or cardiovascular problems 
Gastroenterologists gastrointestinal and liver problems 
Nephrologists renal function is deteriorating 
Neurologists unexplainable CNS problems 
General surgeons surgical complication is suspected 
Interventional radiologists Haemorrhage NB only available 9 -5 
Haematologist Blood related disorders 
Microbiologists Sepsis / infection / antibiotic issues 
 
6.8 ITU admissions 
The Consultant Obstetrician will liaise with the Obstetric Anaesthetic Consultant 
who will liaise with the ITU Consultant if admission to ITU is deemed necessary. 
 
7 Specific Management Regimes & Guidance 
7.1 Haemorrhage 
• Major obstetric haemorrhage has an estimated incidence of 6 in 1000 
maternities. This is among the most common causes of maternal collapse. 
• Causes of major obstetric haemorrhage include postpartum 
haemorrhage, major antepartum haemorrhage from placenta praevia, 
placental abruption, uterine rupture and ectopic pregnancy , rarely uterine 
inversion . In most cases of massive haemorrhage leading to collapse, the 
cause is obvious, but concealed haemorrhage should not be forgotten, 
including following caesarean section and ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 14 of 36 
 • Other rarer causes of concealed haemorrhage include splenic artery 
rupture and hepatic rupture. 
• Blood loss is often difficult to estimate, especially slow, steady bleeding, 
and fit, healthy women can tolerate significant loss prior to showing signs 
of decompensation. 
7.1.1 Management of Haemorrhage 
• In the case of maternal collapse secondary to antepartum 
haemorrhage, the fetus and placenta should be delivered 
promptly to allow control of the haemorrhage. 
• In the case of massive placental abruption, caesarean section 
may occasionally be indi cated even if the fetus has demised to 
allow rapid control of the haemorrhage. 
• Intravenous tranexamic acid significantly reduces mortality due 
to postpartum haemorrhage. 
Referred to : MP053 Obstetric Haemorrhage , MP034 Vaginal 
Birth after Caesarean Section VAC. 
 
7.2 Cardiovascular Events 
 
• Cardiac disease was the most common overall cause of indirect maternal 
death in the MBRRACE -UK report 2016. 
• The majority of deaths secondary to cardiac causes occur in women with no 
previous history and almost one in five deaths occurred in an ambulance or 
accident and emergency department. 
• The main cardiac causes of maternal death are ischaemia and sudden 
arrhythmic cardiac death with a structurally normal heart. 
• Most cardiac events have preceding signs and symptoms. Aortic root 
dissection, although usually associated with an inherited aortopathy e.g. 
Ehlers -Danlos syndrome, can present in otherwise healthy women, and signs 
and symptoms, such as central chest or interscapular pain, a wide pulse 
pressure (mainly secondary to systolic hypertension) and a new cardiac 
murmur, must prompt appropriate imaging and, if required, referral to a 
cardiologist. 
• The incidence of congenital and rheumatic heart disease in pregnancy is 
increasing, secondary to increased survival rates and with improved 
management of congenit al heart disease. 
• Women with mechanical prosthetic heart valves are at particularly increased 
risk of complications in pregnancy. These women should be cared for by an Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 15 of 36 
 appropriately skilled and experienced multidisciplinary team, usually in 
regional centres. 
• Other cardiac causes include: cardiomyopathy; dissection of the coronary 
artery; acute left ventricular failure; infective endocarditis; and pulmonary 
oedema. 
7.3 Management of Cardiac Diseases 
 
• After successful resuscitation, cardiac cases should be managed 
by an expert cardiology team. 
• After initial resuscitation, the ongoing m anagement of cardiac 
disease is similar to that in the non -pregnant state, although in 
many cases, delivery will be necessary to facilitate this. 
• Although thrombolysis can be associated with significant 
bleeding from the placental site, it should be given to women 
with acute coronary insufficiency, although caution should be 
exercised in the perioperative period. If available, percutaneous 
angioplasty allows accurate diagnosis and definitive therapy. 
 
7.4 Thromboembolism 
In the MBRRACE -UK report 2016 Thromboembolism was the most common 
cause of direct maternal death. Appropriate use of thromboprophylaxis has 
improved maternal morbidity and mortality, but improvements in clinical risk 
assessment and prophylaxis are still required. 
7.4.1 Management of Thromboembolism 
Refer to acute Management of Thrombosis and Embolism during 
Pregnancy and the Puerperium. 
 
7.5 Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) 
• UK data published in 2016 give an incidence of AFE of 1.7 per 100 000 
maternities. 
• Survival rates seem to have improved significantly over time, from 14% in 
1979, to approximately 30% in 2005 and 81% by 2014. 
• However, neurological morbidity in survivors is well recognised. 
• It presents as collapse during labour or birth, or within (usually) 30 minutes 
of birth, in the form of acute hypotension, respiratory distress and acute 
hypoxia. Seizures and cardiac arrest may occur. 
• If AFE occurs prior to birth, profound fetal distress develops acutely. 
• There are different phases to the disease progression, which clearly depend 
on maternal survival. Initially, pulmonary hypertension may develop Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 16 of 36 
 secondary to vascular occlusion either by debris or vasoconstriction. This 
often resolves and left ventricular dysfunction or failure develops. 
• Coagulopathy often develops if the mother survives long enough, often giving 
rise to massive postpartum haemorrhage. The underlying pathophysiological 
process has been compared to anaphylaxis or severe sepsis, and may be due 
to complement activation. 
• Diagnosis in nonfatal cases is clinical, as there is no established accurate 
diagnostic test premortem, although research continues in the area. 
7.5.1 Management of amniotic fluid embolism 
• The management of AFE is supportive rather than specific, as 
there is no proven effective therapy. 
• Early involvement of senior experienced staff, including 
obstetricians, anaesthetists, haematologists and intensivists, is 
essential to optimise outcome. 
• Coagulopathy needs early, aggressive treatment, including the 
use of fresh frozen plasma. 
• Recombinant factor VII should only be used if coagulopathy 
cannot be corrected by massive blood component replacement 
as it has been associated with poorer outcome in women with 
AFE. 
• Arrhythmias may develop and will require standard treatment. 
Inotropic support is likely to be needed and measurement of 
cardiac output may help direct the rapy and avoid fluid overload. 
Fluid overload will exacerbate pulmonary oedema and increase 
the risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome. High filling 
pressures are indicative of a failing left ventricle. 
• If undelivered, delivery of the fetus and placenta should be 
performed as soon as possible. The incidence of uterine atony is 
increased in this condition and contributes to the postpartum 
haemorrhage. 
• There is no robust evidence to support their use of steroids, 
heparin, plasmapheresis and haemofiltration. 
 
7.5 Sepsis 
• Sepsis has been recognised for centuries as a significant cause of maternal 
morbidity and mortality, and substandard care continues to feature in the 
cases that result in death. Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 17 of 36 
 • Bacteraemia, which can be present in the absence of pyrexia or a raised white 
cell count, can progress rapidly to severe sepsis and septic shock leading to 
collapse. 
• The most common organisms implicated in obstetric sepsis are the 
streptococcal groups A, B and D, pneumococcus and Escherichia coli . 
 
7.5.1 Management of Sepsis 
• Septic shock should be managed in accordance with the Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign guidelines. 
• The speed and appropriateness of therapy administered in the initial 
hours after severe sepsis develops are likely to influence outcome with 
early resuscitation improving survival rates. 
• A multidisciplinary team approach is required, including midwives, 
consultant obstetricians, anaesthetists, haematologists, intensivists and 
microbiologists. 
• The following ‘Care Bundle’ should be applied immediately or within 
6 hours, and has been shown to signi ficantly improve survival rates: 
1. Measure serum lactate. 
2. Obtain blood cultures and culture swabs prior to antibiotic 
administration. 
3. Administer broad spectrum antibiotic(s) within the first hour of 
recognition of severe sepsis and septic shock according to local 
protocol. 
4. In the event of hypotension and /or lactate more than 4 mmol/l: 
➢ Begin rapid administration of an initial minimum of 
30 ml/kg of crystalloid to be completed within 3 hours of 
diagnosis. 
➢ Once adequate volume replacement has been achieved, a 
vasopressor (noradrenaline, with vasopressin or adrenaline 
in addition, if required) and/or an inotrope (for example, 
dobutamine) may be used to maintain mean arterial 
pressure more than 65 mmHg. 
5. In the event of hypotension despite fluid resuscitation (septic 
shock) and/or lactate more than 4 mmol/l: 
➢ Dynamic variables of fluid status such as 
transoesophageal Doppler and lithium dilution cardiac 
output (LiDCO) are preferred to static variables like 
central venous pressure or pulmonary artery occlusion Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 18 of 36 
 pressure and the use of central venous pressure alone to 
guide fluid resuscit ation can no longer be justified 
➢ Consider steroids if unresponsive to adequate fluid 
resuscitation and vasopressor therapy. 
➢ Maintain oxygen saturation at more than 94% (88% –92% 
in women at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure) with 
facial oxygen. Consider transfusion if haemoglobin less 
than 70 g/l. 
6. Ongoing management involves continued supportive therapy, 
removing the septic focus, administration of blood products if 
required, and Thromboprophylaxis . 
7.6 Drug toxicity and overdose 
• Drug toxicity and overdose should be considered in all cases of collapse. 
• Substance misuse should be remembered as a potential cause of collapse especially 
outside of hospital. 
• In terms of therapeutic drug toxicity, the commonly used drugs in obstetric practice 
are magnesium sulphate in the presence of renal impairment and local anaesthetic 
agents. 
• Toxic effects associated with local anaesthetics usually result from excessively high 
plasma concentrations. This can be either as a result of inadvertent intravenous 
injection, or systemic absorption of toxic amounts administered via appropriate 
(epidural, local infiltration etc.) routes. Local anaesthetic toxicity resulting from 
systemic absorption of the local anaesthetic may occur sometime after the initial 
injection. Effects initially include a feeling of inebriation and light headedness 
followed by sedation, circumoral paraesthesia and twitching; convulsions can occur 
in severe toxicity. On intravenous injection, convulsions and cardiovascular collapse 
may occur very rapidly. Signs of severe toxicity include sudden loss of consciousness, 
with or without tonic -clonic convulsions, and cardiovascular collapse; sinus 
bradycardia, conduction blocks, asystole and ventricular tachyarrhythmias can all 
occur. 
• In terms of local anaesthetics, total spinal block or high spinal/epidural block are 
rare. A high index of suspicion is needed in cases of maternal collapse following 
spinal anaesthesia or epidural top up. Appropriate training of medical and midwifery 
staff to recognise the signs and symptoms of high block is essential. 
7.6.1 Management of Drug toxicity and overdose 
• Many drug overdoses have treatments specific to the drug in 
question and appropriate help should be sought in the 
management of such cases, including liaising with Toxbase and 
speaking to GP / local pharmacist. Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 19 of 36 
 • In obstetric practice, the two main drugs that can give rise to 
overdose or toxic problems are magnesium sulphate and local 
anaesthetic agents. 
7.6.2 Management of Magnesium S ulphate toxicity 
• The antidote to magnesium toxicity is 10 ml 10% calcium 
gluconate or 10 ml 10% calcium chloride given by slow 
intravenous injection. 
7.6.3 Local anaesthetic agents 
• If local anaesthetic toxici ty is suspected, stop injecting 
immediately. 
• Manage arrhythmias as usual, recognising that they may be very 
refractory to treatment. 
• Lipid rescue should be used in cases of collapse secondary to 
local anaesthetic toxicity. Intralipid® 20% should be available in all 
hospitals offering maternity services. The mechanisms by which 
lipids reverse local anaesthetic cardiotoxicity may be (1 ) 
increasing clearance from cardiac tissue which is termed a ‘lipid 
sink.’ ( 2 ) lipids counteract local anaesthetic inhibition of 
myocardial fatty acid oxidation, thereby enabling energy 
production and reversing cardiac depression. 
• Intravenous bolus injection of Intralipid® (Baxter Healthcare 
Corporation, Deerfield, Illinois, USA) 20% 1.5 ml/kg over 1 min 
(100 ml for a woman weighing 70 kg) followed by an intravenous 
infusion of Intralipid® 20% 15 ml/kg/h (1000 ml.h−1 for a woman 
weighing 70 kg). The bolus injection can be repeated twice at 5 -
minute intervals if an adequate circulation has not been restored 
(a further two 100 ml boluses at 5 -minute intervals for a woman 
weighing 70 kg). After another 5 minutes, the i nfusion rate 
should be increased to 30 ml/kg/hr if an adequate circulation has 
not been restored. Do not exceed a maximum cumulative dose of 
12 ml/kg (840 ml for a woman weighing 70 kg). CPR should be 
continued throughout this process until an adequate circulation 
has been restored. This may take over 1 hour. 
• Prolonged resuscitation may be necessary, and it may be 
appropriate to consider other options. The first -line treatment 
should be lipid emulsion, but if the facilities are available, some 
may consider the use of cardiopulmonary bypass. 
• All cases of lipid rescue should be reported to NHS Improvement 
and the Lipid Rescue site. (www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk ) 
(www.lipidrescue.org ) Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 20 of 36 
 8 Eclampsia 
• Eclampsia as the cause of maternal collapse is usually obvious in the inpatient 
setting. Often the diagnosis of pre -eclampsia has already been made and the 
seizure witnessed. 
• In the community setting, fitting after 20 weeks’ gestation may be attributable 
to eclampsia, notably where there is no known history of epilepsy. However, 
epilepsy should always be considered in cases of maternal collapse associated 
with seizure activity. 
8.1 Management of Eclampsia 
Refer to Hypertension in Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management . 
9 Intracranial haemorrhage 
• Intracranial haemorrhage is a significant complication of uncontrolled, 
particularly systolic, hypertension, but can also result from ruptured 
aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations. 
• The initial presentation may be maternal collapse, but often severe headache 
precedes this. 
9.1 Management of Intracranial haemorrhage 
• Neuro -radiologists and neurosurgeons should be involved in the care of 
pregnant women with intracranial haemorrhage at the earliest 
opportunity. 
• Expert neuroradiology is required to establish an accurate diagnosis, and 
management is the same as in non -pregnant women, although delivery 
may be necessary to facilitate this. 
10 Anaphylaxis 
• Anaphylaxis is a severe, life -threatening generalised or systemic 
hypersensitivity reaction, resulting in respiratory, cutaneous and circulatory 
changes, and possibly gastrointestinal disturbance and collapse. There is 
significant intravascular volume redistribution, which can lead to decreased 
cardiac output. Acute ventricular failure and myocardial ischaemia may occur. 
Upper airway occlusion secondary to angioedema, bronchospasm and mucous 
plugging of smaller airways all contribute to significant hypoxia and difficulties 
with ventilation. 
• Common triggers are a variety of drugs, latex, animal allergens and foods. The 
incidence of severe perioperative obstetric anaphylaxis is between 1 and 3.5 
per 100 000, with a mortality rate of approximately 1%. 
• Anaphylaxis is likely when all of the following three criteria are met: Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 21 of 36 
 ➢ sudden onset and rapid progression of symptoms 
➢ life-threatening airway and/or breathing and/or circulation problems 
➢ skin and/or mucosal changes (flushing, urticaria, angioedema). 
• Exposure to a known allergen for the woman supports the diagnosis, but 
many cases occur with no previous history. Mast cell tryptase levels can be 
useful in confirming the diagnosis. As a minimum, 1 sample at 1 –2 hours after 
the start of symptoms should be taken. Ideally though 3 timed samples should 
be taken: as soon as possible after resuscitation has started (without delaying 
resuscitation); 1 –2 hours after the start of symptoms; 24 hours later. 
 
10.1 Management of Anaphylaxis 
• In cases of anaphylaxis, all potential causative agents should be 
removed, and the ABCDE approach to assessment and resuscitation 
followed. 
• If the anaphylactic reaction occurs in the community, the woman 
should have basic life support and be transferred to a hospital setting 
as quickly as possible. 
• The treatment for anaphylaxis is 1:1000 adrenaline 500 micrograms 
(0.5 ml) intramuscularly. This dose is for intramuscular use only. 
Adrenaline treatment can be repeated after 5 minutes if there is no 
effect. In experienced hands, 50 microgram bolus (0.5 ml of 1:10 000 
solution) can be titrated intravenously. 
• Adjuvant therapy consists of chlorphenami ne 10mg and 
hydrocortisone 200 mg. Both are given intramuscularly or by slow 
intravenous injection. 
11 Other causes 
• Hypoglycaemia, hyponatraemia and other metaboli c and electrolyte 
disturbances. 
• Other causes of hypoxia include airway obstruction secondary to aspiration 
or foreign body, air embolism, tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade 
secondary to trauma or dissection, and hypothermia. 
• From an anaesthetic perspective, the main causes of collapse would be local 
anaesthetic toxicity or failed tracheal intubation. 
• Pregnant women undergo a variety of physiological changes that can 
accelerate the development of hypoxia and acidosis, and make ventilation 
more difficult and make resuscitation during pregnancy more challenging. Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 22 of 36 
 11.1 Aortocaval compression 
• From around 20 weeks of gestation onwards the gravid uterus reduces 
venous return in the supine position. As a consequence, cardiac output is 
reduced by up to 30 –40%.Supine hypotension itself can precipitate maternal 
collapse, which is usually reversed by turning the woman into the left lateral 
position. 
• When cardiopulmonary arrest occurs, chest compressions are needed to 
produce a cardiac output. In the non -pregnant situation, they achieve 
around 30% of the normal cardiac output. Aortocaval compression further 
reduces cardiac output to approximately 10% of the non -pregnant cardiac 
output. Therefore, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is less likely to be 
effective in a woman who is at 20 or more weeks of gestation. 
11.2 Respiratory changes 
• Changes in lung function, diaphragmatic splinting and increased oxygen 
consumption make pregnant women become hypoxic more readily and 
make ventilation more difficult. 
11.3 Intubation 
 
• Weight gain in pregnancy, large breasts inhibiting the working space and 
laryngeal oedema can all contribute to making intubation more difficult 
 
11.4 Aspiration 
• Pregnant women are at a significantly higher risk of regurgitation and 
aspiration, secondary to the progesterone effect relaxing the lower 
oesophageal sphincter along with the raised intra -abdominal pressure 
secondary to the gravid uterus. During labour or following maternal opioid 
administration there can also be a delay in gastric emptying. Aspiration 
pneumonitis in pregnant women, known as Mendelsson's syndrome, can 
be severe. 
• The risks can be minimised by early intubation with effective cricoid 
pressure, and the use of H 2 antagonists and antacids prophylactically in all 
women considered tobe at high risk of obstetric intervention during labour. 
11.5 Circulation 
• The increased cardiac output and hyperdynamic circulation of pregnancy 
mean that large volumes of blood can be lost rapidly, especially from the 
uterus which receives 10% of the cardiac output at term. Otherwise healthy 
women tolerate blood loss remarkably well and can lose up to 35% of their 
circulation before becoming symptomatic, and often maternal tachycardia Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 23 of 36 
 may be the only sign of hypovolaemia until very late in the haemorrhage. 
• Blood loss is tolerated less well if there is a pre -existing maternal 
anaemia,and clotting is less efficient if there is significant anaemia. 
• Concealed bleeding and underestimation of loss means that intervention is 
often delayed. Where signs of hypovolaemia have been subtle, 
hypovolaemia as the cause of maternal cardiopulmonary arrest may go 
unrecognised. 

12 What is the optimal initial management of maternal collapse? 
 
12.1 Resuscitation in maternal collapse 
• Maternal collapse resuscitation should follow the Resuscitation Council 
(UK) guidelines using the standard ABCDE approach, with some 
modifications for maternal physiology, in particular relief of aortocaval 
compression. Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 24 of 36 
 • If maternal cardiac arrest occurs in the community setting, basic life 
support should be administered and rapid transfer arranged. The cause of 
the maternal collapse should be rapidly identified and treated to prevent 
potential progression to maternal cardio -respiratory arrest. 
• Ongoing regular ABCDE assessment should be performed as the risk of 
progression to cardiac arrest remains until the cause of the collapse is 
treated. 
12.2 Relieving aorto -caval compression 
• Manual displacement of the uterus to the left is effective in relieving 
aortocaval compression in women above 20 weeks’ gestation or where 
the uterus is palpable at or above the level of the umbilicus. This permits 
effective chest compressions in the supine position in the event of cardiac 
arrest. The technique should be performed using an ‘up, off and over’ 
method. This is achieved by placing a hand below the uterus on the 
maternal right and pushing the uterus slightly upwards and to the left. 
This maintains the woman in a supine position, allowing for continuous 
effective cardiac compressions if necessary. 
• A left lateral tilt of the woman from head to toe at an angle of 15 –30o on 
a firm surface (a tilting operating table, with an appropriate size solid 
wedge and spinal board ) will relieve aortocaval compression in the 
majority of pregnant women and still allow effective chest compressions 
to be performed in the event of cardiac arrest. Using soft surfaces, such as 
a bed, or objects, such as pillows or blankets, are not nearly as effective, 
compromise effective chest compressions, and should not be used. (a 
video of the procedure can be found at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2VyqGqDNlLc ) 
• In cases of major trauma, the spine should be protected with a spinal 
board before any tilt is applied. In the absence of a spinal board, manual 
displacement of the uterus should be used. 
12.3 Airway 
• Intubation in an unconscious woman with a cuffed endotracheal tube 
should be performed immediately by an experienced anaesthetist. 
• The airway in pregnancy is more vulnerable because of the increased 
risk of regurgitation and aspiration. For this reason, it is important to 
clear and protect the airway as early as possible. 
• Intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube should then be performed. 
This will protect the airway, ensure good oxygen delivery and facilitate 
more efficient ventilation. 
• Failed intubation is more common in the pregnant than nonpregnant 
patient and a plan for failed intubation should always be considered. Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 25 of 36 
 • Appendix 2 of this guideline presents suggested equipment that should 
be available for cases where airway management may be difficult. 
12.4 Breathing 
• Supplemental high flow oxygen should be administered as soon as 
possible to counteract rapid deoxygenation. Maternal physiological 
changes lead to increased oxygen requirements. Therefore, 
supplemental oxygen should be added with a gas flow of 10 –15 l per 
minute to whatever method of ventilation is being employed. 
• Bag and mask ventilation or insertion of a simple supraglottic airway 
should be undertaken until intubation can be achieved. 
12.5 Circulation 
• If the airway is clear and there is no breathing, chest compressions 
should be commenced immediately in the absence of a cardiac output. 
Hand position should be over the centre of the chest and it is important 
to ensure that the direction of compression is perpendicular to the chest 
wall. If a left lateral tilt is employed then the angle of tilt must be taken 
into account when performing chest compressions. Immediate and 
competent chest compressions have been found to have a direct impact 
on maternal outcome. 
• In total, 30 chest compressions (at a rate of 100 –120 per minute) should 
be performed for every two ventilation breaths initially. If there are two 
rescuers, one should be responsible for chest compressions and 
ventilation breaths, whilst the other should ensure aortocaval 
decompression with manual uterine displacement. 
• Because chest compressions are not as effective after 20 weeks of 
gestation, there should be early recourse to delivery of the fetus and 
placenta if CPR is not effective. In woman with a very high BMI chest 
compressions can be performed over the head of the woman if there is 
sub-optimal rescuer positioning. 
• Two wide -bore cannulae (minimum 16 gauge) should be inserted as 
soon as possible. If peripheral venous access is not possible, early 
consideration of central venous access, intraosseous access or venous 
cutdown should be considered. 
• There should be an aggressive approach to volume replacement, 
although caution should be exercised in the context of pre -eclampsia or 
eclampsia. 
• Abdominal ultrasound by a skilled operator can assist in the dia gnosis of 
concealed haemorrhage as haemorrhage is the most common cause of 
maternal collapse. Laparotomy should not be delayed if the findings are 
negative and/or the index of suspicion is high. This, however, should not 
interfere with the resuscitation process. Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 26 of 36 
 • In the case where significant haemorrhage, and pre -eclampsia or 
eclampsia exist, careful fluid management is essential. 
• The same defibrillation energy levels should be used as in a nonpregnant 
woman. Adhesive defibrillator pads are preferable to defibrillator 
paddles, and the left defibrillation pad should be applied lateral to the 
left breast. If the woman's breasts are large or engorged, defibrillator 
pads may need to be placed on the anterior and posterior precordium to 
optimise defibrillation energy transfer. The energy from the 
defibrillation shock is directed across the heart and there is no evidence 
that shocks from a direct current defibrillator have an adverse effect on 
the fetus. Uterine monitors should be removed before shock delivery. 
12.6 Drugs 
• There should be no alteration in algorithm drugs or doses used in the 
Resuscitation Council (UK) protocols. (Appendix - Resus Council 2021) 
12.7 Other considerations 
• Common, reversible causes of maternal cardiopulmonary arrest should be 
considered throughout the resuscitation process. 
• Resuscitation efforts should be continued until a decision is taken by the 
consultant obstetrician and consultant anaesthetist to discontinue 
resuscitation efforts. This decision should be made in consensus with the 
cardiac arrest team. 
• Throughout the resuscitation process, consideration should be given to 
the cause of the collapse, so that ongoing therapy can be directed 
towards the specific cause to optimise outcome. 
12.8 When, where and how should perimortem caesarean section (PMCS) be 
performed? 
• In women over 20 weeks of gestation, if there is no response to correctly 
performed CPR within 4 minutes of maternal collapse or if resuscitation is 
continued beyond this, then PMCS should be undertaken to assist 
maternal resuscitation. Ideally, this should be achieved within 5 minutes 
of the collapse. 
• PMCS should not be delayed by moving the woman. It should be 
performed where maternal collapse has occurred and resuscitation is 
taking place. With no circulation, blood loss is minimal, and no 
anaesthetic is required. The doctrine of ‘best interests of the patient’ 
would apply to conduct of this procedure being carried out without 
consent. 
• The operator should use the incision, which will facilitate the most rapid 
access. This may be a midline vertical incision or a suprapubic transverse 
incision . Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 27 of 36 
 • A scalpel and umbilical cord clamps (or alternative ligatures) should be 
available on the resuscitation trolley in all areas where maternal collapse 
may occur, including the accident and emergency department. 
• Delivery of the fetus and placenta reduces oxygen consumption, 
improves venous return and cardiac output, facilitates chest 
compressions and makes ventilation easier. It also allows for internal 
chest compressions by inserting the hand through the open abdomen up 
to the diaphragm and compressing the posterior aspect of the heart 
against the chest wall. This improves cardiac output beyond that achieved 
in closed chest compressions. 
• At less than 20 weeks of gestation there is no proven benefit from 
delivery of the fetus and placenta. PMCS should be considered a 
resuscitative procedure, to be performed primarily in the interests of 
maternal survival. 
• Delivery within 5 minutes of maternal collapse improves the chances of 
survival for the baby. If maternal resuscitation is continuing beyond 
4 minutes of the collapse, delivery of the fetus and placenta should be 
performed as soon as possible to aid this, even if the fetus is already 
dead. 
• If resuscitation is successful following birth, there should be prompt 
transfer to an appropriate environment at that point, as well as 
anaesthesia and sedation, to control ensuing haemorrhage and complete 
the operation. 
• Where the resuscitation is not successful, the case should be discussed 
with the coroner or procurator fiscal to determine whether a postmortem 
is required before any medical devices, such as lines and endotracheal 
tube are removed, as per the Royal College of Pathologists 
recommendations. 
13 What are the outcomes for mother and baby? 
• Outcomes for mothers and babies depend on the cause of collapse, 
gestational age and access to emergency care, with survival rates being 
poorer if the collapse occurs out of hospital. In maternal cardiac arrest 
maternal survival rates of over 50% have been reported. 
• Time intervals between collapse and PMCS was significantly shorter in 
women who survived compared with those who died (median interval, 
3 minutes versus 12 minutes; P = 0.001). 
• Neonatal survival was only found in women who suffered cardiac arrest in 
hospital and there were reports of neonatal survival where delivery was 
performed 30 minutes after maternal cardiac arrest. Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 28 of 36 
 14 Documentation 
• Accurate documentation is essential in all cases of maternal collapse, whether 
or not resuscitation is successful. 
15 Incident reporting 
• All cases of maternal collapse should generate a clinical incident form and the 
care should be reviewed through the clinical governance process. 
• All cases of maternal death should be reported to MBRRACE -UK. 
16 Training 
• All generic life support training should consider the adaptation of CPR in 
pregnant women. 
• All maternity staff should have annual formal multidisciplinary training in ABLS 
(Adult Basic Life Support) and the management of maternal collapse. 
• Life support training improves resuscitation skills. 
• Small group multidisciplinary interactive practical training is recommended to 
improve the management of maternal collapse. 
• All front -line staff must be aware of the adaptations for CPR in pregnancy. This 
includes paramedics who will deal with collapse in the community setting and 
accident and emergency department personnel, as well as staff within a 
maternity unit. 
17 Debriefing 
• Debriefing is recommended for the woman, the family and the staff involved 
in the event. 
• Maternal collapse can be associated with post -traumatic stress disorder (for 
the woman, her family and for staff involved), postnatal depression and 
tocophobia. Debriefing is an important part of holistic maternity care and 
should be offered by a competent professional to support the ongoing mental 
health of all concerned. 
18 Auditable topics 
• Proportion of staff undergoing regular training in life support (100%). 
• Proportion of staff undergoing regular training in maternal collapse (100%). 
• Audit of the management of maternal collapse (100%). 
• Compliance with incident reporting (100%). Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 29 of 36 
 • Achievement of PMCS within 5 minutes of collapse on hospital premises, 
where there is no response to resuscitation (100% in pregnancies over 
20 weeks of gestation). 
• Presence of a scalpel on resuscitation trolleys (100%). 
19 Useful links and support groups 
• UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS) 
[https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/ukoss ]. 
• MBRRACE -UK: Mothers and Babies: Reducing Risk through Audits and 
Confidential Enquiries across the UK [ https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/mbrrace -
uk]. 
• Advance Life Support in Obstetrics (ALSO) [ http://www.also -uk.com/ ]. 
• Practical Obstetric Multi -Professional Training (PROMPT) 
[http://www.promptmaternity.org/ ]. 
• Managing Medical and Obstetric Emergencies and Trauma (mMOET), 
Advanced Life Support Group (ALSG) [ http://www.alsg.org/home/ ]. 
• The Birth Trauma Association [ http://www.birthtraumaassociation.org.uk/ ]. 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 30 of 36 
 20 References 
 
Confidential Enquiry into Maternity and Child Health. (2004). Why Mothers Die 2000 -2002 . 
London: RCOG Press. www.cemach.org.uk 
 
Mothers & Babies Reducing Risk through Audit and Confidential Enquiry across the UK 
(MBRRACE -UK). (2017). Saving Mothers Lives:Improving Mothers’ Care. Lessons learned to 
inform maternity care from theUK and Ireland Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths 
and Morbidity 2013 –15.. https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/downloads/files/mbrrace -
uk/reports/MBRRACE -UK%20Maternal%20Report%202017%20 -%20Web.pdf 
 
National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death. (2001). Changing the Way We 
Operate: The 2001 Report of the National Confidential Enquiry into Peri -operative Deaths . 
London: NCEPOD. www.ncepod.org.uk 
 
Royal College of Anaesthetists, Royal College of Midwives, Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health. (2007). Safer Childbirth: Minimum 
Standards for the Organisation and Delivery of Care in Labour . London: RCOG Press. 
www.rcog.org.uk 
 
Royal College of Anaesthetists, Royal College of Physicians of London, Intensive Care Society, 
Resuscitation Council (UK). (2008). Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation: Standards for Clinical 
Practice and Training (Updated version) . London: www.resus.org.uk 

 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 31 of 36 
 Appendix: Activation of Sudden Maternal Collapse Guideline 
Immediate management of Sudden Maternal Collapse should be the same regardless of cause. 
 
A = Airway B = Breathing C = Circulation 
 
 Client unresponsive 
 Open airway and look for signs of life 
No pulse or respirations Pulse and respirations present 
• Request a ‘2222 – Maternal 
Cardiac Arrest’ 
• Declare cardiac arrest and giving 
specific location 
• This will activate the cardiac arrest 
team, including obstetric, 
anaesthetic & Neonatal teams for 
assistance 
Follow cardiac arrest guidelines 
 
The following modifications are required in 
pregnancy: 
 
• Uterine displacement (manual or 25 -30° 
left lateral tilt) 
• Increased chest wall compression force 
• Use cricoid pressure if assistance 
• available 
• Early tracheal intubation, consider using 
short laryngoscope handle and smaller 
endotracheal tube 
• Perimortem caesarean delivery if mother 
fails to respond with a return of 
spontaneous circulation within 4 minutes 
• Consider other aetiologies, e.g. 
Magnesium toxicity 
• Consider left wide paddle, adhesive pad, 
or breast displacement • Request a ‘2222 - obstetric 
emergency’ 
• Declare obstetric emergency giving 
specific location. 
• This will summon the obstetric, 
anaesthetic and Neonatal teams 
for assistance 
1. Administer 100% oxygen by face mask and 
maintain airway. 
2. Put in to recovery position. 
3. Insert 2 IV cannulae of not less than 14 gauge 
and stake blood for FBC, clotting, G&S, U&E, 
RBS. 
4. Consider early intra -osseus access if 
cannulation difficult 
5. Apply monitoring 
• NIBP 3min cycle 
• SpO2 
• ECG 
6. If GCS < 8 or airway reflexes compromised, 
anaesthetic SpR should intubate and ventilate 
5. 
7. If systolic pressure < 90 mmHg 
• Ensure uterine displacement 
• Infuse 1 litre of colloid or crystalloid 
• Consider ephedrine 6mg boluses 
8. Establish and manage specific cause of collapse 
but remember to regularly evaluate A,B,C for 
changes in maternal condition 
9. Assess the fetal condition and consider urgent 
delivery of fetus 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 32 of 36 
 Appendix - Adult Resuscitation Algorithm - Resus Council 2021 
 
 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 33 of 36 
 Appendix - Recommended airway equipment 

 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 34 of 36 
 Appendix - Post collapse management 

 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 35 of 36 
 Appendix : Prompt Card peri -partum Collapse 

 Peripartum Collapse Severely ill Pregnant Women (RSCH PRH only ) MP055 
University Hospitals Sussex NHS Trust East Page 36 of 36 
 Appendix : Prompt Maternal Cardiac Arrest