# Extracted from: MP079 Newborn Blood Spot Screening.pdf
# Guideline ID: mp079-newborn-blood-spot-screening
# Content length: 88520 characters
# Processing date: 1750066901.744238

Newborn Blood Spot 
Screening 

Maternity Protocol: MP079 
 
Date agreed: March 2022 

Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 2 of 50 

Guideline Reviewer : Alex Winstanley and Sally Burrows 
Version: 1 
Approval Committee: Women’s Services Safety and Quality Committee 
Date agreed: March 2022 
Review date: March 2022 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 3 of 50 
 Contents 
Key Principles ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 5 
Scope ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 5 
Responsibilities ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 5 
Update Process ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 5 
1.0 Newborn Blood Spot Screening: Rationale for Screening and Conditions Screened for . 6 
2.0 Definition of ‘sample taker’ ................................ ................................ ........................... 7 
3.0 Pre-Screening Information ................................ ................................ ............................. 8 
4.0 Offering screening ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 9 
5.0 When Parents Decline Screening ................................ ................................ ................. 10 
6.0 Performing the Screening Test ................................ ................................ .................... 13 
7.0 Collecting the Blood Spot Sample ................................ ................................ ................ 15 
8.0 Sample Transport ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 19 
9.0 Results Processes ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 22 
10.0 Repeat Samples ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 24 
11.0 Special Circumstances: Babies who have moved into the area. ................................ 26 
12.0 Special Circumstances: Babies born preterm or cared for in hospital specialist units .. 
 ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 28 
13.0 Documentation ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 31 
14.0 Special Circumstances: Family history of any of the conditions screened for ........... 31 
15.0 Ensuring All Babies Have Been Offered Screening ................................ ...................... 32 
16.0 Audit, training and performance management of sampling [including Key 
Performance Indicators] ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 33 
17.0 References ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 33 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 4 of 50 
 Abbreviations used within this document : ................................ ................................ ........... 34 
Appendix A - Care Pathways ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 35 
Appendix B : Contacts ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 40 
Appendix C – Patient Information Leaflet – Repeat Screening Test. ................................ .... 45 
Appendix D – Letter to inform health professionals of screening decline: .......................... 47 
Appendix E Parental Decline Form ................................ ................................ ..................... 48 
Appendix: F HV Referral Form to Paediatric Phlebotom ................................ ..................... 49 
Appendix G : Flow Chart: Performance Management Of Avoidable Repeats ............... 50 

 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 5 of 50 
 
Key Principles 
A protocol is a set of measurable, objective standards to determine a course of action. 
Professional judgement may be used in the application of a protocol. 
 
Scope 
♦ This protocol applies to: all babies born within BSUH NHS trust or resident within the 
catchment area within the first year of life. This includes babies who were born elsewhere 
but have moved into the area during the first year of life. 
 
Responsibilities 
 
• Midwives & Obstetricians: [include neonatal staff, and those members of staff trained to 
take newborn blood spot screening samples: this may include nursery nurses, maternity 
support workers and maternity / neonatal care assistants working under supervision of a 
registered professional : 
o To access, read, understand and follow this guidance 
o To use their professional judgement in application of this protocol 
 
• Management Team : 
 
To ensure the protocol is reviewed as required in line with Trust and National 
recommendations 
 
To ensure the protocol is accessible to all relevant staff 
 
Update Process 
 
Prior to the review of this guideline a structured search and appraisal of the evidence will 
be undertaken by the lead author with the library services in the Trust. The most recent 
national guidance from the RCOG is still current at the time of this update and no 
additional evidence was found that added to the recommendations in this document. 
 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 6 of 50 
 
1.0 Newborn Blood Spot Screening: Rationale for Screening and Conditions Screened for 
 
1.1 Newborn blood spot screening is recommended for all babies up to one year old. Up to 
but not including 1st birthday. Screening for Cystic Fibrosis is unreliable after 8 weeks. 
 
1.2 At BSUH screening is offered for the following conditions: 
 
• phenylketonuria [PKU] 
• congenital hypothyroidism (CHT) 
• medium chain acyl -Co A dehydrogenase deficiency [MCADD] 
• sickle cell disease [SCD] 
• cystic fibrosis [CF]. 
• maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) 
• homocystinuria (pyridoxine unresponsive) (HCU) 
• isovaleric acidaemia (IVA) 
• glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1) 
 
1.3 A summary of the national pathway for newborn screening is given in diagram 1.1 
below: 

Diagram 1.1 Ref: NHS Newborn bloodspot screening programme [2013] 
 
Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 7 of 50 
 1.4 Aims and Objectives 
 
1.4.1 The aims of newborn blood spot screening are: 
 
• To achieve early detection, referral and treatment of babies thought to be 
affected by the conditions. 
 
• To reduce morbidity and mortality through prompt identification and treatment 
of affected babies 
 
1.4.2 The national objectives of the newborn bloodspot scree ning programme [NHS 
England 2018: 
 
• To offer all eligible babies timely screening 
• Support parents to make an informed choice about screening for their baby. 
• To refer all screen positive babies to diagnostic and clinical care within an 
effective timeframe (in accordance with standards ) remove in brackets 
• Provide equal access to high quality screening across England 
• To record all results on a Child Health IT system and give a copy to parents 
• To ensure all those involved in the care of the child also have access to the 
results – remove this statement 
• Minimise harmful effects of screening including anxiety, inaccurate information 
and unnecessary investigation. 
 
1.5 The designated programme lead for maternity services at this trust is the antenatal 
screening co -ordinator. 
 
1.6 See appendix B for contact details of the BSUH programme lead and other staff, 
departments and organisations relevant to the screening programme. 
 
1.7 This screening programme is dependent on systematic specified relationships between 
the following stakeholders: maternity services, neonatal and paediatric services, the 
newborn screening laboratory, diagnostics and genetics laboratory, child health 
records, health visiting services, and specialist condition specific services. This protocol 
includes details of roles and responsibilities of external agencies where relevant. 
 
2.0 Definition of ‘sample taker’ 
 
2.1 The term ‘sample taker’ is used throughout this document to indicate the clinician 
responsible for obtaining parental consent and taking the blood spot sam ple. 
 
2.2 The newborn blood spot sample may be taken by any member of staff who has 
undergone training for the procedure. Within BSUH NHS TRUST this may include: 
 
2.2.1 Registered professionals : 
Midwife 
Nurse [neonatal / paediatric] 
Doctor [paediatric] Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 8 of 50 
 
2.2.2 Non -registered staff: 
Nursery nurse 
Maternity support worker 
Paediatric phlebotomist 
 
2.3 Nursery nurses and maternity support workers may take the sample only after 
appropriate training and only working under supervision of a registered nurse or 
midwife. They should only be assigned routine cases and must refer back immediately to 
their supervising professional in the following circumstances: 
 
2.3.1 Where parents decline screening for some or all of the conditions. 
2.3.2 [In such cases, a follow -up visit by a registered nurse or midwife, must be 
arranged within 24 hours of the parent declining the test] 
2.3.3 Where parents have questions that the nursery nurse or maternity support 
worker cannot answer 
 
2.4 A paediatric phlebotomist may take the sample following referral by a registered 
professional who has previously conducted pre -test discussion and obtained and 
documented parental consent. The referring professional is responsible for completing 
the sample request card [except for date of sample collection and name of sample taker 
which should be completed by the sample taker at time of sample collection]. 
 
2.5 Repeat samples for an inconclusive result or suspected affected baby must always be 
taken by a registered professional as these cases are likely to involve more detailed 
explanations requiring additional expertise. A registered professional may refer a baby 
for a repeat sample to paediatric phlebotomy after discussion with the parents. 
 
3.0 Pre-Screening Information 
 
3.1 The trust uses the UK National Screening Committee patient information leaflet 
‘Screening tests for you and your baby’ which includes the section ‘Blood spot sc reening 
for your newborn baby’. Available in a number of languages at gov.uk 
 
3.2 The patient information leaflet should be given to women prior to or at booking [ideally 
prior to 10 weeks gestation]. Parents who have babies admitted to the neonatal unit will 
receive a copy of this leaflet on admission. 
 
3.3 The midwife should document at booking in the maternal hand held notes that this 
information leaflet has been given. 
 
3.4 The sample taker should ensure that parents have had access to the patient leaflet at 
least 24 hours before the test is due and they should document this in the maternity or 
paediatric notes. 
 
3.5 Leaflet is available in English and other languages to download via the following website: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/screening -tests -for-you-and-your -baby -
description -in-brief Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 9 of 50 
 
3.6 Interpreting services should be used for communicating with parents who are not fluent 
in English at all stages of the screening pathway. 
 
4.0 Offering screening 
 
4.1 Newborn bloodspot screening should be offered to all babies: 
 
4.1.1 The policy is to actively recommend screening however parents have the right to 
decline some or all of the tests. 
 
4.1.2 Pathway 1 [Appendix A] summarises the pre -test information and testing 
process. 

4.2 Pre-test discussion 
Pre-test discussion with the parent[s] should ideally include the following: 
 
• The conditions currently being screened for including rationale for screening 
and treatment in the case of an affected baby 
 
• That this is a screening test and so both false -negatives and false -positives 
can be obtained 
 
• How the test is taken from their baby 
 
• The results process to include follow up in the case of a screen positive result 
 
• Sample storage and future research [see section 4.4] 

4.2.1 If parents require further information that cannot be answered by the 
sample taker, then referral can be made to the screening midwife team [see 
contacts appendix B]. 
 
4.3 Obtaining consent to screen 
4.3.1 Screening should only be performed with parental consent. Verbal consent is 
adequate and so does not requir e a signature from the parent. 
4.3.2 The professional gaining consent from the parents should document in the 
postnatal baby notes, [or neonatal/ paediatric notes if the baby is under the care 
of the paediatric services], that discussion has taken place and the parent’s 
decision to accept or decline screening. 
4.3.3 Consent should also be documented in the personal child health record book 
[PCHR] where available. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 10 of 50 
 
4.4 Parents must understand that they are agreeing to both testing and quality assurance processes 
that are an essenti al part of the screening program . These include: 
• completing the blood spot card and taking the sample 
• testing the blood spot sample in a newborn screening laboratory 
• additional testing of the same sample if the initial result is positive (may involve testing in 
another laboratory) 
• contacting parents about the screening results – positive or negative or carrier (only for CF 
and SCD) 
• referral to a specialist clinical team if the result is positive 
• recording the screening results on laboratory and child health information systems, national 
newborn blood spot failsafe solution and sickle cell and thalassemia newborn outcomes 
system 
• retention and storage of residual blood spots for checking the screening results, monitoring 
and improving the screening program 
• Residual blood spots are dried blood spots that are ‘left over’ after the laboratory punches 
(removes) several small discs from the sample to complete screening. The screening 
laboratory stores them for 5 years. 
• Laboratories use residual blood spots to check screening results, for testing equipment or 
methods, and for training and audit. It is a vital part of screening that helps to maintain 
high standards. If parents consent to screening, they cannot opt out of storage of 
their baby’s residual blood spots for these purposes . 

5.0 When Parents Decline Screening 
 
5.1 Although screening is recommended, parents have the option of declining some or all 
tests offered. 
5.2 With regard metabolic disorders, parent cannot decline individual metabolic disorders. 
They can decline all of them or accept all of them. This is because they are processed 
simultaneously in the lab and it is not possible to exclude screening for individual 
metabolic disorders from the testing panel. 
 
5.3 Where parents have declined screening and the member of staff involved at the point of 
declining is a Phlebotomist, Maternity Support Worker or Nursery Nurse, then a follow 
up appointment should be made with a registered midwife [or neonatal professional if 
the baby is on the special care unit or Health Visitor if the baby was referred by the HV] 
to revisit and discuss the offer of a test again within 24 hours of the decline. 
 
5.4 Where parents have declined screening, the sample taker must complete the following 
actions: 
 
5.4.1 Document the decline and reason for the decline [if stated] in the maternity 
postnatal baby notes or paediatric record and, if available, personal child health 
record book [under ‘birth details’ section]. Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 11 of 50 
 
5.4.2 Complete all sections of the sample card as described in section 6.2] and write 
the following on the card according to which tests have been declined: 
 
If all tests are declined write: ‘ DECLINES ALL TESTS’ 
 
If specific tests are declined – write the specific tests 
declined on the card. 
E.g. if sickle cell and CF have been declined write: 
‘DECLINES SICKLE CELL and CF ONLY’ 
 
5.4.3 Send the completed sample card [without any blood spots if all tests were 
declined] to the laboratory as per section 8.0. The rationale being that the 
newborn screening laboratory receives a card for every baby born. The newborn 
screening laboratory will then inform the child health record department that 
screening has been declined. 
 
5.4.4 Inform the following professionals in writing of the conditions for which the 
parents have declined screening using the template letter in appendix E as a 
guide: 
• General practitioner 
• Health visitor 
• Child health record unit 
• Community midwife team leader 
 
5.4.5 A copy of this letter should be retained in the postnatal maternity records. 
 
5.4.6 Ask the parents to sign the ‘decline form’ in appendix F and retain this to be 
inserted in the postnatal baby notes. 
 
5.5 The registered professional discussing the implications of declining screening with 
parents should clearly state the following: 
5.5.1 The potential complications if their baby is affected by one of the conditions 
being screened for and remains undiagnosed. Such complications include 
irreversible brain damage and death and this should be clearly stated to the 
parents. 
5.5.2 That many of the conditions being screened for are recessively inherited and so 
anyone could carry these genes and not be aware of it. Hence the fact that if 
there is no one in their family with these conditions it does not mean that they 
cannot have an affected child. 
5.6 Details of the discussion made between the registered professional and the parents 
should be clearly documented in the baby notes. 
 
5.7 The sample taker should inform parents who to contact [and how to contact them] if 
they subsequently change their minds about screening or would like to discuss this 
further. The screening midwife team are available to speak with parents for further Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 12 of 50 
 discussion in such cases [see appendix B for contact d etails]. The parents should be 
given a letter that confirms their decision (for their records). 

 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 13 of 50 
 
6.0 Performing t he Screening Test 
 
6.1 Timing 
6.1.1 The blood spot sample should be taken on day 5 of life. For the purpose of 
screening, date of birth is day 0. 
6.1.2 The sample should be taken on day 5 of life on all babies where parental 
consent has been given regardless of medical condition, prescribed drugs, milk 
feeding and prematurity. 

6.2 Completing the blood spot card 
 
6.2.1 Prior to completing a sample card, the sample taker should check the expiry 
date on the front of the card. The laboratory will be unable to process samples if 
the card is out of date and a repeat sample will be required, resulting in a 
possible delay in treatment if the baby is subsequently diagnosed with a 
condition. 
6.2.2 A sample card should not be used if it has been damaged in any way, for 
example the blotting paper is folded, contaminated or has been compressed. 
 
6.2.3 It is the responsibility of the sample taker to enter the details on the blood 
spot card at the time of sampling. 
 
6.2.4 It is mandatory to enter the baby’s NHS number onto the sample card. Where 
the NHS number is not given or is incorrect, the laboratory will issue a request 
for a repeat sample to be taken resulting in a possible delay in treatment if the 
baby is subsequently diagnosed with a condition. 
 
6.2.5 If available, a NHS number bar -coded label should be used. When using a bar -
coded label: 
 
• Ensure no sections of the bar code or text are missing 
• Ensure the printing is aligned: the laboratory may reject a card where the 
print is misaligned, partially missing or at an angle. 
• Check all details on the label are correct with the parent and make any 
necessary changes 
• Apply one label to each sheet of the blood spot card at the time of sampling 
 
6.2.6 Any additional information required on the card that is not included on the bar -
coded label should b e completed by the sample in block capitals. 
 
6.2.7 Where labels are not available, the sample taker should ensure that all fields on 
the card are completed using legible handwriting. The sample taker should then 
check all details entered by hand onto the sample card with the parent. 
 
6.2.8 When completing the card, care must be taken to ensure it is placed on a clean 
surface to avoid contamination of the blood spot sample. Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 14 of 50 
 
6.2.9 Care must be taken not to fold or compress the blotting paper on the card as 
this will result in the sample being rejected by the laboratory. 
 
6.2.10 The sample taker should, where relevant, enter the following information in the 
‘comments’ box on the card: 
 
• Baby’s known medical condition [if any] including any drugs received by the 
baby or breastfeeding mother within 24 hours of the blood test. 
• State if the baby had an in -utero blood transfusion 
• State if the mother has received thyroxine or anti -thyroid drugs 
• Relevant family history [e.g. known history of PKU, CF, MCADD etc] 
• Results of pre -natal diagnostic testing if relevant [for example CVS result 
where the couple was at –risk for having a baby with sickle cell disorder] 
• Mother’s carrier status for sickle cell of haemoglobin variant [if known] 
• If the sample was not taken on day 5, state why: [eg pre -transfusion spot, 
preterm CHT ] 
 
6.2.11 Write the maternity code into the PCT box [bottom left hand corner of the 
sample card]. The maternity code alerts the screening lab as to which trust took 
the sample [which may of course be different to the hospital of birth]. This 
ensures swift follow up on any samples that may require repeating. Use the 
maternity code as listed in the table below according to where the sample was 
taken: 
 
 Maternity codes for newborn bloodspot screening cards 
CODE For samples taken in: 
RXH 1 M RSCH maternity Community / hospital midwifery 
RXH 1 T RSCH TMBU Trevor Mann Baby Unit 
RXH 1 A RACH Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital 
RXH 2 M PRH maternity Community / hospital midwifery 
RXH 2 S PRH SCBU PRH special care baby unit Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 15 of 50 
 
7.0 Collecting t he Blood Spot Sample 
 
7.1 Sample takers should gather necessary equipment prior to taking the sample and 
 comply with the trust guidance on infection control, using universal precautions 
 before taking any blood sample. 
7.2 The sample taker should recommend comfort measures for the baby [ UK Newborn 
 Screening Programme Centre [2012] section 3 page 6]: 
 
7.2.1 Ensure the baby is cuddled and in a secure position for taking the sample as 
swaddling may reduce pain and discomfort 
 
7.2.2 Engaging the baby through face -to-face contact, voice and touch may also be 
beneficial 
7.2.3 Breastfeeding during sample collection may have analgesic affect. Offering 
expressed milk, non -nutritive sucking [e.g. a pacifier] or a sucrose or glucose 
solution are alternatives to breastfeeding. Painful procedures are a medical 
indication for such measures and do not undermine the WHO/UNICEF’s Baby 
Friendly Initiative. 
 
7.2.4 There is no evidence that formula feed has analgesic properties, but parents may 
comfort formula fed babies with a feed during the procedure. 
 
7.2.5 Containment holding or the use of a pacifier (with parental consent) may provide 
comfort measures for babies on the neonatal unit 
 
7.3 Preparing the foot 
 
7.3.1 The heel should be cleaned prior to taking the sample, with tepid plain water and 
cotton wool/ gauze. This is to avoid contamination of the s ample which may 
affect results. 
 
7.3.2 Alcohol or alcohol based wipes must NOT be used as this can cause burns and 
blisters. 
 
7.3.3 Soap and detergent should not normally be used as this can be irritant to infantile 
skin. However if faecal matter cannot be removed with water alone, mild 
unperfumed soap may be used and rinsed off thoroughly after. Faecal 
contamination of the sample can lead to a false positive result for CF screening 
 
7.3.4 The heel should be completely dry before taking the sample 
 
7.3.5 The baby should be warm and comfortable prior to taking the sample. Additional 
warming is not required. The foot should NOT be soaked in warm water as there 
is no evidence that warming the foot aids blood flow and there have been reports 
of babies being scalded/ burned during foot warming [ UK Newborn Screening 
Programme Centre [2012] section 3.4 page 7] 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 16 of 50 
 7.3.6 The sample should be obtained using an automated incision device designed for 
use on newborns [eg Gentleheel lancet] in accordance with manufacturer’s 
instructions. The device should be placed against the heel gently and not pressed 
into the heel, to ensure correct depth of incision is achieved. Manual lancets must 
not be used. 
 
7.3.7 For full term and preterm infants, the external and internal limits of the calcaneus 
are the preferred puncture site. This is marked by the shaded area in diagram A 
below. The skin to calcaneous depth is greater in these areas and so using these 
areas minimises the risk of calcaneal puncture that may lead to osteomyelitis. The 
automated incision device should have a penetrative depth of no more than 2.0 
mm. 

Diagram A and B – Puncture sites [UK Newborn Screening Programme Centre 2012 page 8] 

7.3.8 For infants requiring repeated heel punctures, for example babies in neonatal or 
paediatric care, the areas marked in diagram B may also be used. However when 
using the whole plantar surface, it is recommended that the automated incision 
device should have a penetrative depth of no more than 1.0 mm [Arena et al 2005 
in UK Newborn Screening Programme Centre 2012 ]. 
 
7.3.9 Avoid the posterior curvature of the heel. 
 
7.3.10 Allow the heel to hang down to assist blood flow. 
 
7.3.11 It is acceptable for paediatric phlebotomists who are trained in venous sampling 
of neonates, to take a venous sample from the antecubital fossa and use this for 
newborn bloodspot sampling. Such samples should be obtained in accordance 
with phlebotomy protocols. 

Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 17 of 50 
 7.4 Filling the Circles 
 
7.4.1 The aim is to fill each circle on the newborn blood spot sample card using a single 
drop of blood. The blood should reach the printed edge of the circle. 
7.4.2 Wait for the blood to flow. Allow one spot to drop onto each of the circles on the 
card. Do not allow the heel to make contact with the card. 
 
7.4.3 Allow the blood to fill the circle by natural flow and seep through the card. 
 
7.4.4 Do not squeeze the foot in an attempt to increase blood flow. 
 
7.4.5 The minimum sample requirement for day 5 screening is for four blood spots at 
least 7mm in diameter. Therefore aim to fill each of the four circles completely. 
 
7.4.6 Table 7.1 summarises the number of spots required according to reason for 
sampling and advises which section of the policy to refer to for further 
information: 
 
Table 7.1: Number of spots required for 
sampling 

Reason for sampling Baby’s age at which 
sample should be taken Minimum 
number of 
spots 
required Section in 
policy to refer 
to for further 
information 
Pre-transfusion admission spot [on NICU 
or SCBU] to be dispatched with D5 spot On admission to NICU/ 
SCBU 1 12.3 
Routine for all babies Day 5 4 6.0 and 12.4 
Repeat sample requested by the lab 
because: 
- Because first sample went 
missing 
- Because first sample was 
insufficient or unsuitable 
 Within 72 hours of 
laboratory request for 
repeat 4 10.3 
Repeat sample for confirmation [Usually 
CF] As directed by laboratory 2 10.2 
Premature babies born < 32 weeks – 
repeat for CHT screening Day 28 or discharge – 
whichever is soonest 2 12.6 
Baby has moved in to area having not 
previously been screened or no evidence 
that screened for all conditions currently 
offered in England Up to 1 year of age 4 11.0 
 
7.4.7 Do not layer the blood. Layering is where more than one drop of blood has been 
added on top of another blood spot to one circle from either the same side of the 
card or both sides of the card. Layered samples are not acceptable as they can 
give false positive results and the laboratory will request a repeat sample. 
 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 18 of 50 
 7.4.8 After taking the four spots of blood, ensure the blood has seeped through to the 
other side. If one circle is insufficient it is acceptable to add additional blood spots 
anywhere on the blotting paper, taking care that the blood spots don’t join 
together. 
 
7.4.9 Do not compress the blood spot in order to ensure that the blood has soaked 
through to the reverse of the card. This increases the risk of a false negative 
result. 
 
7.4.10 See Diagram C for summary [UK Newborn Screening Programme Centre 2012] 

Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 19 of 50 
 
7.4.11 If the blood ceases to flow: 
• Wipe away the congealed blood with cotton wool or gauze. 
• Gently massage the foot, avoid squeezing, to encourage flow 
and drop the blood onto the card. 
 
7.4.12 If the baby is not bleeding, a second puncture is required. Perform the second 
puncture on a different part of the same foot or on the other foot. 
 
7.5 After taking the sample: 
 
7.5.1 Wipe excess blood from the heel and apply gentle pressure to the wound with 
gauze or cotton wool. This should be sufficient t o stop bleeding in most babies. 
7.5.2 If required, in a healthy term neonate, a hypoallergenic spot plaster may be 
applied, reminding the parent to remove the plaster in a few hours. However if 
the baby is on the neonatal unit, spot plasters are not to be used, in order to 
minimise the amount of adhesive that is applied to the skin [especially premature 
skin which is more delicate] and to avoid the risk that the plaster may come off 
and remain unnoticed in the incubator creating an infection risk. 
 
7.5.3 Allow blood spots on the sample card to air -dry away from direct sunlight or heat 
before placing in the glassine envelope for protection. 
 
7.6 Documentation of sample taking 
 
7.7 The sample taker must record that the sample has been taken in the mother’s maternity 
record and PCHR [and the child’s hos pital records if appropriate]. 
 
7.8 All blood spots to be double checked by another practitioner qualified to perform 
bloodspots before posting. 
 
7.9 The screening status should be recorded on discharge and transfer notifications by the 
clinician responsible for discharging the baby. 
 
8.0 Sample Transport 
 
8.1 Posting routine samples [routine day 5 samples] 
 
8.1.1 Samples are processed at the Newborn Screening 
Laboratory at St. Thomas’s Hospital, London [see address appendix B] 
 
8.1.2 It is the sample taker’s responsibility to ensure that the sample is transported to the 
laboratory according to these guidelines. 
 
8.1.3 All samples must be despatched to the newborn screening laboratory in the prepaid 
addressed envelope and posted within 24 hours of the sample being taken. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 20 of 50 
 8.1.4 Samples are posted using first class Royal Mail either in standard post boxes or via 
the hospital post room. 
 
8.1.5 Samples must NEVER be sent via hospital internal mail as this causes unacceptable 
delays in the cards reaching the laboratory. However, sample cards from babies that 
are in -patient [to include babies on postnatal wards, neonatal units, paediatric wards 
or out -patient paediatric phlebotomy] can be taken on a daily basis direct to the 
hospital post -room on each site where staff will put the samples immediately into 
the external post. 
 
8.1.6 Samples must be posted on the same day that the sample was taken. Despatch 
should not be delayed in order to batch cards together. 
 
8.1.7 A maximum of 5 sample cards can be put in one pre -paid envelope. 
 
8.2 Record of samples taken by the maternity unit 
 
8.2.1 Every sample taker should keep a record of all samples that they have taken and sent 
to the laboratory. This record must include the baby’s name and NHS number, date 
taken, card serial number, reason sample was taken, date posted and location of 
post box used. This is for internal audit purposes. See appendix C for an example 
record sheet. 
 
8.2.2 The sample taker must forward the record sheets of samples taken on a weekly basis 
to a central collection point where they are to be retained for audit: 
• RSCH midwives – level 12 community office, RSCH 
• PRH midwives – community office, PRH 
 
8.3 Record of samples taken by the neonatal unit / SCBU 
 
8.3.1 Babies screened on the neonatal unit [Trevor Mann Baby Unit and Special Care Baby 
Unit] will retain a central record of all babies screened in each area respectively. As it is 
necessary to record where samples were posted, it would be advisable to post all 
samples at either the hospital post room or post box immediately outside the hospital. 
 
8.4 Record of samples taken by the RACH 
 
8.4.1 Paediatric wards at the Royal Alexandra Children’s hospital should maintain a record 
of all samples taken. As it is necessary to record where samples were posted, it would 
be advisable to post all samples at the hospital post room. 
 
8.5 Sample transport in exceptional circumstances 
 
8.5.1 Where there are exceptional circumstances that may disrupt postal services and 
delay sample transport to the laboratory [for example: over long bank holiday 
periods, prolonged bad weather or postal strikes], contingency plans will be made 
for alternative methods of transporting samples to the laboratory. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 21 of 50 
 8.5.2 At such times the trust may revert to using a courier service during the period of 
disruption. Staff will be informed of changes to services accordingly and advised of 
sample collection points. At such times further information will be available via the 
Community Midwifery Matron, antenatal screening midwives or community midwife 
team leaders. 
 
8.6 Transport of repeat samples 
 
8.6.1 Where a sample requires repeating [regardless of the reason], there is already the 
possibility of delayed diagnosis of an affected baby. For this reason every effort must 
be taken to repeat and transport the sample to the labo ratory as quickly as possible. 
 
8.6.2 In all cases it is the sample taker’s responsibility to ensure that the repeat sample 
has arrived at the laboratory within 5 working days of taking the sample. In the case 
of samples taken by the paediatric phlebotomy department, it is the sample 
requestor’s responsibility to do this. 
 
8.6.3 In certain circumstances, it is advisable to use a courier to transport the sample to 
the laboratory. For example: 
• if the baby is unwell 
• if it is suspected that the baby may be affected by one of the conditions being 
screened for 
• if this is the second [or more] repeat sample. 
 
8.6.4 The sample taker should exercise their judgement as to whether a courier is 
necessary. Advice, including information on how to arrange a courier can be 
obtained from the screening midwives, community midwifery matron or community 
midwife team leaders 

8.6.5 Samples sent by courier must be inserted into a plain envelope which is then sealed 
with the following address clearly written on the front: 
 
Newborn Bloodspot Screening lab 
C/O Central Specimen Reception 
5th Floor 
North wing 
St Thomas Hospital 
London 
SE1 7EH 
 
8.6.6 Note that the address must be written on the envelope PRIOR to putting the sample 
inside. This ensures that there is no sample compression during writing which could 
cause the laboratory to reject the sample. 
 
8.6.7 Courier company details are given in appendix B. 
 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 22 of 50 
 9.0 Results Processes 
 
9.1 The sample taker should inform parents of the results process. 
 
9.2 Results process when conditions not suspected 
 
9.2.1 Where conditions are not suspected, the child health bureau will send parents 
a letter within 6 -8 weeks of the test. If the baby screens positive for a condition 
the parents will be contacted sooner [see sections 9.3 to 9.7]. 
 
9.2.2 Parents should be advised that if they have not received their baby’s results 
within 8 weeks, they should contact their health visitor whose responsibility it 
is to follow up any missing results. 
 
9.2.3 It is the health visitor’s responsibility to document screening results in the 
PCHR. 
 
9.2.4 Ensure parents understand results are not 100% accurate. 
 
9.3 Results process when conditions suspected: CF suspected 
 
9.3.1 CF is suspected in the following cases: 
o Two genetic mutations are confirmed on screening 
o One genetic mutation is confirmed on screening and 2 consecutive 
samples show a raised IRT. 
 
9.3.2 In these cases the newborn screening laboratory will inform the Regional Cystic 
Fibrosis Unit at Kings College Hospital, London. The regional team at Kings then 
contact the local CF team at the Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital. A local CF 
nurse specialist will then arrange to visit the family ideally with named HV to 
inform the parents of the result and arranges for a diagnostic sweat test for 
the following day. 
 
9.3.3 The local CF nurse will inform the baby’s GP and HV of the sweat test result. 
 
9.3.4 The laboratory will also send a copy of the result to the child health bureau. 
 
9.4 Results process when conditions suspected: CF carrier suspected 
 
9.4.1 The newborn screening test is not designed to detect carriers of CF but may 
identify a small number of carriers during the process of screening. A CF carrier 
is suspected when the first sample has a raised IRT and 1 genetic mutation is 
identified, but the second sample has a normal IRT. 
 
9.4.2 In such cases the newborn screening laboratory will inform the Regional Cystic 
Fibrosis Unit at Kings College Hospital. The regional team at Kings then contact 
the local CF team at the Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital. A local CF nurse 
specialist will then arrange to inform the parents of the result and implications Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 23 of 50 
 of the result [for example: regarding inheritance and options for screening 
parents for their carrier status]. In such cases a diagnostic sweat test may be 
arranged to exclude a diagnosis of CF and reassure parents. 
 
9.4.3 The local CF nurse will inform the baby’s GP and HV of the carrier result. 
 
9.5 Results process when conditions suspected: Inherited metabolic disorders - PKU/ 
MCADD/ MSUD/ HCU/ IVA/ GA1 
 
9.5.1 In these cases the newborn screening laboratory will inform the Paediatric 
Metabolic Consultant at the Evelina Children’s Hospital, St Thomas’s Hospital, 
London. The consultant will then contact the parents direct [by phone usually] 
and arrange confirmatory testing and follow -up as detailed below according to 
the condition suspected: 
 
MSUD/IVA/ MCADD – should be seen the same day as the result is 
generated, ideally at the regional paediatric metabolic unit in London, 
as these babies require immediate treatment 
 
GA1/ PKU/ HCU – should be seen the same or next working day 
following the result, ideally at the ideally at the regional paediatric 
metabolic unit in London Inform GP of the results. 
 
9.5.2 Where parents are unable to attend the regional IMD unit in London, the 
consultant in London will liaise with local paediatric services with regard repeat 
confirmatory samples, treatment and follow up. 
 
9.5.3 The newborn screening laboratory will send a copy of the result to the local 
CHB. 
 
9.5.4 The consultant at the regional IMD unit will inform the baby’s GP, HV and 
CMW as well as local paediatric services of the baby’s diagnosis. 
 
9.5.5 The newborn screening laboratory will send a copy of the result to the local 
CHB. 

9.6 Results process when conditions suspected: Sickle cell disorders 
 
9.6.1 The newborn screening laboratory will refer all suspected carrier and SCD 
results to King’s Red Cell Lab for further testing [Contacts in appendix B]. The 
King’s lab will then contact designated paediatrician at the Royal Alexandra 
Children’s hospital who will arrange to see the parents and arrange follow up 
as appropriate. This includes informing the baby’s GP and HV. 
 
9.6.2 The newborn screening laboratory will send a copy of the result to the local 
CHB. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 24 of 50 
 9.7 Results process when conditions suspected: Carriers of haemoglobin variants 
 
9.7.1 In addition to detecting babies with sickle cell disorders, newborn blood spot 
screening may also detect carriers of haemoglobin variants. However carriers 
of thalassaemia are NOT detected by screening. 
 
9.7.2 Carrier results are given to parents by a specialist link HV. The newborn 
screening laboratory will inform the specialist link HV who will then arrange to 
inform the parents and advise regarding the implications of the result. 
Specialist parent information leaflets, according to the type of carrier 
identified, are available online: http://sct.screening.nhs.uk/leaflets 
 
9.7.3 The link HV will also inform the baby’s named HV, GP and CHB of the carrier 
status. 
 
9.7.4 The newborn screening laboratory will inform the BSUH antenatal screening 
co-ordinator of all carrier and affected babies. The ASC will ensure all women 
with a carrier or affected baby were screened appropriately [according to 
policy] during pregnancy and inform the laboratory lead at BSUH to enable the 
lab to link parents and baby results in the future. 
 
10.0 Repeat Samples 
 
10.1 The process for repeat samples is summarised in Pathway 4 [Appendix A] 
 
10.1.1 The laboratory will contact BSUH to request repeat samples by sending an 
email to the trusts shared generic newborn screening email account: 
undefined uhsussex.newbornscreening@nhs.net 
 
10.1.2 The community midwife team leaders at both PRH and RSCH will nominate 
someone on a daily basis [Monday to Friday inclusive] to check the shared 
email account to action any request for repeat samples. 
 
10.1.3 When taking a repeat sample, the sample taker must tick the ‘ repeat sample’ 
box on the blood spot card. 
 
10.1.4 Repeat samples are considered either to be unavoidable or avoidable. 
 
10.2 Unavoidable repeat samples 
 
10.2.1 Unavoidable repeat samples may be required from some babies due to 
prematurity, borderline TSH results, inconclusive CF screening or having 
received a blood transfusion. These samples should be taken as soon as 
possible [certainly within 72 hours of receipt of the request] or at the age 
directed by the screening laboratory. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 25 of 50 
 10.2.2 A one week interval between samples is recommended for borderline TSH 
results. In such cases the sample taker must take 4 blood spots and mark the 
card ‘CHT borderline’ . 
 
10.2.3 Where repeat samples are required for inconclusive CF screen or borderline 
TSH results, the sample taker should inform the HV by phone so that the HV 
can follow up results and offer additional support to the family whilst results 
are awaited. 
 
10.3 Avoidable repeat samples 
 
10.3.1 Laboratories may also request a repeat sample due to any of the following 
reasons. Table 10.1 lists the reasons considered to be avoidable reasons for 
having to repeat a sample: 
 
Table 10.1: 
Reasons for avoidable 
repeat samples Examples 
Insufficient Insufficient blood / blood not soaked through the card or 
circles not filled 
Unsuitable Compression of the blood spot 
Overlapping, multiple layered or multiple blood spots 
Suspected contamination of the sample card [e.g. faeces] 
Sample card expired 
Pre-transfusion spot and day 5 spots on same card 
Presence of adult blood 
Diluted sample / squeezed heel 
Insufficient or incorrect data on the card [e.g. incorrect date 
of collection or date of birth] 
NHS number not given or incorrect 
Printed information on barcoded label misaligned 
Clotted / congealed sample 
Delay in sample reaching laboratory [> 14 days] 
Wet card 
 
Too young Sample taken too soon [e.g. before day 5] 
Too soon post 
transfusion Sample taken before donor blood cleared 
 
10.3.2 When a repeat sample is requested for any of the above reasons, the sample 
should be taken within 72 hours of receipt of the request. The only exception 
to this is where a baby is receiving a blood transfusion [see section 12.5]. 
 
10.3.3 All first repeat samples should be sent to the lab in prepaid envelopes [as for 
first samples]. Second or subsequent repeats should be sent by courier as per 
section 8.5. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 26 of 50 
 10.3.4 The sample taker must discuss the reason for the repeat with the parents and 
obtain consent as described in section 4.0. 
 
10.3.5 The sample taker should give parents a copy of the national information 
leaflet: 
‘Your baby needs a repeat screening test –heel prick test. Information 
sheet for parents & carers November 2013 (v1.1)’ [copy in Appendix 
D]. 
 
10.3.6 In such cases parents should be informed of the results process and how to 
follow up the results with the health visitor if they have not heard by post. 

10.4 Repeat samples on babies over 28 days [this section applies to babies living at 
home] 
 
10.4.1 It is the responsibility of maternity services to arrange a repeat sample on any 
baby up to and including 28 days of age and living at home. 
 
10.4.2 If a baby is over 28 days and a repeat sample is required because there was an 
error in sample taking [e.g. due to avoidable reasons listed in section 10.3, 
table 10.1] then maternity services are responsible for informing parents and 
taking the repeat sample. 
 
10.4.3 If a baby is over 28 days, and the reason for the repeat sample is due to an 
unavoidable reason, then the health visitor should be informed and it is their 
responsibility to arrange the repeat sample. Details on how health visitors can 
arrange a repeat sample are given in section 11. In rare circumstances when 
the midwife may continue visiting past 28 days, then it would be appropriate 
for the midwife to take a repeat sample. 
 
10.4.4 If the baby, of any age, is an in -patient under the care of neonatal or paediatric 
services, then the team caring for the baby are responsible for arranging the 
repeat sample. 
 
11.0 Special Circumstances: Babies who have moved into the area. 
 
11.1 Responsibility for arranging and taking samples on babies who have moved into the 
area: 
 
11.1.1 The process for taking samples on ‘movers -in’ is summarised in Pathway 5 – 
appendix A. 
 
11.1.2 Newborn blood spot screening is recommended on all babies up to one year of 
age. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 27 of 50 
 11.1.3 If a baby has moved into the area whilst still receiving routine postnatal 
midwifery care, then it is the responsibility of maternity services to offer 
screening and take the sample. 
 
11.1.4 If a baby has moved into the area after discharge from midwife care, up to one 
year of age, then the responsibility for offering and arranging screening lies 
with the health visitor. 
 
11.1.5 The health visitor visits the baby within 10 working days of being notified of a 
new family, to ascertain whether the baby has been screened elsewhere. 
 
11.1.6 If the baby has had screening elsewhere and there is written evidence of the 
results then no further action is necessary. 
 
11.1.7 In the following circumstances, it is the responsibility of the health visitor to 
offer and arrange screening: 
• the baby has not had any screening 
• the baby was screened elsewhere [either in the UK or abroad] but 
there are no written results 
• the baby has had some screening tests but has not been tested for 
all nine conditions currently screened for in England [listed in 
section 1.0] 
 
11.1.8 If there is any doubt about what tests a child has had or whether the child has 
had screening, then screening should be re -offered. 
 
11.1.9 It is not possible to offer screening for CF over the age of 8 weeks. Parents 
should be advised as to whether screening for this condition has been possible 
or not. 
 
11.2 Health visitor referral process for screening 
 
11.2.1 The health visitor is responsible for pre -test discussion and documentation of 
acceptance or decline of screening. 
 
11.2.2 Where parents decline screening, the HV should follow the guidance in section 
5.0 and return a blank sample card to the laboratory by completing the form in 
appendix F. 
 
11.2.3 Where parents accept screening, the health visitor can arrange for the baby to 
have a screening test as follows according to area: 
 
11.3 How the HV organises repeats: Brighton and Hove area 
 
11.3.1 The health visitor arranges an appointment in paediatric phlebotomy at the 
Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 28 of 50 
 11.3.2 The HV phones 01273 696955 x 62474 at the RSCH to arrange an 
appointment. 
 
11.3.3 The HV must complete all sections on the request form in appendix G and 
faxes the request form to 01273 523120 and write: For The Attention of 
Phlebotomists, level 5, RACH. 
 
11.3.4 The HV should also give parents a hard copy of the request form to take along 
to the appointment at phlebotomy. 
 
11.3.5 The phlebotomy department cannot take the sample from the baby without a 
request form or if the request form is incomplete. In such cases the 
phlebotomy department will refer back to the requesting HV. 
 
11.3.6 If the baby does not attend for blood spot sampling, the phlebotomy 
department will inform the HV by phone on the day that the appointment was 
scheduled. If the phlebotomy staffs are unable to contact the HV that day, they 
will inform either their manager or the HV manager by phone or email to 
arrange follow up with the named HV. 
 
11.4 How the HV organises repeats: Mid Sussex area 
 
11.4.1 The health visitor can arrange for blood spot screening at Princess Royal 
Hospital at Haywards Heath via the on -call paediatric nurse. The nurse can be 
contacted by phoning 01444 441 881 and asking switchboard to bleep the 
paediatric nurse on bleep 6034 to arrange a time for parents to bring their 
baby in and have the sample taken. 
11.4.2 Within the Crawley area, the HV can refer babies to the Child Assessment Unit 
at East Surrey Hospital for blood spot sampling. 
 
11.4.3 It is the HV’s responsibility to ensure that all babies referred for screening 
attended for the test and that a result has been received and documented in 
the PCHR book and HV notes. 
 
12.0 Special Circumstances: Babies born preterm or cared for in hospital specialist units 
[summarised in Pathways 2 and 3 in appendix A] 
 
12.1 Babies requiring care from neonatal or paediatric services should have screening 
taken in accordance with the guidelines contained within this document. The following 
section 12.2 describes additional measures to be considered when caring for these 
babies. 
 
12.2 Pre-test information and consent 
 
12.2.1 The pre -test information and consent process should be the same as section 
4.0. However in emergency situations there may be limited time to allow 
discussion with parents. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 29 of 50 
 12.2.2 Babies admitted to neonatal units are likely to have multiple blood samples 
taken for medical reasons. Blood spot screening should be coordinated with 
other tests where possible. 
 
12.2.3 Venepuncture or venous / arterial sampling from an existing line is an 
alternative method to collect the blood spot sample. This is providing the line 
is cleared of infusate. EDTA, heparin or citrate tubes or capillaries should not 
be used to collect blood as these anticoagulation reagents will affect the 
assay [ NHS Newborn blood spot screening programme 2014]. 
 
12.2.4 Alcohol, Vaseline or any antiseptic solutions for skin preparation should not 
be used, as these can interfere with the results. Parafin solutions can increase 
the risk of infection, can alter results of the test and may clog the equipment 
used [Linger 2014]. 
 
12.2.5 Sample cards should be completed as detailed in section 6.2. It is important 
to include all details regarding the baby’s medical condition and any blood 
transfusions received on the sample card as in some cases, the baby’s 
condition and treatment may affect accuracy of screening results. In such 
cases the lab will advise the unit of any baby that requires a repeat test. 
 
12.2.6 Babies cared for in hospital specialist units will usually require additional 
newborn blood spot screening samples in excess of the routine day 5 sample, 
as detailed below. 
 
12.3 Admission spot for SCD screening 
 
12.3.1 All babies admitted to TMBU or SCBU should have a single circle blood spot 
sample taken on admission or prior to transfusion to screen for SCD. The 
sample taker must write ‘ Pre-Transfusion’ on the sample card. 
 
12.3.2 The ‘ Pre-Transfusion’ blood spot card should be stored on the baby’s clip 
board in the glassine envelope, kept dry and not compressed in any way. It 
should be sent to the newborn screening laboratory together with the 
routine day 5 sample. 
 
12.3.3 If the baby is transferred to another unit or discharged home before the day 
5 sample has been taken, the ‘pre -transfusion’ sample accompanies the 
infant. Details of newborn sampling should be included in the transfer 
information. 
 
12.4 Day 5 routine screening 
 
12.4.1 On day 5 of life [remember day of birth is day 0], a further sample card of 
four full circles should be taken on all babies, regardless of the medical 
condition, milk feeding or prematurity. The only exception to this is babies 
who have received a blood transfusion [see section 12.5]. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 30 of 50 
 12.4.2 A new sample card should be used for the routine day 5 sample containing 4 
sample spots. Extra blood spots must NOT be added to the existing single 
spot ‘pre -transfusion’ card taken on admission to the unit. 
 
12.4.3 The ‘pre -transfusion’ card should be placed in a glassine envelope and 
stapled to the glassine envelope containing the day 5 card. Details must be 
fully completed on BOTH cards. Both cards should then be sent to the 
laboratory together on day 5. 
 
12.4.4 The single circle blood spot sample taken and marked as ‘Pre -transfusion’ can 
be discarded if the baby does not receive a blood transfusion. However if 
there is any uncertainty, for example if it is not possible to confirm in the 
medical notes, then the ‘pre -transfusion’ spot should be sent in with the day 
5 card. 
 
12.5 Screening after blood transfusion [including intrauterine transfusion] 
 
12.5.1 Blood transfusion should refer to the transfusion of any blood product that 
will affect the circulating concentration of the metabolite being measured on 
screening. In practice this refers to blood transfusions, exchange transfusions, 
platelets and fresh frozen plasma. 
 
12.5.2 For babies who have received an intrauterine transfusion, count the date of 
birth as date of transfusion. 
 
12.5.3 When a baby has had a blood transfusion, either intrauterine or in the 
newborn period, before the day 5 blood spot, another sample [of four spots] 
is required 72 hours after the last blood transfusion. There must be at least 3 
days from the end of the transfusion before the blood spot is taken. 
 
12.5.4 On reaching day 5, if 72 hours has not passed since transfusion, then wait 
until this number of hours has been reached, but if you reach day 8 then a full 
screen must be taken regardless. 
 
12.5.5 In the event of multiple transfusions, a sample card of four spots must be 
sent by day 8 at the latest. This ensures all babies are screened by day 8 
regardless of blood transfusion status 
 
12.5.6 The sample taker should record the date of the last blood transfusion before 
the blood spot was taken on the sample card. 
 
12.5.7 A pre -transfusion sample is the preferred option for sickle cell screening. 
When a preterm baby has not has a pre -transfusion sample taken, the 
laboratory may forward the routine 5 -8 day sample to the DNA laboratory for 
analysis as a failsafe. The laboratory will advise if further specimens are 
required in these circumstances. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 31 of 50 
 12.5.8 If a baby who has been transfused has not had a pre-transfusion sample 
taken, the laboratory will forward the routine day 5 sample to the DNA lab 
for analysis as a failsafe. 
 
12.6 CHT screening for preterm infants 
 
12.6.1 Babies born at less than 32 weeks [equal to or less than 31weeks and 6 days] 
require a second blood spot sample for CHT screening to be taken in addition 
to the ‘pre -transfusion’ and day 5 sample. 
 
12.6.2 These babies should be re -tested when they reach 28 days of age [counting 
day of birth as day 0] or the day of discharge home, whichever is sooner. If 
baby is discharged home before 28 days, write ‘discharged home’ on the 
bloodspot form. 
 
12.6.3 The sample taker must clearly write on the card if the baby has been 
discharged or remains an in -patient 
 
12.6.4 Only two blood spots are required for this sample. 
 
12.6.5 The sample taker should write ‘CHT preterm’ and the gestational age on the 
blood spot card. 
 
12.6.6 The responsibility for taking the sample lies with the healthcare professional 
responsible for clinical care at the time the sample is due. Where babies are 
transferred before they reach 28 days of age, the responsibility is transferred 
to the healthcare professional in the receiving unit. 
 
13.0 Documentation 
 
13.1 It is the sample taker’s responsibility to record all blood spot samples taken in the 
baby’s hospital records and as follows: 
 
• On the cot card which includes space to document when the admission spot and 
day 5 spot have been taken. 
• In the admission book held in each unit 
• On Metavsion [neonatal electronic patient record] which records the dates the 
samples are due and when they have been taken. Repeat samples are also 
included on this system. [Note at time of writing policy, Metavision was not yet in 
place at SCBU, PRH] Therefore the sample taker should record in the baby’s 
notes that the baby has been screened] 
 
13.2 Any transfer documentation should include details of blood spot samples taken. 

14.0 Special Circumstances: Family history of any of the conditions screened for 
 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 32 of 50 
 14.1 Where there is a family history of any of the conditions that are screened for, this 
should have been identified by the midwife at booking. The booking midwife should 
refer the woman to the screening midwife team or obstetrician for further discussion 
in the antenatal period. Such discussions may include options for prenatal and 
postnatal diagnosis, taking specialist advice from the genetics and paediatric teams 
where appropriate as to the risk to the baby in this pregnancy. 
 
14.2 Where parents have opted for postnatal diagnosis, a plan should have been made 
and agreed with parents as to the most appropriate method of testing after birth. 
This should be agreed with the paediatric team and a copy of this plan should be in 
the hospital file and maternal hand held notes. 
 
14.3 In certain conditions, early screening may be indicated, for example with MSUD/IVA/ 
MCADD, due to the potential for the baby to become symptomatic prior to screening 
on day 5. Where the baby is at risk of inheriting a specific condition it should be 
under paediatric care and not discharged before the result of screening is known or 
without consultant paediatric review. Advice as to the best time to screen should be 
sought from the paediatric team and/or newborn screening laboratory. 
 
14.4 In all such cases, details of the family history should be written on the screening 
sample card. In urgent cases, the lab should be informed by phone to alert them to 
expect a sample card on a baby at risk or at higher risk of a condition. 
 
15.0 Ensuring All Babies Have Been Offered Screening 
 
15.1 The trust uses NORTHGATE Newborn Blood Spot Failsafe Solution – the national 
web based software programme which lists all babies born at the trust along with 
their blood spot screening result. Where parents have declined screening this is also 
recorded. Northgate identifies and highlights any babies for whom there is no record 
of a screening result or record of decline by day 17. 
 
15.2 The designated Northgate lead at each site [ RSCH, PRH, TMBU, SCBU and RACH] [see 
appendix B contacts], will check Northgate on each week day and action repeats on 
any baby found not to have a screening result by day 17. See appendix H for 
Standard Operating Procedure. 
 
15.3 It is acceptable for the designated Northgate lead to nominate a named member of 
staff to check Northgate, as long as the named member of staff has had training in 
using the system. 
 
15.4 The trust’s shared NHS net newborn screening email account has the following 
address: uhsussex.newbornscreening@nhs.net 
 
15.5 The newborn screening email account can be accessed by the key users, that is the 
community midwife matron, CMW team leaders and antenatal screening co -
ordinator. Other members of staff may have access to this account to check emails 
with permission from key users. 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 33 of 50 
 15.6 The Newborn Screening Laboratory will send a list of all samples received from our 
trust direct to the trust’s shared NHS net newborn screening email account on a daily 
basis. Therefore it will be possible to cross check that samples sent have been 
received. It is especially important to check that repeat or delayed samples have 
been received by the laboratory. 
 
16.0 Audit, training and performance management of sampling [including Key 
Performance Indicators] 
 
16.1 The newborn screening laboratory will notify the trust of the avoidable repeat rate 
 on a quarterly basis. This forms the dataset for performance in the screening Key 
 Performance Indicator [KPI]. 
 
16.2 The antenatal screening co -coordinator will collate and submit the data required for 
 the KPI and disseminate performance issues within the trust. 
 
16.3 The Community Midwife Team Leader at each site will monitor all avoidable repeats 
 and any sample taker with a high percentage of avoidable repeats will be required to 
 undertake additional measures such as retraining and online learning. 
 
16.4 Staff new to an area [for example new to the trust, new to working in the 
 community, newly qualified or new in to taking blood spot samples etc] should 
 ideally have their first ten samples second checked before sending to the laboratory 
 [see appendix H for information about second checking samples]. This is at the 
 manager’s discretion. 
 
16.5 Staff involved in the newborn blood spot screening programme should ideally attend 
 an annual update. 
 
16.6 Staff new to the trust who will be involved in the newborn blood spot screening 
 programme should attend an induction session covering this screening programme. 

17.0 References 
 
Arena, J., et al., Skin to calcaneus distance in the neonate. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed, 
2005. 90(4): p. F328 -f331. 

Linger A [2014] Clinical Guidelines: neonatal capillary blood sampling. 
Great Ormond Street Hospital. Available at 
www.gosh.nhs.uk/health -professionals/clinical -guidelines/blood -sampling -neonatal -
capillary/ Accessed: 13/08/2014. 
 
NHS England [2013] Public health functions to be exercised by NHS England: Service 
specification No.19 NHS Newborn blood spot screening programme Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/public -health -commissioning -in-the-nhs-
2014 -to-2015 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 34 of 50 
 
NHS Newborn blood spot screening programme [2014] A Laboratory Guide to Newborn 
Screening in the UK for cystic fibrosis. Available from: 
http://newbornbloodspot.screening.nhs.uk/cf -supportingdocs [accessed 13/08/2014]. 

NHS Newborn blood spot screening programme [2013] Newborn blood spot screening 
pathway. Available at: 
http://newbornbloodspot.screening.nhs.uk/pathways#fileid12534 [accessed 5/11/14] 

UK Newborn Screening Programme Centre [2012] Guidelines for Newborn Blood Spot 
Sampling. UK National Screening Committee, February 2012. 
 
Abbreviations used within this document : 
 
AN - anetenatal 
CHRU – Child health record unit 
CHT – congenital hypothyroidism 
CF – cystic fibrosis 
DNA – Did not attend 
GA1 - Glutaric aciduria type 1 
GP – general practitioner 
HCU - Homocystinuria (pyridoxine unresponsive) 
HV – health visitor 
IMD – inherited metabolic disorder 
IVA - Isovaleric acidaemia 
MCADD – medium chain Acyl -CoA dehydrogenase deficiency 
MSUD - Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) 
MSW – Maternity Support worker 
MW – midwife 
PCHR – personal child health record [red book] 
PKU – Phenylketonuria 
RACH – Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital 
SCD – sickle cell disorders 

 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 35 of 50 
 Appendix A - Care Pathways 
Pathway 1.1 Healthy term neonate: Information and testing process 

All women given the information leaflet Screening tests for you and your baby’ at booking 
 
Screening accepted: Arrange to take sample on 
day 5 [day 5 -8 in exceptional circumstances]. Day 
of birth counted as day 0. 
 
Screening declined 
Document decline in postnatal / 
paediatric notes and PCHR. 
 
Complete all details on a blood spot 
sample card and send to the newborn 
screening lab with blood spot circles left 
blank. 
Inform the following in writing: 
- GP, HV, CHRU 
- CMW team leader [if sample 
taken in maternity] 
Ask parent to sign decline form. 
Ensure that parents are aware of how 
to have their baby tested if they change 
their minds about accepting screening 
in the future. 
 
Document that newborn bloodspot screening has 
been discussed, booklet given and consent sought. 
Record acceptance in postnatal / paediatric notes and 
personal child health record [PCHR]. 
Take test according to protocol, Fill all 4 circles 
completely. Complete all details on bloodspot card. 
Write clearly on form if one or more tests declined. 
Ensure parents understand blood spots are retained 
for at least 5 years – write ‘NO RESEARCH CONTACT’ 
on form if parents don’t wish to be contacted about 
this in future. 
 
Send to card to laboratory immediately [within 24 
hours of sample being taken] 
At least 24 hours pre -test, ensure that parents have received the leaflet and understand which conditions 
are being screened for. The p olicy is to RECOMMEND screening. Advise parents to prepare foot [by 
keeping warm with socks] prior to test. 
RESULT 
 CONDITIONS NOT 
SUSPECTED 
 
All results are sent to the local 
Child Health Record Unit who 
notify the health visitor [HV] and 
send a letter direct to the parents. 
 
HV ensures results have been 
received at the 6 -8 week check 
and documents results in the 
PCHR [ red book] 
RESULTS: 
CONDITION/S 
SUSPECTED 
See policy section 9.3 
to 9.7 
REPEAT 
REQUIRED 
 
See Pathway 
4 
‘Repeat 
sample 
pathway’ Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 36 of 50 
 Pathway 1.2 Special considerat ions for premature infants and screening for CHT 

 Baby born before 32 weeks gestation [31+6 or below] 
 
Take routine sample on day 5 [4 spots required] 
Take further sample wh en baby reaches 28 days of age (counting day of birth 
as day 0) or the day of discharge, whichever is sooner. 
 
Write ‘CHT preterm’ on the card (2 spots required) 
 
Rationale: immaturity of the hypothalamic -pituitary axis in the premature baby 
may mask congenital hypothyroidism 

 Take ‘ pre-transfusion’ spot on admission to neonatal unit ( 1 spot requ ired) Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 37 of 50 
 Pathway 1:3 Special considerations for newborn blood spot screening in babies admitted 
to SCBU/ neonatal unit 

 Offer routine screening day 5 
for CHT, PKU, CF and 
MCADD. 
Note: This should be delayed 
until 72 hours AFTER the last 
transfusion is completed . If the 
baby is having repeated 
transfusions then the sample 
should be taken on day 5 but 
repeated again 72 hours after 
the last transfusion . Baby admitted to NICU / SCBU (any gestation) 
Take ‘ pre-transfusion’ spot on admission to neonatal unit (1 spot required) regardless 
of reason for admission. 
 
Rationale: When screening for sickle cell disorders [SCD], the blood spot sample 
MUST be taken before a blood transfusion, even if this is before day 5. A screening 
test after transfusion will test the donor blood for sickle cell disorders rather than the 
baby’s own blood. Taking a single spot on admission will reduce the need to recall 
babies at a later date for repeats. 
 
NOTE: if admission to NICU / SCBU is anticipated antenatally , then consent 
should be sought from parents prior to birth as appropriate 
Sample card 
should be clearly 
marked ‘PRE -
TRANSFUSION’. 
Retain card and 
send to the 
laboratory with the 
routine day 5 
sample. 

Also refe r to 
Pathway 2 if born 
before 32 weeks 
 
 Admission 
sample taken 
(1 spot) Admission sample not taken 
e.g. due to emergency or lack of time 
to gain parental consent 
Baby not 
transfused Baby receives blood 
transfusion 
Offer routine 
screening da y 5 
for CHT, PKU, 
CF, SCD and 
MCADD 
 
Also refe r to 
Pathway 2 if 
born before 32 
weeks Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 38 of 50 
 Pathway 1:4 Repeat sample pathway [RSCH/ Brighton and Hove] 

Laboratory emails request for repeat sample to community 
midwifery team leader and informs child health record unit [CHRU] 
HV visits family. 
Explains reason why a 
repeat sample is required. 
Documents discussion and 
parental consent in PCHR. 
 
Remember that it is not 
possible to screen for CF 
after 56 days [8 weeks] . 
 
Brighton and Hove area: 
Arrange appointment in 
phlebotomy at RACH within 
3 working days. 
 
Mid Sussex area: 
The parent would contact 
PRH on 01444 441881 and 
ask for the paediatric nurse 
on bleep 6034 to arrange a 
time to take their baby to 
have the sample taken. 

Baby 28 days or under 
 
Repeat sample required 
because the first sample by 
midwifery or neonatal services 
was an avoidable repeat. 
Midwifery services to arrange repeat 
within 72 hours [3 days] of request. If 
the baby is still under care of 
neonat al/ paediatric team, they will 
be asked to take repeat sample. 
 
Explain reason for repeat to parents. 
Proceed with screening as per 
protocol. 
 
Repeat required – 
unavoidable repeat 

Health visitor’s responsibility 
to ensure all parents have 
received results and that 
these are documented in the 
PCHR. 
Repeat sample 
required for 
any reason 
 
Baby over 28 days 
 
CHRU, lab or midwifery team 
leader informs named health 
visitor that repeat is required Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 39 of 50 
 
Pathway 1:5 Movers -in pathway [includes arranging for samp le collection at RACH 
phlebotomy by health visitors] 

Give pre -test information [written and verbal]. The policy 
is to actively recommend screening. Remember that it is 
not possible to screen for CF after 8 weeks. 
 
Document discussion and parental consent / decline for 
screening in PCHR. 
 
Phlebotomy returns 
referral letter to HV via 
post. HV follows -up and 
arranges reappointment 
Baby newly moved into a rea and is under 1 year of age. [HV 
may be the first to identify family OR HV may be informed by 
CHRU] 
Within 10 working days of the HV being notified of new family, HV visits to ascertain 
whether baby has had screening elsewhere 
Baby has not 
had any 
screening 
Baby screened elsewhere but 
either: 
No written result available 
OR 
Not tested for all the conditions 
currently screened for locally 
If in doubt offer re -screen 
Baby screened 
elsewhere and 
written results 
available for all the 
conditions currently 
screened for locally 
Document in PCHR 
and send copy of 
results to CHRU to 
be recorded on 
database 
Screening accepted: 
Arrange appointment at phlebotomy, RACH within 3 
working days. 
 
HV faxes completed referral letter [see appendix G ] to 
level 5 phlebotomy 
 
Screening 
declined : 
 
Document in PCHR. 
 
Complete decline 
letter and copy to 
CHRU, laboratory 
and GP . 
 
Ensure parents have 
contact number in 
case they change 
their mind about 
testing 
 
Attend appointment 
 DNA appointment 
All results given back to 
parents via health visitor 
and documented in the 
personal child health 
record book. Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 40 of 50 
 
Appendix B : C ontacts 
 
Newborn Screening Laboratories [note: all sample cards are sent to St Thomas’s] 
 
LABORATORIES 
 
Laboratory for CF/ MACDD / PKU / CHT/ Additional metabolic disorders 
 
Newborn Screening Laboratory 
GSTS Pathology, 4th Floor North Wing, St Thomas Hospital, SE1 7EH 
Tel: 0207 188 1267 All queries 
Service Manager : 0207 188 5472 
 
Director: Rachel Carling 
Deputy: Rachelle Garstone 

Laboratory for Sickle Cell Disorders 
Sickle Cell Suspected or other haemoglobin suspected cases are dealt with by : 
Consultant: Dr David Rees 
Laboratory Operations Manager: Chris Lambert 
Red Cell Centre 
Kings College Hospital 
Denmark Hill 
LONDON SE5 9RS 
 
Tel 020 3299 9000 ext 32455 

Address to send the sample cards to [when using courier to transport specimens]: 
 
Newborn Bloodspot Screening lab 
C/O Central Specimen Reception 
5th Floor 
North wing 
St Thomas Hospital 
London 
SE1 7EH 

COURIER COLLECTION COMPANY 
CITY SPRINT 
 
Telephone: 01273 818 285 
 
Newborn screening laboratory results line [for all results and queries] 
 Phone: 0207 188 1267 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 41 of 50 
 Fax number: 02071881269 Gst-tr.selonbslab@nhs.net 
 
MATERNITY UNIT 
 
Shared email for newborn screening enquiries: 
 bsu-tr.newbornscreening@nhs.net 
 
Antenatal Screening C o-ordinator 
Karen Gregory 
karen.gregory12@nhs.net 
 Mobile: 07876 357 423 
Office: 01273 696955 X7477 
 
Antenatal Screening Support Midwives [BSUH] 
RSCH: Mobile: 07876 357 423 Office: 01273 696955 X7477 
 
PRH: Office: 01444 441881 X 65404 
 
Midwifery Liasion 
 
Community Midwives Office, RSCH 01273 664794 X 64361 
Bolney Ward, PRH: 01444 441881 X 68478 
 
Lead for Northgate [failsafe web programme] 
Alex Winstanley, Midwifery Team Leader 01273 664794 
Rebecca Elms, Midwifery Team Leader 01444 448608 
TMBU : Claire Hunt, Neonatal Matron 01273 696955 x 4377 
 
Child Health Bureau 
Brighton & Hove Children & Families Services, Child Records Unit – Office 3, Basement - E 
Block, Brighton General Hospital , Elm Grove, Brighton, BN2 3EW 
Telephone 01273 696011 Blood spot recording: X 4224 / 4227 
Community Health Centre , Bicentennial Building , Terminus Road , Chichester , PO19 8EZ 
Telephone 01243 793643 
Blood Sp ot Recording: Lucy White x 65158, General ext x 65160 
 
Cystic Fibrosis 
 
Regional CF team at Kings College Hospital: 
CF nurse specialist= Jo Dignan 020 3299 9000 ext 33342, bleep 876047 
Email : jo.dignan @nhs.net 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 42 of 50 
 CF team at Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital, Eastern Road, Brighton. 
 Level 4C, Cystic Fibrosis and Respiratory Nurse Specialists: 
 Jason Lenton 07810 550433 
 Phone: 01273 696955 Extension 62518 
 
CF Paediatrician 
Dr Paul Seddon [Consultant Paediatrician]: 
Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital, Brighton 01273 696955 
paul.seddon@nhs.net 
 
CF – Genetics Counselling: 
North East Thames Regional Genetics Service - Clinical Genetics Department, Great Ormond 
Street Hospital, Great Ormond Street, London, WC1N 3JH 
Telephone number: 020 7762 6845/ 6831/ 6856 
Fax number: 020 7813 8141 Email: gos-tr.clinicalgenetics@nhs.net 
 
IMDs – Inherited Metabolic Disorders 
[MCADD/ PKU/ MSUD/ HCU/ IVA/ GA1] 
 
South Thames Metabolic Service is based at the Evelina Children’s Hospital 
 Lead Consultant: Dr Mike Champion 
 Metabolic Nurse Specialist Tanya Gill 020 7188 0855 
 Email : paediatricmetabolicc ns@gstt.nhs.uk 

Cogenital Hypothyroidsim - CHT 
 
Dr Shankar Kanumakala [Consultant Paediatrician – Endocrinology] 
Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital, Brighton 
01273 696955 ext 62341 
s.kanumakala@nhs.net 
 
Haemoglobinopathy [Sickle cell and thalassaemia] 
 
 Paediatrician 
 Dr Anne Davidson [Consultant Paediatrician - Haemoglobinopathy]: Royal 
 Alexandra Children’s Hospital, Bri ghton 01273 696955 X 62324 
 anne.davidson10@nhs.net 
 
 Health Visitor S pecialist [RSCH babies] 
 Hollingdean Childrens Centre, 8 Shenfiled Way, Brighton, BN1 7DY 
 linda.gardner@nhs.net rachael.chatterje@nhs.net and hilda.beckford@nhs.net 

Link Health Visitor Specialist [PRH - West Sussex babies] 
 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 43 of 50 
 Claire Auston 
Pound Hill Children and Family Centre 
Crawley Lane, Pound Hill, Crawley, RH10 7EB 
 
c.auston@nhs.net 
 
01293 227809 
07500 097442 

 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 44 of 50 
 APPENDIX C : Newborn bloodspot screening [see following page] 
Newborn bloodspot screening: Record of samples taken / sent 
 
Name of sample taken: 
 
Baby name /DOB / NHS no 
 
Use barcoded label where available Date taken 
Date posted Sample card serial number 
Location of post box 

 Taken: 

Posted: 
 
 Card serial no: 

Post box: 

 Taken: 

Posted: 
 
 Card serial no: 

Post box: 
 Taken: 

Posted: 
 
 Card serial no: 

Post box: 
 Taken: 

Posted: 
 
 Card serial no: 

Post box: 
 
 Taken: 

Posted: 
 
 Card serial no: 

Post box: 

 Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 45 of 50 
 RETURN to community midwifery office every week 
Appendix C – Patient Information Leaflet – Repeat Screening T est. 

Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 46 of 50 

Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 47 of 50 
 
Appendix D – Letter to inform health professionals of screening decline: 
Copy to GP, HV, CHRU, Screening Lab, CMW team leader. 

Private and Confidential 
 
TO 
 
<INSERT GP name> 
<INSERT GP address> 
 <Insert your address > 
<Insert your contact number> 

<INSERT date> 
 
DECLINE OF NEWBORN BLOOD SPOT SCREENING 
 
Dear <GP name> 
 
Re: <INSERT baby’s name> 
< INSERT baby’s NHS number 
<INSERT date of birth> 
<INSERT Baby’s last known address> 
 
I am writing to inform you that the parents of the child above have declined <all> <part, name tests declined> 
newborn blood spot screening. 
 
Newborn blood spot screening is offered to all babies up to one year of age and screens for the rare conditions 
listed below: 
 
Phenylketonuria 
Congenital hypothyroidism 
Sickle cell diseases 
Cystic fibrosis (can only be tested for babies up to 56 days of age) 
Medium -chain acyl -CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD) 
Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) 
Homocystinuria (pyridoxine unresponsive) (HCU) 
Isovaleric acidaemia (IVA) 
Glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1) 
 
We are providing this information so that a record of decline is entered onto the medical record and to make 
you aware should the child present with any symptoms of the conditions normally screened for. 
Although not as satisfactory, screening for all conditions except cystic fibrosis would be available up to one 
year old, if the parents should change their minds 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
<INSERT signature > 
<Insert your printed name and job title > 
 
CC: Health Visitor <INSERT HV name> 
 Child Health Record Unit 
 Copy to maternal notes 
 
Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 48 of 50 
 
Appendix E Parental Decline Form 
 National Newborn Bloodspot Screening Programme 
Parental Decline Form 

I have been informed about the National Newborn Bloodspot Screening Programme and 
understand why the screening is recommended and what medical conditions are screened 
for. 
 
I have had the opportunity to discuss the newborn screen with 
 
----------------------------------------------------------- (name) 
 
------------------------------------------------------------ (profession) and all of my questions have 
been answered to my satisfaction. 
 
Please confirm below: 
I do not want my baby to have a blood spot test to screen for the following conditions 
which, if undiagnosed, could in some cases result in serious health problems, permanent 
disability or death: Phenylketonuria, Hypothyroidism, MCADD, Sickle Cell disease and Cystic 
Fibrosis (if under 8 weeks of age ), maple syrup urine disease (MSUD), homocystinuria 
(pyridoxine unresponsive) (HCU), isovaleric acidaemia (IVA), glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1) 
 
Signed ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Date ---------------------------------------------------- 
 
C.C. G.P, H.V. records, Child record unit 
SEND COMPLETED SAMPLE CARD TO LABORATORY 

Parent/Carer ---------------------------- ----------------------------------------------- 
 
Baby -------------------------------------------------------- ---------------- ----------- 
 
Baby’s DOB -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Baby’s NHS number ---------------------------------------------------------------- 
Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 49 of 50 
 
Surname 
Fornames
DDMMYY
Postcode SEX [√]Is the baby in 
hospital [√] NHS
Comments [family history e.g. Mother's carrier status 
[Antenatal HBO code, HBO outcome code]: Temporary address
Name of person taking sample [PRINT] DATE OF 
SPECIMEN
DDMMYY
Is this a 
repeat [√]
YES NO
If yes, current hospital and ward:YES NO If yes, date 
of last 
transfusion DDMMYYHas the baby 
had a blood 
transfusion [√] YES NONEWBORN SCREENING BLOOD SPOT TEST
GEST ……………………
…………….…..….. /40
Rank ……
…….. /Ethnic 
CodeBaby's NHS No
M F Home 
address
GP Practice Name
Mother's NHS number Mother's DOBMother's full nameBaby's DOB
Birth weight [g]
GP address
Parent phone no.
Alternative surname
Tel no of person taking sample Hospital of birthMaternity code RXHGP practice code
 
Appendix: F HV Referral Form t o Paediatric Phlebotom y 
 
 To the Phlebotomy Department, ROYAL ALEXANDRA CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL 
 I would like to refer the following client for a repeat bloodspot screening due to: 
 
 Transfer in under 1 year old (no evidence of previous result) Post transfusion sample 
 Lab. Request – inconclusive result Other –please state below 
 Repeat due to prematurity – born before 35+2 wks. ………………………………………… 
 Health Visitor to complete this form clearly in block capitals: 

 Name of HV [PRINT] ………………………..…………………………………………… HV signature………………………………… 
 HV Based at ………………………..……………………………………………………………………………………….…………….… 
 HV Telephone………………………………………………………….. H.V. Fax no..……………………………………………… 
 Date of referral ………………………………………………..………………………… 
 To make appointment; Telephone 01273 696955 X 2474 and fax completed 
 form to 01273 523120 FAO Phlebotomists, Level 5, RACH APPOINTMENT FOR BLOOD SPOT TEST 
DATE……………………………………….……………………… ………………………… TIME…………………………………..…… Newborn Blood Spot Screening (RSCH PRH only ) MP079 
 
University Sussex Hospital NHS Trust East Page 50 of 50 
 Appendix G : Flow Chart: Performance Management Of Avoidable Repeats 

 First avoidable repeat 
Not to undertake further sampling until: 
• Has seen team leader / line manager to discuss errors 
• Has completed the elearning newborn screening module 
and confirmed with manager that this has been 
completed 
Next ten samples to be checked for data completeness and 
signed off by a second checker. If necessary the samples must 
be brought back to the hospital for re -checking. 
If the second checker considers that the bloodspots might be 
rejected by the lab for being insufficient - the card must still 
be sent to the lab but consider either taking a further sample 
taken OR follow up with the laboratory to ensure sample is 
sufficient 
 
Not to undertake further sampling until: 
• Discussion with supervisor / line manager 
• One-to-one training session with 
Antenatal Screening Co -ordinator Further avoidable repeat sample taken within 3 
months from date of last avoidable repeat Subsequent 
avoidable repeat: 
 
Total of 2 avoidable 
repeats within a 3 
month period 
 
or 
 
Total of 4 avoidable 
repeats within a 12 
month period Sample taker informed by team leader / line manager and advised as to why the sample 
required repeating. Asked to reflect on practice and make changes accordingly . 

No further 
avoidable 
repeat 
samples 
within the 
following 3 
months 
Further avoidable repeat sample taken within 3 
months from last avoidable repeat Start 
pathway 
again at 
next 
avoidable 
repeat 
sample 
• Not to undertake any further blo odspot sampling 
• Discussion with both line manager/ supervisor and ASC. Only in exceptional 
circumstances will staff member be allowed to sample again 
• To consider redeployment to an area where newborn blood spot sampling is 
not a part of the role [i.e. transfer from the community and work in hospital 
setting] OR period of supervised practice