# Extracted from: UHSx Perineal Trauma & Repair Guideline.pdf
# Guideline ID: uhsx-perineal-trauma-repair-guideline
# Content length: 53049 characters
# Processing date: 1750066902.260955

CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 1 of 29 Please note, IF DOCUMENT IS PRIN TED, IT MAY BECOME OUT OF DATE 
 
TRUST CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
 
Perineal Trauma & Repair 

Overview 
 
This guideline aims to provide guidance on the OASI care bundle and benefits of perineal warming, 
on the recognition, classification and appropriate repair of perineal trauma, and the management of 
wound infection/dehiscence. 
 
This guideline applies to all staff involved with assessment and repair of perineal trauma following 
childbirth. It covers: 
 
• Assessing trauma 
• Training and supervision 
• Principles of repair 
• OASI care bundle and perineal 
warming 
• Suture material 
• Suture technique • Analgesia 
• Aftercare 
• Referral pathways 
• Record keeping 
• Perineal wound infection/dehiscence 

Owner Clinical Director 
Author/Further information Lorna Gisborne & Franciska Ambrus 
Pelvic Health Midwives 
Guideline version v1.0 
Related policies None 
Related documents SRH&WH: Care of Women and people in Labour, 
Operative Vaginal Birth, Female Genital Mutilation 
Shoulder Dystocia, Obstetric Haemorrhage, 
Postnatal Care. 
PRH&RSCH: Shoulder Dystocia, Obstetric 
Haemorrhage, Care of women/people in labour, 
Provision and schedule of postnatal care, Female 
Genital Mutilation, Assisted Vaginal Birth. 
Standards RCOG (2015) Green -top guideline 29 
Management of 3rd and 4th Degree Tears 
The OASI2 study | RCOG 
Local SOP for Swabs, needle & instrument counts CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 2 of 29 for invasive procedures in obstetric settings 
(outside of theatre) (Legacy West) 
Superseded documents CG1131 Perineal Trauma and Repair 
MP054 Perineal Trauma Repair 
Review due March 2027 
Date uploaded 4th December 2024 
 
Approval 
JOGG Date approved 20th March 2024 
Women & Children’s Clinical Effectiveness 
Meeting Date approved 18th April 2024 
Medicines Governance Committee Date approved 8th November 2024 
Consultation 
Antimicrobial Stewardship Group Date approved 7th October 2024 
Ratification 
Clinical Document Approval Group Date approved 29th November 2024 
 
 CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 3 of 29 Table of Contents 
 
1.0 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 4 
2.0 Definitions and abbreviations used in this document ................................ ................... 4 
3.0 Duties and responsibilities ................................ ................................ .......................... 4 
4.0 Background ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 4 
5.0 Prevention of obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASI) and the OASI care bundle ........ 5 
5.1 Elements of the OASI Care Bundle ................................ ................................ ............. 6 
6.0 Perineal repair and training ................................ ................................ ......................... 9 
7.0 Classification of perineal tears ................................ ................................ .................... 9 
8.0 Assessing perineal trauma ................................ ................................ ........................ 10 
9.0 First- and second -degree tears and episiotomies ................................ ...................... 11 
9.1 Preparing the woman or birthing person for the procedure. ................................ ....... 11 
9.2 Equipment ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 11 
9.3 Procedure preparation ................................ ................................ .............................. 11 
9.4 Suture material and technique ................................ ................................ .................. 12 
10.0 The management of labial and clitoral tears ................................ .............................. 13 
11.0 Third - and fourth -degree tears (OASI) ................................ ................................ ....... 13 
11.1 Antibiotics ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 15 
12.0 Post-repair for 3rd- and 4th- degree tears ................................ ................................ ... 15 
12.1 Referral and follow -up ................................ ................................ ............................... 16 
12.2 Prognosis and future births ................................ ................................ ....................... 17 
13.0 Analgesia and laxatives ................................ ................................ ............................ 17 
14.0 Record keeping ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 18 
14.1 Documentation of consent, repair and post -care ................................ ....................... 18 
14.2 Documentation for OASI Care Bundle purposes ................................ ....................... 18 
15.0 Perineal wound dehiscence (breakdown) ................................ ................................ .. 18 
16.0 Incident reporting ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 19 
17.0 Monitoring ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 19 
Appendix 1: Images of manual perineal protection (RCOG 2017) ................................ ........ 20 
Appendix 2: Repair of obstetric anal sphincter injury (OASI) proforma ................................ . 22 
Appendix 3: Information for women and birthing people (RCOG) ................................ ......... 23 
Appendix 4: OASI care bundle information for women and birthing people .......................... 23 
Appendix 5: Referral to perineal tears clinic ................................ ................................ ......... 24 
Appendix 6: 60 -degree mediolateral episiotomy diagram (RCOG 2020) ............................... 25 
Appendix 7: Guideline version control log ................................ ................................ ............. 26 
Appendix 8: Due regard assessment tool ................................ ................................ ............. 27 
Appendix 9: Template dissemination, implementation and access plan ................................ 28 
Appendix 10: Additional guidance and information ................................ ............................... 29 
 
 CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 4 of 29 
Perineal Trauma & Repair 
1.0 Introduction 
This policy aims to provide guidance on the OASI care bundle and benefits of perineal 
warming, on the recognition, classification and appropriate repair of perineal trauma, and the 
management of wound infection/dehiscence. 
2.0 Definitions and abbreviations used in this document 
EAS External Anal Scanning EAUS Endoanal Ultrasound Scanning 
FGM Female genital mutilation MAU Maternity Assessment Unit 
MPP Manual Perineal Protection OASI Obstetric Anal Sphincter Injury 
RCOG Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists TNA Training Needs Analysis 
VBAC Vaginal birth after caesarean section 
3.0 Duties and responsibilities 
All staff working in the 
Trust • To access, read, understand and follow this guideline . 
• To use their professional judgement in application of this 
guideline . 
Managers • To ensure the guideline is reviewed three yearly and aligns with 
national standards. 
• To ensure the guideline is accessible to all relevant staff. 
4.0 Background 
In England, the reported rate of detected obstetric anal sphincter injury (OASI) among 
primiparous women and birthing people tripled over a ten -year period from 1.8% in 2000 to 
5.9% in 2014. According to the 2019 clinical report from the National Maternity Perinatal 
Audit (NMPA), the overall incidence of detected OASI in Great Britain between 2016 and 
2017 was 3.5% (range 1.6 -7.5%). Although this increase is primarily associated with 
improved detection at the time of birth Gurol -Urganci, et al (2013), some tears continue to be 
undiagnosed, leading to a greater likelihood of developing anal and urinary incontinence 
symptoms, which can have a devastating impact on quality of life. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 5 of 29 The main risk factor for anal incontinence amongst childbearing women and birthing people 
is OASI. A systematic review demonstrated a wide variation in the prevalence (2.2 —36.7%) 
of anal incontinence in the short term, which can get worse over time. 
Short -term complications of OASI include pain, bleeding and infection, which can result in 
urinary retention and constipation. These complications can lead to multiple attendances in 
hospital or community services. Long -term complications of OASI include anal incontinence 
(Faeces and Flatus), chronic pain, dyspareunia and urinary incontinence. The social, 
psychological, emotional consequences of associated anal incontinence is a hidden taboo 
which carries considerable morbidity Keighley et al (2016). In some circumstances, the 
trauma of sustaining an OASI and its complications affects subsequent births where a 
vaginal birth is forsaken for an elective caesarean, with associated additional costs. 
Medico -legally, the total value of negligence claims relating to OASI during 2000 - 2010 was 
estimated to be £31.2 million. The leading cause is misdiagnosing a tear. The specific 
negligent acts related to failure to consider a caesarean section, failure to perform or extend 
an episiotomy, failure to diagnose the true extent and grade of the injury, inadequacy of 
repair and failure to perform a repair. 
5.0 Prevention of obstetric anal sphincter injuries ( OASI ) and the OASI care 
bundle 
There is not a clear predictive method for OASI, however the following risk factors have 
been shown to have a higher chance of sustaining OASI. 
Risk factors of OASI: 
• Asian Ethnicity birthing in high income countries only 
• Nulliparity or first vaginal birth after caesarean birth 
• Birth weight greater than 4kg 
• Shoulder Dystocia 
• Occipito -posterior position 
• Prolonged second stage of labour 
• Instrumental birth 
• Previous OASI CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 6 of 29 5.1 Elements of the OASI Care Bundle 
There are four key elements: 
 
1. Inform the pregnant woman or birthing person about OASI and what steps can 
be taken to minimize their risk. 
2. When indicated, episiotomy should be performed mediolaterally at a 60-degree 
angle at crowning. 
3. Documented use of manual perineal protection (MPP) : 
- For spontaneous births , manual protection should be used unless the 
woman or person objects, or their chosen position for birth doesn’t 
allow MPP. 
- For assisted births , manual perineal protection should be used. 
4. 4. Following birth, the perineum should be examined and any tears graded 
according to RCOG guidance. The examination should include a per rectum (PR) 
check even when the perineum appears intact and this should be documented on 
BadgerNet Maternity . 
 
1. Inform the woman or birthing person about OASI and what steps can be taken to 
minimise their risk 
All pregnant women and birthing people shoul d receive a notification from BadgerNet 
Maternity with a c opy of the OASI Care Bundle information leaflet from 34 weeks 
onwards. Perineal massage is included in this leaflet and the benefits discussed. 
Perineal massage reduces OASI risk, and the need for episiotomy as well as improving 
wound healing and decreasing pain post repair Hajela (2021) Abedelkim (2020). If the 
OASI care bundle has been implemented fully, it can reduce the chances of OASI by 
20% ref OASI2. 
 
If the pregnant woman or birthing person has not received information about the OASI 
Care Bundle before the start of their labour, the clinician should explain the care bundle 
at this time and address any questions or concerns the pregnant woman or birthing 
person may have. Few instances where it may not be possible to use MPP is when the 
pregnant woman or birthing person are labouring in water or, on a birthing stool (which 
itself can increase the risk of OASI) or if in a birthing position which has been adopted 
does not allow the midwife to place hands on the perineum. 
Perineal warming: Recommend to the pregnant woman or birthing person that a warm 
compress during the second stage of labour helps the perineal tissue to stretch and 
reduces perineal discomfort. It can also help increase the incidence of intact Perineum 
and reduces the incidence of perineal trauma. G Magona et al (2019). CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 7 of 29 The warm compress can be a swab or sanitary towel in warm tap water placed against 
the perineum, changed at regular intervals if soiled or cooled. The warm compresses 
should be used up until the point that MPP should be carried out to ensure adequate 
visualisation of the perineum. 
2. When indicated, episiotomy should be performed mediolaterally at a 60 -degree 
angle at crowning 
There is little evidence to support the routine use of episiotomy for an unassisted birth; 
however, there is some evidence that episiotomy reduces the risk of OASI during 
instrumental birth. Episiotomy should never be a ‘routine’ intervention to reduce the risk 
of OASI and should only be carried out after clinical assessment of the fetal and 
maternal risks. The indication for an episiotomy should be recorded in the pregnant 
woman or birthing person ’s BadgerNet Maternity . 
 
Episiotomy is indicated in cases of fetal distress, instrumental birth . An episiotomy 
should be used for all term forceps and ventouse/kiwi births in nulliparous women and 
birthing people. In multiparous women and birthing people, an episiotomy should also 
be used for all term forceps births but may occasionally be omitted with a ventouse birth 
after considering and discussing the woman or birthing person’s risk of sustaining an 
OASI. Use MPP for all instrumental births , even after an episiotomy has been 
performed. 
When a severe perineal tear is judged to be imminent, feel digitally for remaining 
space/stretch and observe whether blood flow to the perineum appears 
significantly reduced (ie pallor of the stretched skin). 
If an episiotomy is indicated, it should be performed at a 60-degree angle on the 
pregnant woman or birthing person ’s right as the baby’s head is crowning. 
Evidence suggests that this will reduce the risk of OASI. All midwives and obstetricians 
should be competent in performing this intervention. Studies have demonstrated that a 
significant proportion of ‘mediolateral’ episiotomies are performed at an inappropriately 
acute angle, perhaps due to the distorted anatomy at the time of crowning. To facilitate 
achievement of the 60-degree angle, such as the use of scissors that indicate the 
correct episiotomy angle, have been shown to be effective and may be considered. 
Please see Appendix 6 for a diagram of the correct procedure for 60 -degree 
mediolateral episiotomy. 
Appropriate anaesthetic should be used prior to performing episiotomy. See section 9.3 
for further information on dosage and administration . 
It is important that the clinician communicates the indication(s) for which an episiotomy 
is being considered with the pregnant woman or birthing person and gains their consent 
before performing the procedure. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 8 of 29 3. Documented use of manual perineal protection (MPP) 
Manual perineal protection (MPP) is a bimanual technique that requires support of the 
posterior fourchette with one hand and cupping of the fetal head with the other to 
prevent the head coming out with great force as it progresses at crowning (The Finnish 
Grip, see Appendix 1 for details on technique). It can be performed in most birthing 
positions that the pregnant woman or birthing person feels comfortable in. Support the 
pregnant woman or birthing person to adopt a position which decreases the chance of a 
deep tear such as all fours, kneeling or left lateral. 
Important principles are: 
a. Coaching the pregnant woman or birthing person to avoid sudden expulsive 
pushing. 
b. Maintaining gradual progress during the birth of the head . 
c. No undue downward traction during birth of the shoulders . 
d. Support the perineum throughout the whole birth . 
 
Great care should be taken during the birth of the shoulders and MPP should be 
continued as the shoulders are born. Depending on the woman or birthing person’s 
position , the posterior shoulder may deliver first. The baby’s body should be born 
following the direction of the curve of Carus using maternal or birthing parent effort and 
gentle axial traction, if needed, avoiding undue downward traction. Video link Manual 
perineal protection in left lateral 
Note: Anyone who experienced an OASI -type tear in a previous pregnancy, and is 
planning a vaginal birth, should ideally be supported at the time of birth by an 
experienced member of staff (band 6 or above) confident in the use of the OASI2 care 
bundle. 
4. Perineal examination, including a per rectum examination, carried out following 
all vaginal births 
Following birth, a systematic examination of the perineum should be carried out. It is 
recommended that a competent clinician assess the perineum following every vaginal 
birth. This assessment must include a rectal examination as recommended by NICE 
and should be carried out even when the perineum appears intact. This assessment 
should include an examination of the ano -rectum and vagina using the pill -rolling 
technique. The pill -rolling technique is to feel for the 'tone and bulk' of the sphincters. 
Note that the woman or birthing person’s ability to squeeze is affected by whether they 
have an epidural, but the bulk can just feel thinner anteriorly if an OASI sustained 
('thinner at 12 o clock' than at '9' and '3'). 
Any tears should be classified according to the RCOG as stated in section 7.0 and 
documented on BadgerNet Maternity including a pictogram. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 9 of 29 If a woman or birthing person declines examination of the perineum following vaginal 
birth, then the midwife must discuss fully the implications of undiagnosed perineal 
trauma especially 3rd of 4th degree tears. This discussion must be documented on 
BadgerNet Maternity . Please highlight, that an examination does not mean that suturing 
must take place, but it will give the woman or birthing person the tools to make an 
informed choice regarding suturing, once the extent of the trauma is identified. 
6.0 Perineal repair and training 
Qualified midwives and obstetric medical staff can perform perineal repair . Training for 
midwives and doctors is evidenced in the Training Needs Analysis (TNA). 
7.0 Classification of perineal tears 
 
Buttonhole tear - Tear involves the anal mucosa with intact sphincter. If not recognised and 
adequately repaired, there is risk of ano -vaginal fistula. 
CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 10 of 29 8.0 Assessing perineal trauma 
Assessment of perineal trauma should be carried out immediately after completion of the 
third stage (as above). 
Before assessing genital trauma, healthcare professionals should: 
• Explain to the woman or birthing person what they plan to do and why . 
• Offer inhalational analgesia if required and regional anesthesia is not already 
being used. 
• Ensure good lighting. 
• Position the woman or birthing person so that they are comfortable and so that the 
genital structures can be seen clearly. This would normally be in the lithotomy 
position, in a homebirth, a position which facilitates the best angle for 
visuali sation. 
 
Correct diagnosis and treatment of third/fourth degree tears can improve outcomes for 
women and birthing people . A rectal examination following all vaginal births and before 
commencing the repair is recommended and should be offered and documented. This is 
recommended as obstetric anal sphincter injury or isolated rectal buttonhole tears are 
possible with an intact perineum. Gloves should be changed prior to and following the rectal 
examination. 
If the midwife is in doubt about the extent of a tear, they should seek the advice of the labour 
ward co -ordinator, and the registrar will be asked to review if necessary. All skin tears that 
extend to the anal margin should be assessed by the obstetric registrar, to ensure that a 
third-degree tear is not missed. This review, including timing, must be documented on 
BadgerNet Maternity . 
If there is any doubt in the grade of perineal trauma then the tear should be treated as a 
higher rather than a lower degree. 
Any woman or birthing person who is suspected to have a third - or fourth -degree tear should 
have careful examination of the perineum by a senior obstetrician. 
All perineal repairs should be performed as soon as possible to minimise the risk of infection 
and bleeding. The reason for any delay (more than 2 hours from the end of the 3rd stage) 
should be documented on BadgerNet Maternity . Repair of third - and fourth -degree tears 
should be performed in the operating theatre under regional or general anaesthesia, with 
good lighting and appropriate instruments. Repair of third -degree tears in the labour room 
may be performed in certain circumstances after discussion with a senior obstetrician 
(RCOG 2015) but this should not be the norm. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 11 of 29 For women and birthing people who birth in water, any tears actively bleeding should be 
sutured as soon as possible. For tears not -actively bleeding, repair may be delay ed for one 
hour if this is deemed appropriate. 
9.0 First- and second -degree tears and episiotomies 
Only tears confined to the skin may be left unsutured. Labial tears which are deep, bleeding 
or bilateral, should be sutured. There is no evidence to suggest that leaving second -degree 
tears unsutured is of any long -term benefit. 
All tears where there has been a concern regarding previous female genital mutilation 
(FGM) must be examined and repaired by an experienced obstetric trainee or consultant 
owing to the possibility of distorted anatomy. 
9.1 Preparing the woman or birthing person for the procedure. 
Explain the procedure and gain verbal consent. Document accordingly. 
If the woman or birthing person declines suturing, the reason should be clearly documented 
along with the advice given on BadgerNet Maternity . In anything more than a first -degree 
tear, the labour ward co -ordinator and/or obstetric registrar should see the woman or birthing 
person to discuss the benefits of suturing. 
9.2 Equipment 
A suture trolley/sterile area (if at home) should be pre pared containing the following: 
• Suture pack 
• Sterile Gloves 
• 20 ml syringe 
• Green needle 
• 2/0 rapidly absorbable suture (polyglactin suture such as Covidien Velosorb) 
• 20ml 1% lidocaine 
• Warm water 
• Diclofenac 100mg suppository (if no contraindications) 
• Swabs 
9.3 Procedure preparation 
Swabs, needles and instruments should be counted and verified by 2 health professionals 
(one must be the operator) and documented prior to commencement of the suturing ( SRH & 
WH see P19005 LocSOP for Obstetric Procedural Counts.pdf ). CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 12 of 29 The woman or birthing person should be made comfortable for suturing in an appropriate 
position; this may be in lithotomy or on the edge of the bed. The woman or birthing person 
could maintain skin -to-skin contact with their baby throughout the procedure, or once they 
feel comfortable, with support from their birthing partner. It is recommended that the partner 
stays in the room whilst suturing takes place in case the woman or birthing person wishes 
for the baby to be repositioned. 
Once the woman or birthing person is ready, the perineal area should be cleaned with warm 
water, and sterile towels used to create a sterile field. Tampons should not be used outside 
of the theatres . No swabs should be inserted into the vagina. 
If the woman or birthing person does not have an epidural, the area should then be 
infiltrated with 1% lidocaine. Up to 20mls 1% lidocaine total may be used (including for 
episiotomy). If an epidural is in situ, a top up may be required. 
9.4 Suture material and technique 
The use of rapidly absorbable synthetic material (polyglactin suture such as Covidien 
Velosorb) or Vicryl ™ Rapide (Ethicon) for the repair of perineal trauma is associated with 
less perineal pain, lower analgesic use, lower risk of dehiscence and re -suturing when 
compared to PDS suture material. 
The tensile strength of 2/0 polyglactin suture such as Covidien Velosorb or Vicryl ™ Rapide 
(Ethicon) is reduced between 10 -14 days and fully absorbed by 35 -42 days. 
The apex of the tear should be identified visually, and the first suture inserted 1 cm above 
this. The repair should then proceed with a continuous suture to the posterior vaginal wall. 
There is no need to knot this suture at the fourchette since a single continuous suture 
causes less pain than leaving a knot at the fourchette and star ting again in the deep tissues. 
The perineal muscle should then be repaired using a continuous suture. These sutures 
should be continued to the fourchette, bringing the muscles into apposition. Again, there is 
no need to tie the suture off here but continue directly with the skin stitch which minimises 
pain. 
The skin should then be closed using a continuous subcuticular suture. Continuous 
subcuticular sutures are associated with less pain in the immediate post -partum period. The 
final knot should be an Aberdeen knot (because it requires very little suture material and 
hence minimises pain and scar formation) placed remotely from the fourchette since the 
fourchette is the most sensitive part. The skin suture should not be too tight or use sutures 
too close together, as this is associated with inc reasing the risk of dehiscence. 
On completion of the repair the vagina should be checked for complete haemostasis then 
the tampon removed if used in theatre. To highl ight a vaginal pack is in situ: CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 13 of 29 • An identifiable wristband stating ‘Vaginal Pack inserted’ is placed on the woman or 
birthing person’s arm. 
 
This wristband should be removed at the same time as the pack is removed. 
A digital rectal examination should be done to ensure that no sutures have penetrated the 
rectal mucosa . If sutures are felt, refer the woman or birthing person for an obstetric review 
– do not remove the sutures prior to this review. If penetrating sutures are confirmed by the 
obstetrician, then the sutures will need removing before re -suturing. 
Swabs, tampons, needles and instruments should be counted by 2 health professionals and 
documented at the end of the procedure ( SRH & WH as per P19005 LocSOP for Obstetric 
Procedural Counts.pdf ). 
10.0 The management of labial and clitoral tears 
If labial tears are bleeding, large or there is a likelihood of the labia fusing, repair with 3/0 
Covidien Velosorb or Vicryl ™ Rapide (Ethicon) is recommended. Good analgesia is 
required. The findings and management should be discussed with the woman or birthing 
person. 
Interrupted sutures may give a better cosmetic appearance. Consideration should be given 
to the aesthetic result and the woman or birthing person ’s body image. 
The area generally heals very well, so the minimum suturing required for haemostasis and 
tissue apposition should be done, with the use of Aberdeen knots to minimise size of knot 
and hence post -birth pain. 
11.0 Third- and fourth -degree tears (OASI ) 
• Written consent must be obtained prior to the repair (note: when consenting for 
operative vaginal birth, include information regarding potential perineal trauma 
and repair). 
• Both partner and baby should accompany the woman or birthing person to theatre 
in order to re -establish skin -to-skin contact as soon as possible and to offer the 
opportunity of an early breastfeed. The benefits of breast milk and uninterrupted 
skin-to-skin for the baby outweigh the historic practice of excluding partners and 
babies from theatre. The only exception is where there is a need of an emergency 
transfer due to haemorrhage or a general anaesthetic is required. 
• The obstetric consultant should be notified of all 3rd degree tears, unless the 
senior specialist trainee has been assessed as competent to undertake the repair 
unsupervised. 
• The obstetric consultant must attend for the repair of a 4th degree tear and repair 
must be in theatre. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 14 of 29 • Third degree tears can be repaired in the labour room if this deemed acceptable 
by the senior obstetrician taking into account adequate analgesia, adequate 
lighting and acuity on labour ward: but this should not be the norm , as RCOG best 
practice is to repair all OASI in theatre. 
• A definite attempt should be made to recognise the internal anal sphincter, so that 
this can be repaired as a separate layer, if necessary. The use of interrupted 3/0 
PDS or 2/0 Polysorb (or equivalent) is recommended and should be repaired 
using the end -to-end technique with interrupted mattress sutures. The internal 
anal sphincter should not be repaired with an overlapping technique. Figure of 8 
sutures should be avoided because they are haemostatic in nature and may 
cause tissue ischaemia ( RCOG 2015 ). 
• The use of 3/0 PDS is recommended in this unit for repair of the external anal 
sphincter. Use of fine suture size such as 3 -0 PDS and 2 -0 Polysorb (or 
equivalent) may cause less irritation and discomfort. The only randomised 
controlled trial comparing braided and monofilament sutures reported no 
significant difference in morbidity from anal incontinence, perineal pain or suture 
migration with 12 months follow -up. 
• If the external anal sphincter is completely divided , an overlap technique should 
be considered. If the sphincter is not completely divided, there is insufficient 
evidence to recommend an overlap technique (which would require division of the 
remaining fibres), and an end-to-end repair should be used. 
• When obstetric anal sphincter repairs are being performed, burying of surgical 
knots beneath the superficial perineal muscles is recommended to prevent knot 
migration to the skin . Women and birthing people should be warned of the 
possibility of knot migration to the perineal surface, with long -acting and non -
absorbable suture materials . 
• In the event of a 4th degree tear, the rectal wall should be repaired in 1 layer using 
3-0 Polysorb or equivalent (RCOG 2015). 
• At the end of the repair a rectal and vaginal examination should be performed to 
ensure that the anorectal mucosa is intact and that no sutures have penetrated 
the wall. 
• 100 milligrams diclofenac should be administered rectally at the end of the 
procedure (contraindicated with asthma and with PPHs >1000ml) . Rectal 
paracetamol (1 gram) can be used as an alternative if this has not been given in 
the last 4 hours and the woman or birthing person has not already exceeded the 4 
grams daily dose. 
• The obstetric consultant should repair or assist in the repair of fourth degree 
perineal tear and may discuss the management with a consultant colorectal 
surgeon. A combined approach to repair may be appropriate. 
• All details regarding the repair should be clearly documented on BadgerNet 
Maternity by the obstetrician who performed the repair. The swab count, by two 
healthcare professionals, and estimated blood loss must be included. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 15 of 29 • An Incident reporting (Datix) form must be completed, and the reference number 
documented on the OASI proforma on BadgerNet Maternity . 
11.1 Antibiotics 
A minimum of 1 dose prophylactic IV antibiotics should be given at the time of the 
procedure . 
IV ANTIBIOTICS 
 Antibiotic Dose Rate 
First line Co-amoxiclav 1.2 grams 
STAT Penicillin 
allergy Cefuroxime + 
Metronidazole 1.5 grams 
500 milligrams 
Severe 
penicillin 
Allergy Clindamycin + 
Gentamicin 900 m illigrams 
240 m illigrams 
If known MRSA - add Teicoplanin 
 
If switch to oral antibiotics indicated: 
ORAL ANTIBIOTICS 
 Antibiotic Dose Rate 
First line Co-amoxiclav 625 milligrams TDS 
Penicillin 
allergy Cefalexin + 
Metronidazole* 500 milligrams 
400 milligrams TDS 
Severe 
penicillin 
Allergy Discuss with microbiology as clindamycin alone will not 
cover the gram -negative bacteria that could be 
implicated in these types of infections . 
• please note that metronidazole can taint the taste of breastmilk 
 
12.0 Post-repair for 3rd- and 4th- degree tears 
• Foley catheter should be inserted and remain in situ for 24 hours until the patient 
is mobile. 
• Consider a full blood count on day 1, depending on estimated blood loss and 
maternal condition. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 16 of 29 • Regular analgesia must be prescribed (usually ibuprofen 400 milligrams TDS and 
paracetamol 1 gram QDS (unless contra -indications). 
• High Fiber diet is recommended. 
• Macrogol s 1 Sachet taken 1 -3 times a day dissolved in 125 millilitres of water. 
There is no evidence for the use of bulking agents (eg Fybogel) routinely following 
3rd and 4th degree tears. Ideally the woman or birthing person should have a 
normal bowel movement before discharge from hospital, but if this doesn’t happen 
bowel action should be monitored and documented at each visit. 
• A senior clinician or Pelvic Health Midwife should see the woman or birthing 
person prior to discharge to explain the significance of the tear a nd follow up. The 
woman or birthing person should be given information regarding the nature of the 
injury and the importance of follow -up before they are discharged from hospital. 
The RCOG (2019) patient information leaflet ‘ Care of a third - or fourth -degree tear 
that occurred during childbirth (also known as obstetric anal sphincter injury – 
OASI ’ should be given. 
• The woman or birthing person’s GP is notified of the tear via the reports on 
BadgerNet Maternity , this relies on midwifery staff completing the birth documents 
and sending the report at the end of the process. 
• Information on pelvic floor exercises should be provided. Signposting to the LMNS 
Sussex website for further information and videos on the correct way to perform 
pelvic floor exercises. Pelvic floor exercises are lifelong exercise to promote good 
pelvic health and prevent pelvic organ prolapse throughout a woman and person’s 
life. The Fit for the Future booklet published by the Pelvic Obstetric and 
Gynaecological Physiotherapist should be given to the wom an or birthing person 
prior to discharge or it is available via BadgerNet Maternity . 
12.1 Referral and follow -up 
The doctor performing the repair should complete all relevant documentation on BadgerNet 
Maternity - Episiotomy, Tears and Perineal Trauma section with a filled pictogram of the 
tear/episiotomy; as well as the Perineal Repair Note . 
The health professional performing the OASI care bundle elements should complete the 
section under Episiotomy, Tear and Perineal Trauma section. 
The midwife assigned to the woman or birthing person should check that this has been 
documented. They should complete the Perineal Tears Clinic referral form via BadgerNet 
Maternity (the clinic pathway is outlined in appendix 5 ) and Datix prior to transfer to the 
postnatal ward. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 17 of 29 12.2 Prognosis and future births 
• Women and birthing people should be advised that the prognosis following repair 
is good, with 60 -80% asymptomatic at 12 m onths. Most women and people who 
remain symptomatic describe incontinence of flatus or faecal urgency. 
• All women and birthing people who sustained an OASI in a previous pregnancy 
should be counselled about the risk of developing anal incontinence or worsening 
symptoms with subsequent vaginal birth. 
• All women and birthing people who sustained an OASI in a previous pregnancy 
should be advised that there is no evidence to support the role of prophylactic 
episiotomy in subsequent vaginal births. 
• All women and birthing people who have sustained an OASI in a previous 
pregnancy and who are symptomatic or have abnormal endoanal ultrasonography 
and/or manometry should have the opportunity to discuss elective caesarean 
birth. 
• Women and birthing people with previous history of a 3rd or 4th degree tear require 
antenatal counselling by an obstetric consultant or senior registrar to agree a birth 
plan and discuss the risk of recurrence (the recurrence rate can be up to 20% 
depending on the extent of the previous tear). Post birth and prior to any repair, 
perineal assessment including a digital rectal examination should be carried out 
by a competent midwife who is confident of perineal trauma classification, to 
exclude repeat obstetric anal sphincter injury, regardless of perineal trauma 
sustained. Women and birthing people who birth at home, are recommended to 
have a systematic examination of the perineum including PR examination. If the 
attending midwife is confident of perineal trauma classification then there is no 
need to transfer in to hospital providing there is no evidence of OASI. 
• The highest risk of recurrence of OASI is with subsequent forceps births . 
Accordingly, those caring for women and birthing people in labour who have had a 
previous OASI should make every attempt to avoid using the forceps to deliver the 
woman and birthing person unless absolutely necessary . If forceps are necessary 
the birth should be performed by an experienced operator, preferably a 
consultant. 
13.0 Analgesia and laxatives 
Administration of 100 milligrams diclofenac rectally immediately following any degree of 
perineal repair should be strongly considered (diclofenac is contraindicated with asthma and 
should not be given if there has been a PPH >1000ml). If diclofenac 100 milligrams PR has 
been administered, ibuprofen should not commence until 18 hours later . 
IV paracetamol (1 gram) can be used as an alternative if there is a contraindication to 
diclofenac, if paracetamol has not been gi ven in the last 4 hours and the woman or birthing 
person has not already exceeded the 4 grams daily dose. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 18 of 29 Consider prescribing laxatives (Lactulose/ macrogols ) in all women and birthing people , 
especially women and birthing people on opiate based analgesia. All women and birthing 
people with 3/4th degree tears should be discharged with laxatives and encouraged to carry 
this on for the subsequent 4 weeks. 
14.0 Record keeping 
14.1 Documentation of consent, repair and post -care 
All details regarding any repair (including the time in lithotomy) should be clearly 
documented on BadgerNet Maternity including a pictogram . 
The swab count and estimated blood loss must be recorded. The swab count (both pre and 
post procedure) should be performed by two healthcare profess ionals (as per local 
guideline ). 
In a homebirth situation if only 1 midwife is present, they must carefully count and record the 
swabs. Information given regarding support following the repair should be documented 
within BadgerNet Maternity . 
Following any perineal suturing the healthcare professional should offer perineal inspection 
at each postnatal review and document if the woman or birthing person declines. If the 
woman or birthing person declines, the importance of regular review should be explained. 
Following readmission with perineal problems including infection, if still within the visiting 
period the community midwife must ensure the perineum is inspected at each visit as above. 
If they are no longer under community midwifery care, hospital staff caring for the woman or 
birthing person should inform the woman or birthing person ’s GP of any complications to 
ensure an effective aftercare plan is established. 
14.2 Documentation for OASI Care Bundle purposes 
All fields must be complet ed on BadgerNet Maternity including pictogram. 
15.0 Perineal wound dehiscence (breakdown) 
Perineal wound dehiscence occurs when healing of perineal trauma by the use of sutures 
has failed. The repaired perineum gapes and can become infected. The condition can result 
in significant physical and psychological problems if left untreated and so appropriate 
management is necessary to prevent this. There is currently insufficient evidence available 
to either support or refute secondary suturing for the management of broken -down perineal 
wounds following childbirth, but these should be a ssessed on an individual basis. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 19 of 29 In the first instance, look for signs of infection. In case of suspected perineal wound infection 
in community (oozing, foul discharge, redness, pain), women and birthing people should be 
directed to their local Triage/MAU for swab, doctor review and broad -spectrum antibiotics 
with minimal delay and explained rationale. If still an in -patient, the wound should be 
swabbed, assessed by a doctor and broad -spectrum antibiotics prescribed. 
Anti-inflammatory pain relief such as ibuprofen may help and is safe in breastfeeding. In the 
presence of active perineal infection, the wound cannot be re - sutured and will heal by 
secondary intention. 
16.0 Incident reporting 
For all women and birthing people who sustain a 3rd or 4th degree perineal tear, staff should 
complete a Datix incident form. 
All women and birthing people seen either through the maternity or gynecology service 
following perineal repair dehiscence or with anal incontinence must have a Datix incident 
form completed in order to monitor outcomes. 
Any postnatal readmissions, staff should complete a Datix incident form. 
17.0 Monitoring 
Organisations should audit the recognition of OASI and institute a guideline for repair and 
follow -up. Collected data should be audited against recom mended/locally agreed standards: 
• Incidence of OASI compared with reported incidence of less than 3% in the UK. 
• 100% evidence of adequate documentation of systematic examination of the 
vagina, perineum and rectum prior to suturing of OASI . 
• 100% of OASI repaired with documented evidence of type of analgesia, suture 
material, and method of repair and grade of operator. 
• 100% of women and people with OASI receiving postoperative advice as per local 
guideline and follow -up appointment. 
• 100% of doctors and midwives undertaking repair of OASI have attended 
recognised training courses. 
Issue being 
monitored Monitoring 
method Responsibility Frequency Reviewed by 
and actions 
arising 
followed up 
by 
Incidence of 3rd 
or 4th degree 
tears Case review Patient Safety 
Midwives On-going Maternity Q&S 
Meeting CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 20 of 29 APPENDIX 1: IMAGES OF MANUAL PERINEAL PROTECTION (RCOG 2017) 

CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 21 of 29 
 
CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 22 of 29 Appendix 2: Repair of obstetric anal sphincter injury (OASI) proforma 
Proforma can now be found on BadgerNet Maternity . The woman or birthing person’s GP is 
notified of the tear via the reports on BadgerNet Maternity , this relies on midwifery staff 
completing the birth documents and sending the report at the end of the process.CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 23 of 29 Appendix 3: Information for women and birthing people (RCOG) 
Click on link below to print leaflet for women and birthing people: 
• Care of a third - or fourth -degree tear that occurred during childbirth (also known as obstetric 
anal sphincter injury – OASI) (RCOG, 2019) 

Appendix 4: OASI care bundle information for women and birthing people 
• Obstetric Anal Sphincter Injury Information for expectant mothers 
 
 CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 24 of 29 Appendix 5: Referral to perineal tears clinic 
 
• All 3rd and 4th degree tears who birth at UH Sussex will need to be referred via BadgerNet 
Maternity to the Perineal Tears Clinic . 
• The clinic pathway will consist of a telephone consultation 3 weeks post birth from a 
physio therapist or pelvic health midwife. This telephone call will discuss recovery and 
pelvic floor exercises. 
• At 6-8 weeks, a face -to-face consultation with a physio therapist and/or pelvic health 
midwife will take place to assess perineal healing and to complete a pelvic floor 
assessment. 
• 3 months post birth a face-to-face appointment will be offered with a consultant and pelvic 
health midwife or physiotherapist, to assess healing +/ - endo anal scanning. 
Refer to the Perineal 
Tear Clinic :
In the 
antenatal 
period
Anyone who 
suffered 
previous OASI 
Immediate 
postpartum -before 
transfer to the ward
Any OASI patients or 
complex 
tears/episiotomies 
Community -
postnatal 
period
Perineal wound 
infection/
breakdown
Refer to MAU anyone 
with signs of 
infection* 
*MAU should see anyone with signs of sepsis/pain/foul/ discharge/bleeding/gaping for swab, Dr review, +/ - 
antibiotics after which refer for f/up – F2F in Perineal clinic . 
**Explain healing by secondary intention, consider extending visits to >10 days, email Pelvic Health 
Specialist Midwife if any concerns/advise needed. CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 25 of 29 Appendix 6: 60 -degree mediolateral episiotomy diagram ( RCOG 2020) 

CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 26 of 29 Appendix 7: Guideline version control log 
Change Log – Perineal Trauma & Repair 
 
Version Date Author(s) Comment 
1.0 Mar 2024 Lorna Gisborne & 
Franciska Ambrus 
Pelvic Health 
Midwives New UH Sussex Maternity guideline replacing: 
• CG1131 Perineal Trauma and Repair (Legacy 
West) 
• MP054 Perineal Trauma Repair (Legacy East) 
 
 CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 27 of 29 Appendix 8: Due regard assessment tool 
To be completed and attached to any guideline when submitted to the appropriate committee for 
consideration and approval. 
 Yes/No Comments 
1. Does the document/guidance affect one group less or 
more favourably than another on the basis of: 
 Age No 
 · Disability No 
 · Gender (Sex) No 
 · Gender Identity No 
 · Marriage and civil partnership No 
 · Pregnancy and maternity No 
 · Race (ethnicity, nationality, colour) No 
 · Religion or Belief No 
 · Sexual orientation, including lesbian, gay and bisexual 
people No 
2. Is there any evidence that some groups are affected 
differently and what is/are the evidence source(s)? No 
3. If you have identified potential discrimination, are there 
any exceptions valid, legal and/or justifiable? NA 
4. Is the impact of the document likely to be negative? No 
5. If so, can the impact be avoided? NA 
6. What alternative is there to achieving the intent of the 
document without the impact? NA 
7. Can we reduce the impact by taking different action 
and, if not, what, if any, are the reasons why the 
guideline should continue in its current form? NA 
8. Has the document been assessed to ensure service 
users, staff and other stakeholders are treated in line 
with Human Rights FREDA principles (fairness, respect, 
equality, dignity and autonomy)? Yes 
 
If you have identified a potential discriminatory impact of this guideline , please refer it to [Insert 
Name], together with any suggestions as to the action required to avoid/reduce this impact. For 
advice in respect of answering the above questions, please contact uhsussex.equality@nhs.net 
01273 664685). 

 CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 28 of 29 Appendix 9: T emplate dissemination, implementation and access plan 
 
To be completed and attached to any guideline when submitted to Corporate Governance for 
consideration and TMB approval. 
 
 Dissemination Plan Comments 
1. Identify: 
 Which members of staff or staff groups will be affected 
by this guideline ? Midwives, obstetricians 
 How will you confirm that they have received the 
guideline and understood its implications? Dissemination through the 
usual Communication 
channels and highlighted at 
Safety Huddles. 
 How have you linked the dissemination of the guideline 
with induction training, continuous professional 
development and clinical supervision as appropriate? All new members of staff 
shown where to access 
Clinical documents that are 
relevant to their area of 
practice. 
2. How and where will staff access the document (at 
operational level)? Accessed by staff via 
Sharepoint 
 
 Yes/No Comments 
3. Have you made any plans to remove 
old versions of the guideline or related 
documents from circulation? Yes N/A 
4. Have you ensured staff are aware the 
document is logged on the 
organisation’s register? Yes Dissemination plan includes 
notifying staff via email, safety 
noticeboards , Teams 
notification s and newsletter . 

 CLINICAL GUIDELINE 
Due for review: March 2027 
Name of Guideline : Perineal Trauma & Repair v1.0 
For use at: PRH, RSCH, SRH, WH 
 Page 29 of 29 Appendix 10: A dditional guidance and information 
1. DeRidder , C.A., Berkowitz, C.D., Hicks, R.A. and Laskey, A.L., 2013. Subconjunctival 
hemorrhages in infants and children: a sign of nonaccidental trauma. Pediatric emergency care, 
29(2), pp.222 -226. 
2. Li LH, Li N, Zhao JY, et al. Findings of perinatal ocular examination performed on 3573, healthy 
full-term newborns. Br J Ophthalmol. 2013; 97(5):588 –591 
3. Spitzer, S.G., Luorno, J. and Noël, L.P., 2005. Isolated subconjunctival hemorrhages in 
nonaccidental trauma. Journal of American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and 
Strabismus , 9(1), pp.53 -56. 
4. Parikh , Alomi O. et al "Prevalence and Causes of Subconjunctival Hemorrhage in 
Children." Pediatrics 146.1 MeetingAbstract (2020): 1-2. Web. 06 Jan. 2021. 
5. Pan Sussex Child protection and safeguarding procedures 
6. Royal College of Paediatrics and Child health Child Protection companion 2013, 
updated 2021.