# Extracted from: Uptodate - 2025 - Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas) Treatment overview - UpToDate.pdf
# Guideline ID: uptodate-2025-uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview-uptodate
# Content length: 107287 characters
# Processing date: 1740355611.3157916

Official reprint from UpToDate
www.uptodate.com © 2025 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview
INTRODUCTION
Uterine fibroids are very common in reproductive-age females. For some, they are entirely
asymptomatic. Moreover, since fibroids can grow, remain stable, and/or potentially regress
(during hypoestrogenic states such as menopause) [1,2], patients without symptoms should
be educated about the presence of fibroids and potential associated symptoms. However,
many patients will present with symptoms including abnormal uterine bleeding, pressure or
bulk symptoms, fertility issues, and/or pain that warrant treatment. These patients have a
variety of therapeutic options available to address their symptoms.
This topic will present an overview of the treatment options for fibroids, including expectant
management. Related topics on the clinical presentation, diagnosis, exclusion of malignancy,
and specific procedures for fibroids are presented separately.
COMMON SYMPTOMS FOR TREATMENT®
AUTHOR:Elizabeth A Stewart, MD
SECTION EDITOR:Robert L Barbieri, MD
DEPUTY EDITOR:Alana Chakrabarti, MD
All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our peer review process is complete.
Literature review current through: Jan 2025.
This topic last updated: Aug 26, 2024.
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Epidemiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and natural
history".)●
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Differentiating fibroids from uterine sarcomas".) ●
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Open abdominal myomectomy procedure".) ●
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Laparoscopic myomectomy and other laparoscopic
treatments".)●
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Hysteroscopic myomectomy and other transcervical
procedures".)●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 1/39There are four common symptom categories that are associated with uterine fibroids.
Patients can have one or multiple symptoms:
Each of these categories is reviewed in detail elsewhere. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas):
Epidemiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and natural history", section on 'Clinical features'.)
Clinicians should be aware that patients may not associate their symptoms with fibroids
because the symptoms appear unrelated to the disease or are so insidious in onset that they
attribute their symptoms to aging or other common non-fibroid problems [3,4]. For example,
a patient with a fibroid uterus, 20 gestational weeks in size, who has urinary frequency, back
pain, and early satiety may not be aware that these symptoms can be related to uterine
enlargement and a subserosal fibroid near the bladder. Another patient may have heavy
menstrual bleeding lasting for 12 days every month, but since fibroids run in families, the
patient may have been told by family members that this is normal menses [4]. For this group
of patients, education about symptoms, correlation between physical examination or
imaging and other anatomic landmarks, and correlation of uterine size with the gestational
week of pregnancy can be helpful since most patients have symptoms attributable to
increased uterine size with uterus enlargement equivalent to 12 weeks of gestation.
PRETREATMENT ASSESSM ENT
Before selecting a course of treatment, both clinical and laboratory investigations are
performed to exclude concomitant disease or serious sequelae of disease, such as anemia
resulting from heavy menstrual bleeding. Imaging studies may also be warranted,
particularly if surgical or interventional treatment requires additional understanding of the
anatomy and/or if there is increased suspicion of a uterine sarcoma (eg, peri- or
postmenopausal patients or patients with specific genetic syndromes) [5]. Patients at risk for
endometrial cancer should undergo endometrial biopsy.
The patient's desire for immediate or future childbearing is also assessed prior to choosing
any fibroid treatment as the therapies have differing impacts on fertility.Heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding ●
Bulk symptoms (abdominal protrusion, bowel or bladder dysfunction, early satiety) ●
Reproductive dysfunction (infertility or recurrent pregnancy loss) ●
Pain, including painful menses or nonmenstrual pain ●
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Epidemiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and natural
history", section on 'Diagnostic evaluation'.)●
(See "Overview of the evaluation of the endometrium for malignant or premalignant
disease".)●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 2/39PATIENTS NOT DESIRING FERTILITY
For patients who do not desire fertility, treatment is aimed at symptom reduction. We take a
stepwise approach through the treatments below until the symptoms are adequately
controlled. As there are limited comparative studies demonstrating superiority of one
treatment option over another, patient preference and shared decision-making are used to
create the optimal management strategy.
Isolated heavy menstrual bleeding — Heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB) is a common
presenting symptom in patients with fibroids. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas):
Epidemiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and natural history", section on 'Heavy or
prolonged menstrual bleeding'.)
First tier — First-tier treatment of HMB includes hysteroscopic fibroid resection, if the
fibroids are in an appropriate anatomic location, or medical treatment aimed at reducing
HMB for those with fibroids in locations not amenable to hysteroscopic resection.
Hysteroscopic resection of submucosal fibroids — For patients with HMB, the first
step is determining if there is a submucosal fibroid because of the safety and efficacy of
hysteroscopic myomectomy as a treatment [6]. Submucosal fibroids amenable to
hysteroscopic resection include International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) type 0, type 1, or type 2 (figure 1).
Hysteroscopic myomectomy is an outpatient procedure with rapid recovery, a low risk of
complications compared with abdominal procedures, rapid improvement in quality of
life, and low risk of reintervention for fibroids [7,8]. Moreover, it is safe for future
pregnancy, with virtually no risk for uterine rupture in subsequent pregnancy [9].
However, trial data comparing hysteroscopic resection with other treatments are sparse
[10], in part because of ethical concerns for randomly assigning a symptomatic patient
to observation, placebo, or more invasive surgery than necessary (eg, laparotomy) and
requirement of only intracavitary lesions for a purely hysteroscopic approach.
Initial hysteroscopic myomectomy leads to substantial quality-of-life improvement in
most patients [5]. Clinicians should be aware, however, that there is a lower risk of
complete resection with increasing size of the fibroid, particularly those greater than 5
cm in diameter and >50 percent extension into the myometrium (FIGO type 2) [11]. A
variant of hysteroscopic myomectomy is transcervical treatment with radiofrequency
ablation. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Laparoscopic myomectomy and other
laparoscopic treatments", section on 'Radiofrequency fibroid ablation'.)
Information specific to performing hysteroscopic myomectomy, including patient
evaluation, pretreatment, procedure technique, and outcomes, is presented elsewhere.23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 3/39(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Hysteroscopic myomectomy and other transcervical
procedures".)
Medical therapy — Patients with all other types of fibroids (ie, not exclusively
submucosal) who do not desire pregnancy are offered medical management to reduce
their HMB. First-tier agents for HMB do not reduce the fibroid size but improve the
bleeding parameters. Patients who also have bulk or pressure symptoms are directed to
treatment options that are considered second tier for HMB as these agents reduce
fibroid size as well. (See 'Bulk or pain symptoms with or without bleeding' below.)
For patients with fibroid-related HMB, the author offers the following treatments in the
order listed below. As direct comparator data are sparse, the treatment order considers
the efficacy, safety, tolerability, ease of use, ancillary benefits (eg, contraception), and
cost. However, patients and clinicians may reasonably elect to use these agents in a
different order based on patient preferences and other factors, such as desire for
contraceptive efficacy or local availability.
Estrogen-progestin contraceptives – Combined estrogen-progestin contraceptives
(oral contraceptive pills, vaginal ring, or transdermal patch) are the most common
medical therapy utilized by patients with HMB and fibroids, especially those who
desire contraception [12]. However, there is little high-quality evidence supporting this
practice [13]. As estrogen-progestin contraceptives provide a variety of health benefits
beyond contraception (including reduction of iron deficiency anemia, uterine cancer,
and ovarian cancer; a long clinical history of use; and are inexpensive and widely
available), many guidelines still recommend combined estrogen-progestin
contraceptives as first-line therapy [5,9,13-15]. The selection of oral pills, vaginal ring,
or transdermal patch is driven by patient preferences around dosing and frequency of
use. Patients must be appropriate candidates for exogenous estrogen use.●
(See "Combined estrogen-progestin oral contraceptives: Patient selection,
counseling, and use".)•
(See "Contraception: Hormonal contraceptive vaginal rings".) •
(See "Contraception: Transdermal contraceptive patches".) •
(See "Combined estrogen-progestin contraception: Side effects and health
concerns".)•
Progestin-releasing intrauterine devices (IUDs) – For patients who cannot use or do
not want estrogen-containing contraceptives, the levonorgestrel (LNG)-releasing IUDs
(LNG IUD) are the most effective progestin-only contraceptive for fibroid-related HMB,
although supporting data are mainly observational and less strong than for its use
with generic HMB [16-18]. Nonetheless, most guidelines support the use of LNG IUDs
as a first-line agent for fibroid-related HMB [5,9,13-15]. IUDs also provide highly●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 4/39Second tier — Effective second-tier medical treatments for fibroid-associated HMB are
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists and antagonists [13,24]. Uterine artery
embolization (UAE) is a minimally invasive treatment option that treats both bleeding and
bulk symptoms [25].
Despite evidence supporting use of the progesterone receptor modulators (PRM) ulipristal
acetate and mifepristone as daily medical therapy for fibroid-related bleeding, neither iseffective long-acting contraception. First, identifying patients with significant
submucosal fibroids is important since the risk of expulsion of the IUD is greater in
patients with fibroids that distort the endometrial cavity. Discussion of various IUDs,
candidates, and device selection are presented elsewhere.
(See "Intrauterine contraception: Background and device types".) •
(See "Intrauterine contraception: Candidates and device selection".) •
(See "Intrauterine contraception: Insertion and removal".) •
(See "Intrauterine contraception: Management of side effects and complications".) •
Tranexamic acid – Tranexamic acid is a nonhormonal oral medication that can be
taken during menses or during the heavy days of menses. It can be preferred by
patients who cannot or do not wish to use hormonal contraceptives or by those who
desire a treatment that is used only when symptoms are present. A systematic review
reported that it can be more effective than oral progestins [19], and small studies have
shown benefit in patients with fibroid-associated HMB [20,21]. Tranexamic acid is
available as an oral 1.3 gram dose given three times daily [22]. It is started with the
onset of HMB. (See "Abnormal uterine bleeding in nonpregnant reproductive-age
patients: Management", section on 'Patients with heavy bleeding' and "Abnormal
uterine bleeding in nonpregnant reproductive-age patients: Management", section on
'Tranexamic acid'.)●
High-dose oral progestins – High-dose oral progestins do not appear to be as
effective for treatment for fibroid-related HMB as the LNG IUD, although high-quality
data are limited. In one randomized trial of 60 patients with fibroid-related HMB, those
treated with the 52 mg LNG IUD compared with oral norethindrone acetate (NETA, 5
mg twice daily) had a greater decrease in menstrual blood loss from baseline (80 and
56 percent, respectively) at six months, as measured by visual blood scoring (VBS) [23].
   ●
Other progestin therapies (eg, progestin implants, progestin injections) also do not
appear to be as effective for fibroid-related HMB as the LNG IUD, although some
guidelines advise their use [5,13-16]. (See "Abnormal uterine bleeding in nonpregnant
reproductive-age patients: Management", section on 'Progestin-only therapies'.)23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 5/39currently available in most countries for fibroid treatment; in settings where these drugs
are available, use is restricted given potential for hepatic toxicity [26-29]. (See 'Treatments
not typically recommended' below.)
GnRH analogs — GnRH analogs, including antagonists and agonists, can reduce HMB
[24]. Agonists also significantly reduce fibroid volume but have potential adverse effects
that limit use.
For patients who do not have an adequate response to first-tier treatment, the author
prefers to initiate oral GnRH antagonist combinations (with low dose estrogen and
progestin), because they are orally dosed and generally better tolerated compared with
agonists, and then moves to a trial of depot GnRH agonists if the antagonist therapy is
not adequate to control symptoms. However, patients and clinicians who prefer to
initiate GnRH agonists may reasonably do so. In addition, GnRH agonists likely result in a
greater reduction in fibroid volume compared with GnRH antagonists.
GnRH antagonists – Oral GnRH antagonists are a relatively new generation of medical
therapy. Like GnRH agonists, these agents act centrally and are associated with
hypoestrogenic side effects, but they are available as oral formulations rather than
injections. GnRH antagonists are often formulated with low-dose steroidal add-back to
limit hypoestrogenic side effects, so separate add-back therapy is not required.●
Elagolix combination therapy – Elagolix, in combination with estradiol and
norethindrone (ie, elagolix-estradiol-norethindrone), was approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) in May 2020 for the treatment of fibroid-related HMB
for up to 24 months of use [30-32]. This preparation (commercial name Oriahnn) is
available as two co-packaged capsules: one contains elagolix 300 mg plus estradiol 1
mg plus norethindrone 0.5 mg to be taken in the morning, and the other contains
elagolix 300 mg alone to be taken in the evening.•
In two identical phase III trials comparing six months of elagolix plus hormonal add-
back therapy (elagolix 300 mg twice a day with daily estradiol 1 mg and
norethindrone acetate 0.5 mg) with placebo for patients with fibroid-related HMB,
more patients in the treatment arm met the primary endpoint (menstrual blood loss
of less than 80 mL during the final month of treatment and at least a 50 percent
reduction in menstrual blood loss from baseline to the final month) compared with
placebo (range 69 to 77 versus 9 to 10 percent) [33]. When data were analyzed
according to specific patient subgroups (eg, age, race, body mass index, fibroid
location and size), the proportion of responders was greater for patients in the
elagolix add-back arm compared with placebo in every subgroup [34]. Concomitant
adenomyosis does not appear to limit the effectiveness for fibroid-related HMB [35].
Sustained reduction of menstrual bleeding was also shown when the treatment was23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 6/39continued for an additional 6 months (total of 12 months) with 88 percent of
patients in the treatment arm meeting the primary endpoint [36].
During treatment with elagolix plus add-back, side effects were modest, including
hot flushes (7 percent), night sweats (3 percent), headache (5.5 percent), and nausea
(4 percent). Two patients developed liver transaminase levels more than three times
the upper limit of normal, resulting in one patient discontinuing treatment. Bone
mineral density was also affected; at the end of 12 months of treatment, bone
mineral density in the lumbar spine was reduced by 1.5 percent (median Z-score
0.8); however, patients regained some bone density when measured one year
following completion of treatment (improvement to reduction of 0.6 percent;
median Z-score 1.1). Similar trends were observed in total hip and femoral neck
bone density.
The benefit of add-back therapy is that it mitigates many of the hypoestrogenic side
effects of elagolix; however, the effect on fibroid volume reduction is also
attenuated.
Elagolix alone, without add-back therapy, has been demonstrated to improve
fibroid-related HMB and may be considered for patients with a contraindication to
add-back therapy; however, this use remains off-label and we do not use elagolix-
alone for this indication in our practice. In the randomized trials above, elagolix
alone compared with placebo resulted in meeting the primary endpoint in 77 to 84
percent of patients after 6 months and 89 percent of patients after 12 months of
therapy [33,36]. Furthermore, fibroid volume was reduced by 40 to 50 percent after
6 months, and an even greater reduction was noted after 12 months of therapy.
Common adverse events included night sweats and reductions in bone mineral
density (mean reduction of 4.8 percent at the end of 12 months of treatment, with
improvement to reduction of 2 percent one year following completion of treatment).
Low-dose elagolix (ie, 150 mg once daily) without add-back therapy has also been
described [37].
As ovulation suppression with elagolix plus add-back is variable, it should not be
considered a contraceptive [38,39].
Use of elagolix for endometriosis-related pain is presented separately. (See
"Endometriosis: Medical treatment of pelvic pain", section on 'GnRH antagonists'.)
Relugolix combination therapy – A combination tablet containing relugolix-
estradiol-norethindrone acetate (commercial name Myfembree) was approved by
the US FDA in May 2021 for the treatment of fibroid-related HMB for up to 24
months [40]. Each tablet contains relugolix 40 mg plus estradiol 1 mg plus•23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 7/39norethindrone acetate 0.5 mg in a single daily dose. Potential advantages of
relugolix are its once daily dosing and potential for greater reduction of pain and
bulk symptoms (compared with twice daily dosing of elagolix combination therapy).
In two identical phase III trials comparing 24 weeks of relugolix combination
therapy (40 mg of relugolix, 1 mg of estradiol, and 0.5 mg of norethindrone acetate),
delayed relugolix combination therapy (40 mg of relugolix monotherapy, followed by
relugolix combination therapy, each for 12 weeks), and placebo, more patients in the
relugolix treatment arms achieved the primary endpoint (menstrual blood loss of
less than 80 mL during the final month of treatment and at least a 50 percent
reduction in menstrual blood loss from baseline to the final month) compared with
placebo (71 to 80 percent versus 15 to 19 percent) [41]. In addition, combination
therapy decreased a number of other secondary endpoints (including anemia, bulk-
related symptoms, and uterine volume [reduction of approximately 12 to 15
percent; range -3.2 to -23 percent]) while preserving bone mineral density. In a
secondary analysis of these trials, quality-of-life measures (eg, emotional well-being,
sexual function) were also improved in the combination therapy group [42].
When data were analyzed according to specific patient subgroups (eg, age, race,
ethnicity, uterine volume, baseline menstrual blood loss age), the proportion of
responders was greater for patients in the relugolix combination therapy arm
compared with placebo in every subgroup [41]. Combination therapy also decreased
fibroid-associated pain [41,43]. Of the 277 patients in these trials with moderate to
severe pain, more patients treated with combination therapy compared with
placebo achieved minimal to no pain (45.2 versus 13.9 percent) [43]. For patients in
the combination therapy group, menstrual pain was reduced more than
nonmenstrual pain. In extension studies, patients using relugolix combination
therapy long term (up to two years) experienced similar improvements in menstrual
blood loss; no new safety concerns or changes in bone mineral density were
identified [44,45].
Hypersensitivity reactions (eg, anaphylaxis, urticaria, angioedema) have been
described [46].
Linzagolix – Linzagolix is an oral GnRH antagonist that is available in Europe for the
treatment of moderate to severe fibroid symptoms; it is not available in the United
States. Linzagolix is dispensed as a 100 mg or 200 mg once daily tablet and has the
option of being administered with or without add-back therapy [47]. The lower dose
(100 mg) aims for partial suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO)
axis where the higher dose (200 mg) aims for full suppression.•23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 8/39The use of GnRH analogs for the management of fibroid-related bulk or pain symptoms
is discussed in detail below. (See 'Bulk or pain symptoms with or without bleeding'
below.)In two identical phase III trials evaluating the efficacy and safety of linzagolix
therapy for the treatment of fibroid-related HMB, more patients treated with
linzagolix (with or without 1 mg estradiol and 0.5 mg norethisterone acetate add-
back therapy) met the primary endpoint (menstrual blood loss ≤ 80 mL and ≥ 50
percent reduction from baseline at 24 weeks) compared with placebo [48].
Specifically, for patients receiving placebo, 100 mg alone, 100 mg plus add-back, 200
mg alone, or 200 mg plus add-back, response rates were 29 to 35 percent, 56 to 57
percent, 66 to 77 percent, 71 to 77 percent, and 76 to 94 percent, respectively.
Patients receiving linzagolix alone (either dose) compared with linzagolix plus add-
back therapy had greater reductions in fibroid volume. In addition, fewer patients
receiving 100 mg (with or without add-back) and 200 mg with add-back experienced
hot flushes compared with those treated with 200 mg without add-back therapy.
Reductions in bone mineral density were dose dependent and ameliorated with add-
back therapy.  
GnRH agonists – GnRH agonists are primarily used as either preoperative therapy
(typically three to six months in duration) or as transitional therapy for patients in late
perimenopause as they move to menopause. For patients with fibroids and anemia
who are planning surgery for fibroids but have not responded adequately to iron-only
therapy, a short course of preoperative GnRH agonist treatment plus iron is an
established option [49].●
Goals of preoperative therapy can include induction of amenorrhea to improve anemia
and volume reduction to facilitate a less invasive procedure, such as allowing a vaginal
rather than an abdominal hysterectomy. Good quality data exist that GnRH agonists
decrease uterine and fibroid volume, increase hemoglobin, and improve perioperative
outcomes in patients undergoing hysterectomy and myomectomy [24]. However, side
effects must be weighed against benefits [5]. When used alone (ie, without hormonal
add-back treatment), the parenteral forms of GnRH agonists (one- and three-month
depot formulations given as an intramuscular injection) cause significant
hypoestrogenic side effects, including bone loss [50]. There are a variety of steroidal
and nonsteroidal add-back therapies that can limit these side effects and permit more
long-term use, but these are rarely used unless there are contraindications to surgical
or interventional therapies for the fibroids. Discussion of add-back therapy, based on
data from patients with endometriosis, is presented separately. (See "Endometriosis:
Long-term treatment with gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists".)23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 9/39Uterine artery embolization — For premenopausal patients who do not desire future
fertility, uterine fibroid embolization (UAE) is a minimally invasive option for
management of fibroid-related symptoms. Substantial randomized clinical trial data
support its efficacy, making it a second-tier treatment for patients who do not have
access to oral GnRH antagonists, and a third-tier treatment where those agents are
available [13,51].
Up to 90 percent of patients will report improved or resolved HMB symptoms after
treatment. When compared with hysterectomy or myomectomy, patients undergoing
UAE have a decreased risk of transfusion, a shortened hospital stay, less pain, and a
quicker return to work. However, following UAE, patients have more short-term
complications, unscheduled visits, and readmissions, but this may also represent bias
since UAE patients were typically discharged from the hospital earlier than those
undergoing surgery. Patients undergoing UAE compared with myomectomy
(laparoscopic, hysteroscopic, and abdominal) [52-54] and hysterectomy [55] may also
experience less favorable quality of life and worse symptom severity. This is discusse d in
more detail elsewhere. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment with uterine
artery embolization", section on 'Outcomes'.)
UAE is not intended for use in patients who desire optimization of future childbearing
and is generally avoided in postmenopausal patients (because of the concern of
mistakenly treating a uterine sarcoma). In addition, UAE may cause ovarian dysfunction
and a loss of ovarian reserve. These issues are presented in detail elsewhere. (See
"Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment with uterine artery embolization", section on
'Reproductive outcomes'.)
Third tier — Less invasive interventional therapies are available for patients who desire
less time away from work and/or uterine preservation. However, these procedures are not
intended to be used for patients who desire optimization of future pregnancy. Procedure
selection is determined by patient preferences around invasiveness and recovery time as
well as treatment availability.
One advantage of third-tier fibroid therapies is that they offer minimally invasive
approaches to treatment. Depending on patient characteristics and preferences, patients
may also reasonably proceed to traditional surgical therapy. (See 'Traditional surgery'
below.)
Focused ultrasound surgery — Focused ultrasound surgery utilizes high intensity
ultrasound energy to induce coagulative necrosis of fibroids. The treatment can be
guided by ultrasound, most widely used in China and typically called high intensity
focused ultrasound (HIFU) [56,57], or by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), termed
MRgFUS in the rest of the world. This noninvasive, thermoablative technique applies23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 10/39multiple waves of ultrasound energy through the abdominal wall and can be performed
as an outpatient procedure with sedation [58-62]. With HIFU, an abdominal probe is
placed on the abdomen with the patient supine, while with MRgFUS, the ultrasound
source is within the bed of the MRI machine, and the patient is positioned prone over
the transducer. Like surgical myomectomy, each fibroid is targeted individually, and,
thus, size, vascularity, heterogeneity, calcifications, and abdominal scars through which
the ultrasound energy passes can all affect treatment. Ideal treatment candidates have
three or fewer fibroids, size less than 10 centimeters in maximal dimension,
homogenous and dark on T2-weighted images, and well-vascularized without
calcification [63,64]. MRI visualizes the anatomic structures and provides real-time
thermal monitoring to optimize tissue destruction with optimization of safety. It appears
that MRgFUS results in a reduction in myoma volume of approximately 37 to 40 percent
[65].
Outcomes – Symptomatic improvement is observed within the first three months
postprocedure, and this improvement has been maintained at least through 24 to 36
months of follow-up, with more complete ablation leading to better outcomes [60,66-
68]. Adverse event rates appear to be decreased with increased practitioner
experience, despite more extensive treatment [60]. The procedure is time-consuming
and costly, but short-term morbidity is low and recovery is rapid. Analyses based on
quality-of-life measures have found the procedure to be cost-effective [69,70]. Review
by the United Kingdom's National Institute for Health and Care Excellence suggests
the data are adequate to support clinical use of MRgFUS [71] and more limited data
support use of HIFU [72,73].●
Comparison with UAE – MRgFUS was compared with UAE in the Fibroid Interventions:
Reducing Symptoms Today and Tomorrow (FIRSTT) study, which included 81 patients
with combined analysis of observational and randomized data [74]. Complication rates
were low in both groups, but patients undergoing UAE used more opioid pain
medications, and patients with significant pain at baseline were more likely to have
adverse events with either treatment [75]. Over 24 months, quality of life improved,
and general fibroid symptoms and pain scores declined significantly with both
treatments, but to a greater extent in the UAE arm in which patients had symptom
scores that were consistent with patients without fibroids [76]. MRgFUS compared
with UAE resulted in a higher rate of reintervention for symptomatic fibroids (30.0
versus 12.5 percent) within three years [76]. Reintervention was more likely when
treatments occurred at younger ages and in patients with higher pretreatment AMH
levels. Finally, AMH levels at 24 months were lower in the UAE group [76].●
Postprocedure pregnancy – There are reports of pregnancies following MRgFUS for
uterine fibroids [77-80] and ultrasound-guided HIFU [81,82]. The case series of●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 11/39Endometrial ablation — There is a limited role for endometrial ablation in patients with
uterine fibroids and HMB, such as for patients with bleeding disorders [83]. In the
author's practice, use of an LNG IUD is generally preferable to endometrial ablation
since the IUD does not require surgery, is reversible, provides contraception, and
minimizes the risk of an extrauterine pregnancy following endometrial ablation. (See
'Medical therapy' above.)
Traditional surgery — For patients who do not desire future fertility and have persistent
fibroid-related symptoms despite the above therapies or who desire surgical treatment,
options include hysterectomy and myomectomy. Hysterectomy involves removal of the
uterine corpus, including the fibroids, while myomectomy removes only the fibroids and
leaves the uterus in situ.MRgFUS described 54 pregnancies in 51 patients with mean birth weight of 3.3 kg and
a 64 percent vaginal delivery rate. There was no specific pattern of complications; 9
percent of patients had placentation problems, but, in this series, all had prior uterine
surgery as a risk factor for this complication [80]. The HIFU series described 80
pregnancies in 78 patients who delivered at a mean of 38.1±2.2 weeks, with 89 percent
of pregnancies resulting in delivery and 85 percent in term delivery [82].
Hysterectomy – Hysterectomy, or complete removal of the fibroid uterus, provides
definitive therapy and, thus, has been the mainstay of surgical treatment for a century.
In the United States, over 80 percent of hysterectomies are performed for benign
disease, and one-third to over one-half are performed for uterine fibroids, which results
in a lifetime hysterectomy prevalence of 45 percent [84,85]. Hysterectomy eliminates
both the risk of new fibroids forming and all types of abnormal uterine bleeding, and it
improves quality of life, even when compared with uterine-sparing options [55,86-88].
However, hysterectomy has also been associated with long-term morbidity.●
Outcomes – While short-term outcomes are good [88,89], there has been an
increased focus on the long-term morbidity associated with hysterectomy, both with
and without bilateral oophorectomy. Studies of hysterectomy with bilateral
oophorectomy, which is seldom required for fibroids, have reported increased risk of
fracture [90], multiple morbidity [91], all-cause mortality [92], cardiovascular disease
[93], and neurologic dysfunction [94,95]. Hysterectomy with ovarian conservation, the
more common procedure for patients with fibroids, has also been associated with
increased risk of earlier menopause [96], decreased ovarian reserve [97,98], mood
disorders [99], and cardiovascular morbidity [100]. The impact of hysterectomy on
subsequent pelvic organ prolapse and pelvic floor dysfunction is a subject of debate.
Additionally, there is increasing evidence that factors other than disease extent,
including a history of abuse, may be associated with undergoing hysterectomy•23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 12/39Bulk or pain symptoms with or without bleeding — For patients whose main symptoms
include bulk or pain, with or without HMB, treatment options include UAE (or MRgFUS for
patients who are optimal candidates and decline UAE) and GnRH analogs. Patients and
clinicians must balance procedure risk and longer recovery of UAE with the hypoestrogenic
symptoms associated with long-term use of GnRH analogs. If not effective, or if patients[86,101]. Concerns related to hysterectomy, with or without oophorectomy, are
presented in detail separately.
(See "Elective oophorectomy or ovarian conservation at the time of hysterectomy",
section on 'Long-term health risks'.)-
(See "Hysterectomy (benign indications): Patient-important issues and surgical
complications", section on 'Decreased ovarian function or earlier menopause'.)-
(See "Hysterectomy (benign indications): Patient-important issues and surgical
complications", section on 'Cardiovascular and metabolic morbidity'.)-
Indications – The author prefers to avoid the procedure, even with ovarian
conservation, because of the long-term risks discussed above. In the author's practice,
hysterectomy is reserved for patients who previously have had unsuccessful
conservative therapy or who have significant concomitant diseases, such as
adenomyosis, cervical dysplasia, or uterine prolapse, for which hysterectomy is
curative for both conditions. Additionally, when hysterectomy is performed for uterine
fibroids, unless there are high-risk mutations for breast or ovarian cancer such as
BRCA1 and BRCA2 or ovarian pathology, ovarian conservation appears to be indicated.•
(See "Hysterectomy (benign indications): Selection of surgical route", section on
'Hysterectomy indications and alternatives'.)-
(See "Elective oophorectomy or ovarian conservation at the time of hysterectomy".) -
For patients who elect hysterectomy, the approach to selecting the route (abdominal or
vagina) and surgical type (traditional, vaginal, laparoscopic, robotic) is discussed
elsewhere. (See "Hysterectomy (benign indications): Selection of surgical route".)
Myomectomy – Given the success of less invasive alternatives, including UAE and
MRgFUS, the author advises myomectomy only in patients who do not have another
uterine-sparing option or if there is a suspicion of sarcoma and the patient strongly
desires a uterine-sparing technique knowing it may compromise outcome if sarcoma is
found.●
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Laparoscopic myomectomy and other
laparoscopic treatments".)•
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Open abdominal myomectomy procedure".) •
(See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Differentiating fibroids from uterine sarcomas".) •23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 13/39desire more definitive surgical therapy, then myomectomy and hysterectomy are discusse d.
Selection of embolization, medication, or surgery depends upon patient preferences around
side effects, invasiveness, recovery time, need for prolonged treatment (more than six
months), and risk of the treatment compared with risk of symptom recurrence. Other
deciding factors include availability and cost.
Bulk and pain symptoms are more difficult to manage for several reasons. First, slow uterine
and fibroid growth can compromise function without abrupt change. Secondly, some bulk
symptoms, such as urinary frequency and back pain, can be attributed to habits (frequently
drinking water) or common conditions (lower back pain). However, it is increasingly clear that
uterine fibroids are associated with both menstrual and nonmenstrual pain without invoking
other diseases, such as endometriosis or adenomyosis [102].
Initial treatment options include:
For patients with persistent bulk or pain symptoms or those who desire definitive surgical
therapy, surgical treatment options include myomectomy and hysterectomy. Myomectomy
may be reasonable for patients with a limited number of large lesions in whom discreet
fibroid removal is likely to significantly reduce uterine volume or focused pain. However, for
patients with diffuse myometrial fibroids or pain that is not specific to one or two lesions,UAE – For patients who do not desire optimization of pregnancy or future fertility, UAE can
be used to treat symptoms of pain, pressure, and bulk in addition to HMB. Symptom
improvement rates vary by indication, mechanism of assessment, treatment comparator,
and duration of follow-up, but they are in the range of 60 to 80 percent. Discussions of UAE
procedure details, efficacy, and need for subsequent treatment are presented in detail
separately. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment with uterine artery
embolization".)●
GnRH analogs – GnRH analogs include both agonists (eg, leuprolide acetate depot
suspension) and antagonists (elagolix and relugolix). Agonist treatment has been
demonstrated to reduce fibroid volume [24], and relugolix has been demonstrated to
reduce both fibroid volume and pain (see 'GnRH analogs' above). There are some data
suggesting that agonist treatment may reduce bulk symptoms more than relugolix, but
data are conflicting [41,103]. Furthermore, it is likely that elagolix combination therapy also
decreases pain, but this has not been studied; while pain was a prespecified secondary
endpoint in the relugolix trials, there are no comparable data for elagolix combination
therapy.●
Both GnRH agonists and antagonists result in hypoestrogenic side effects, which limit their
tolerability and long-term use to a maximum of six months without add-back therapy. (See
'GnRH analogs' above.)23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 14/39hysterectomy is preferred as it provides definitive surgical therapy. Both surgical approaches
and benefits as related to the treatment of fibroids are reviewed above. (See 'Traditional
surgery' above.)
PATIENTS DESIRING FERTILITY
Impact of fibroids on fertility — Fibroids themselves can contribute to a num ber of
reproductive impairments, including infertility and recurrent pregnancy loss, although the
available data often come from observational studies and, in some insta nces, they conflict
[104-107]. One of the key confounders is that increasing age is associated with increased risk
of infertility, fibroids, and miscarriage [106]. Generally, the literature has concluded that
fibroids that distort the cavity (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO]
types 0 to 3 (figure 1)) have more of an impact on fertility, and surgical treatment can be
effective in reversing that impairment [104]. Likewise, the more the fibroids are located near
the serosal surface, the less a role they appear to play. There is also likely confounding by
age as has been shown in the relationship between fibroids and miscarriage; fibroids are
associated with miscarriage in univariate analysis, but, in multivariate analysis, age appears
to be the major influence since both fibroids and miscarriage increase with increasing age up
to menopause [104,108]. Secondly, infertility and other reproductive dysfunction are often
multifactorial, and, thus, a complete infertility evaluation of both partners is indicated before
fertility treatment for fibroids [109]. Finally, in populations such as in the United States where
much of fertility care is not covered or differentially covered by insurance, there is an
incentive to treat fibroids first, which are covered as medical issues, before embarking on
out-of-pocket fertility care. (See "Female infertility: Causes", section on 'Uterine fibroids
(leiomyomata)'.)
Treatment options — Most medical therapies for uterine fibroids preclude conception,
cause adverse effects when employed long-term, and result in rapid symptom rebound
when discontinued. Therefore, medical treatment of fibroids in patients attempting to
become pregnant is usually unsuccessful. The author takes the following approaches for
patients with symptomatic fibroids who desire pregnancy.
Submucosal fibroids only — For patients desiring fertility who present with heavy
menstrual bleeding (HMB) and a submucosal fibroid or fibroids (FIGO type 0, type 1, or
some type 2 (figure 1)), we recommend hysteroscopic myomectomy both for its
minimally invasive relief of symptoms and optimization of fertility. Hysteroscopic
myomectomy is appropriate for patients who do, and do not, desire future fertility.
Outcomes data for hysteroscopic myomectomy with regard to treating HMB are reviewed
above. (See 'Hysteroscopic resection of submucosal fibroids' above.)23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 15/39For patients desiring pregnancy, wishing to maximize fertility, and presenting with
submucosal fibroid or fibroids (FIGO type 0 or type 1) in the absence of other symptoms,
we suggest hysteroscopic myomectomy. Although some guidelines [9] suggest removal of
submucosal fibroids in asymptomatic patients not actively pursuing pregnancy, we
suggest removal of FIGO types 0 and 1 fibroids but not type 2 (figure 1) due to the
greater complexity of that surgery and higher risk of a two-stage procedure. Support for
this approach mainly stems from the minimally invasive nature of the procedure and the
anticipated benefit from removal of fibroids that impact the uterine cavity. However,
available evidence is limited, includes surrogate patient groups (eg, patients with
endometrial polyps rather than submucosal fibroids), and often lacks data on live birth
rates, which is the key endpoint [105,106]. A trial comparing hysteroscopic myomectomy
for major cavity abnormalities with expectant management in 181 patients affected by
fibroids who had been trying to conceive for a year without success reported improved
overall pregnancy rates following myomectomy, but the differences were not statistically
significant [110]. A different trial that evaluated the removal of endometrial polyps prior to
intrauterine insemination reported improved clinical pregnancy rates after polyp removal
(odds ratio 4.41, 95% CI 2.45-7.96, 204 patients), but data on live birth rates were not
available [105,111]. A meta-analysis including 442 patients with uterine fibroids and
infertility reported nonsignificant trends toward higher clinical pregnancy rates following
fibroid removal compared with no intervention; again, live birth rates were not reported
[106].
All fibroids other than submucosal — For patients who desire pregnancy and present
with bulk symptoms (with or without bleeding) or whose fibroids are not amenable to
hysteroscopic resection, we suggest myomectomy via either laparoscopy (with or without
robotic assistance) or an open abdominal incision.
Selection of laparoscopic or open technique is determined by the num ber, size, and
location of the fibroids and does not appear to impact live birth rate, although supporting
data are limited [106]. As the rate of new fibroid formation is high following uterine-
sparing interventions such as myomectomy, fibroids are ideally treated as close to the time
of actively pursuing pregnancy as possible. Additionally, since having a term delivery is
associated with decreased fibroid risk, timing treatment close to the pursuit of pregnancy
appears beneficial [112].
Myomectomy is typically the first option because while less invasive treatments (eg,
uterine artery embolization [UAE], focused ultrasound surgery) reduce bulk and shrink
fibroids, they do not remove them. However, for patients who have a high risk of
intraoperative conversion to hysterectomy, who have had prior myomectomy with
recurrent fibroids, and/or who are considering a future pregnancy but will accept the
possibility of impaired fertility in exchange for an expedited recovery phase, these less23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 16/39invasive treatments may be considered appropriate alternatives. (See 'Uterine artery
embolization' above and 'Focused ultrasound surgery' above.)
Choosing the approach — Laparoscopic myomectomy offers several advantages
compared with open abdominal myomectomy, including decreased morbidity and a
shorter recovery. However, laparoscopic myomectomy may be limited by characteristics
of myomas and surgical expertise (eg, laparoscopic suturing) [113]. Laparoscopic
myomectomy may also have higher rates of unplanned hysterectomy compared with an
open or hysteroscopic approach. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Laparoscopic
myomectomy and other laparoscopic treatments", section on 'Unplanned
hysterectomy'.)
Laparoscopic myomectomy – In general, laparoscopic myomectomy, with or without
robotic assistance, is an option for patients with the following:●
Uterine size <17 weeks. •
Subserosal or intramural fibroids. Pedunculated subserosal fibroids (ie, International
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO] type 7) are the easiest to remove,
but myomas in other locations (FIGO type 2 to 6) can also be excised
laparoscopically (figure 1). Intracavitary myomas (ie, FIGO type 0 and 1) are
difficult to remove during laparoscopic myomectomy and hysteroscopic
myomectomy is the procedure of choice for such myomas. Patients with both
submucosal and intramural/subserosal myomas may be candidates for concomitant
laparoscopic and hysteroscopic myomectomy. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas):
Hysteroscopic myomectomy and other transcervical procedures", section on 'Patient
selection'.)•
A small number (typically less than five) of fibroids [114]. Performing laparoscopic
myomectomy in patients with large or numerous myomas is likely to be time
consuming, particularly since morcellation is usually required. In addition, removal
of such fibroids may lead to increased blood loss, which is better prevented and
controlled during open myomectomy. (See "Techniques to reduce blood loss during
abdominal or laparoscopic myomectomy", section on 'Intraoperative measures'.)•
Fibroids that are anterior or fundal in location. Many surgeons find anterior or
fundal myomas easier to remove laparoscopically than those that are posterior or
proximate to other important structures (eg, uterine vessels, fallopian tubes).•
Future childbearing is possible; however, the integrity of the uterine incision during
pregnancy has not been evaluated adequately and may be inferior to open abdominal
myomectomy. Due to reports of uterine rupture in pregnancy following some
laparoscopic myomectomies, surgeons should discuss the risks and benefits of each23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 17/39In a systematic review of six randomized trials including 576 subjects undergoing
myomectomy, laparoscopic compared with open abdominal myomectomy had an
increase in operative duration (13 minutes longer), but a decrease in blood loss (34 mL
less) [119]. However, these differences are small and unlikely to be clinically significant.
In addition, while the overall risk of complication was lower for laparoscopic
myomectomy (odds ratio [OR] 0.47, 95% CI 0.26-0.85), the risk of major complications
(eg, hemorrhage requiring transfusion, visceral injury, thromboembolism) was similar
between groups, but the analysis lacked sufficient statistical power to detect this
difference. The rate of recurrent myomas was also similar between groups (18 to 20
percent; follow-up period of 6 to 52 months), although this too lacked statistical power.
Interestingly, other data suggest that a laparoscopic approach may result in less severe
adhesive disease (particularly fewer adnexal adhesions) which may impact fertility [120],
and that surgical complication rates (for both open and laparoscopic procedures) may be
higher in Black, Hispanic, and Asian patients compared with White patients [121]. (See
"Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Laparoscopic myomectomy and other laparoscopic
treatments", section on 'Complications' and "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Open
abdominal myomectomy procedure", section on 'Complications' and "Uterine fibroids
(leiomyomas): Laparoscopic myomectomy and other laparoscopic treatments", section
on 'Adhesive disease'.)
Surgical approach does not appear to affect ovarian reserve, as measured by anti-
müllerian hormone (AMH) levels [122]. While a transient decline in AMH levels may be
seen after open myomectomy (and associated with tourniquet use), the effect is
transient, and levels appear to return to baseline by three months. (See "Techniques to
reduce blood loss during abdominal or laparoscopic myomectomy", section on
'Tourniquets'.)
Further randomized trials are needed to compare these two procedures.option with patients, including possible risk of uterine rupture, as well as provide
information regarding their experience with laparoscopic suturing. While robotic
assistance may alleviate these problems, supporting data are minimal. (See "Uterine
fibroids (leiomyomas): Laparoscopic myomectomy and other laparoscopic
treatments", section on 'Counseling about future pregnancy'.)
Open abdominal myomectomy – For patients with more numerous and/or larger
fibroids, a laparotomy may be required. Open abdominal myomectomy can be safely
performed even with very large uteri in expert hands; absolute size parameters vary
among surgeons [115-118]. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Open abdominal
myomectomy procedure".)●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 18/39Both submucosal and other fibroids — Patients with symptomatic submucosal and other
fibroids may require both hysteroscopic and abdominal/laparoscopic myomectomy.
Role of preventive treatment to improve fertility — There are no data to support empiric
removal of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic fibroids in patients before attempting
pregnancy. Because the risk for new fibroid formation is high, this approach can leave
patients with recurrent fibroids that require additional intervention as they are pursuing
pregnancy [123]. However, for patients with a uterus 16 weeks in size or larger, shortening
the interval for trying for pregnancy before embarking on a full fertility evaluation seems
prudent (after six months for patients <35 years old and after three months for patients ≥ 35
years old). (See "Advancing maternal age: Infertility evaluation and management".)
ROLE OF EXPECTANT MANAGEMENT
There are few data on expectant management for patients with uterine fibroids, and they
primarily come from the comparator arm of active treatment trials [13]. Moreover, expectant
management has typically only been studied for a duration of up to six months. With those
constraints, however, there is little evidence of documented harm over 6 to 12 months of
observation, and expectant management can be employed [13].
Candidates – While there are no data-informed guidelines, candidates for expectant
management may include patients who are:●
Asymptomatic •
Attempting pregnancy •
With lesions that are stable in size as demonstrated by serial imaging studies for one
year•
Peri- or postmenopausal •
With uteri less than 12 weeks in size (not palpable abdominally) •
Components of expectant management – Expectant management involves periodic
evaluation of the patient for new symptoms that could be related to fibroids and for
evidence of fibroid growth. Such evaluation may be limited to history and physical
examination or may require imaging or laboratory studies, typically with pelvic ultrasound
and assessment for anemia. The optimal time interval for such evaluation or repeat
imaging is not known. In patients with no other symptoms or concerns, yearly evaluation
is reasonable. Patients are encouraged to contact their clinicians if new pelvic symptoms
develop. Expectant management is not appropriate if anemia worsens despite iron and
vitamin supplementation, if transfusion is required for treatment of anemia, if the patient
requires emergency evaluation for either anemia or heavy uterine bleeding, or if imaging
raises suspicion for uterine sarcoma.●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 19/39SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Pregnancy and postpartum — Fibroids can undergo degeneration or torsion in pregnancy
and the postpartum period, both of which can be associated with significant pain.
Degeneration is managed with supportive therapy, while management of torsion varies with
the size and location of the fibroid. (See "Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Issues in pregnancy",
section on 'Degeneration and torsion'.)
Peri- and postmenopause — Since symptoms tend to stabilize or regress once a patient
reaches menopause, perimenopausal patients can typically be managed expectantly.
Postmenopausal patients with fibroids should be evaluated periodically to ensure that the
fibroid or fibroids have not increased in size. There is no consensus as to the frequency of
evaluation, but every one to two years seems reasonable in the absence of new symptoms.
Postmenopausal patients with new symptoms, particularly uterine bleeding or enlargement,
should be evaluated immediately, and malignancy, including leiomyosarcoma, should be
excluded. (See "Uterine sarcoma: Classification, epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and
diagnosis".)
TREATMENTS NOT TYPICALLY RECOMMENDED
Numerous medical therapies have been tried for fibroid symptoms but are not effective
and/or carry unacceptable risks.While many providers rely on periodic ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging to follow
patients expectantly, there is no evidence of the usefulness of this process. Nonetheless,
since certain therapies depend on the number and/or size of the fibroids present, periodic
imaging can be used at annual intervals, especially in patients who have had prior fibroid
treatment, to allow the least invasive option for future treatment.
Progesterone receptor modulators (PRMs) – Despite evidence supporting use of the
PRMs ulipristal acetate (UPA) and mifepristone as daily medical therapy for fibroid-related
bleeding [26,124], neither is currently approved in the United States for fibroid treatment.
Both UPA and mifepristone remain on the market for one-time use as emergency
contraceptives. (See "Emergency contraception".)●
UPA – UPA is not typically used for treatment of uterine fibroids as cases of serious liver
toxicity, liver transplantation, and fatalities have been reported [27,125,126]. As such,
UPA is not available in the United States for treatment of fibroid-related bleeding by the
US Food and Drug Administration [28,29]. In the European Union and Canada, UPA is
approved in selected premenopausal patients with uterine fibroids who are not•23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 20/39candidates for, or have previously failed, surgical procedures (including uterine fibroid
embolization) for up to four treatment cycles [127].
In randomized trials, UPA compared with placebo resulted in improved fibroid symptom
severity and health-related quality of life, and efficacy appeared similar to that of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists but with the advantage of oral dosing
and lack of hypoestrogenic side effects [26,128]. The original trials for UPA were
conducted in European populations where most participants were thin with relatively
small uteri [129-131]. When trials were subsequently conducted in more diverse United
States populations utilizing both 5 and 10 mg daily doses, the 10 mg dose generally
showed greater efficacy [128,132,133].
Repeated cycles of UPA appear to further reduce fibroid-related symptoms. In one
randomized trial of patients with fibroid-related heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB), more
patients receiving UPA (10 mg) for four cycles compared with one cycle had amenorrhea
(89 versus 79.5 percent) and a greater change in total fibroid volume (-72.1 versus -49.9
percent) [134].
UPA as a single dose remains widely available for emergency contraception. Because of
differences in dosing, off label use in the US would require a compounding pharmacy.
(See "Emergency contraception", section on 'Oral medication emergency contraception
methods'.)
Mifepristone – Mifepristone at doses of 5 to 50 mg for three to six months has been
reported to decrease heavy menstrual bleeding and, in some studies, fibroid volume
[135-138]. However, some studies reported abnormal endometrial histology at the
conclusion of therapy [135]. As a compounded formulation of mifepristone is required
for these doses, the drug is rarely used for this off-label indication [26,135].•
Androgenic compounds – Use of the androgens danazol and gestrinone have been
studied in small series from single centers, but there are no comparative data [139,140].
Thus, we do not advise using these agents for fibroid-related symptoms.●
Aromatase inhibitors – While one small trial of the aromatase inhibitor letrozole reported
decreased fibroid volume following treatment, the trial did not assess fibroid-related
symptoms, and the volume reduction was similar to that achieved with GnRH agonist
therapy [141]. Two small studies reported that pretreatment with letrozole may improve
surgical outcomes [142,143], but these studies have not been repeated.●
Selective estrogen reuptake modulators (SERMs) – Studies of the SERM raloxifene have
reported mixed outcomes for fibroid treatment [144]. Use of raloxifene as hormonal add-
back with GnRH analog treatment for fibroids appeared to reduce bone loss but did not
improve quality of life or other fibroid-related symptoms [145].●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 21/39SOCIETY GUIDELINE LINKS
Links to society and government-sponsored guidelines from selected countries and regions
around the world are provided separately. (See "Society guideline links: Uterine fibroids
(leiomyomas)" and "Society guideline links: Abnormal uterine bleeding" and "Society
guideline links: Hysteroscopy".)
INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS
UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the
Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5 to 6
grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have
about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview
and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are
longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10 to 12
grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are
comfortable with some medical jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to
print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles
on a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.)Complementary medicine ●
Herbal supplements – Limited data do not support use of herbal supplements,
including black cohosh and Chinese herbal medicine, for fibroid-related symptoms [146-
148].•
Acupuncture – Trials assessing acupuncture for the treatment of fibroid-related
symptoms are lacking, but small observational studies have suggested improved
outcomes with acupuncture [149,150]. Until trial data supporting efficacy are available,
we do not advise these interventions as primary treatment of fibroid-related symptoms.
However, as risks associated with acupuncture are low, patients who desire a trial of
acupuncture as adjunctive therapy may reasonably do so.•
th th
th th
Basics topics (see "Patient education: Uterine fibroids (The Basics)" and "Patient education:
Uterine artery embolization (The Basics)")●
Beyond the Basics topic (see "Patient education: Uterine fibroids (Beyond the Basics)") ●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 22/39SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
General considerations ●
Treatment of fibroids is aimed at resolving or reducing the symptoms associated with
the lesions. Common symptoms include prolonged or heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB),
bulk symptoms, pain, and impaired fertility. Symptoms can be present in isolation or
combination. (See 'Common symptoms for treatment' above.)•
Pretreatment assessment includes clinical and laboratory evaluation, with imaging and
endometrial sampling as indicated by either planned procedure or patient risk factors.
Peri- and postmenopausal patients are evaluated for sarcoma risk, and all patients with
HMB should be evaluated for iron deficiency anemia and the possibility of coexisting
endometrial hyperplasia. (See 'Pretreatment assessment' above.)•
While there are limited data on expectant management for patients with uterine
fibroids, there is little evidence of documented harm over 6 to 12 months of observation,
and expectant management can be employed. (See 'Role of expectant management'
above.)•
Patients with HMB who do not desire future fertility – For patients who do not desire
future fertility, treatment is aimed at the presenting symptoms and performed in a
stepwise approach until the symptoms are adequately controlled. As there are limited
comparative studies demonstrating superiority of one treatment option over another,
patient preference and shared decision-making are used to create the optimal
management strategy.●
First tier •
For patients with HMB likely from submucosal fibroids, we recommend hysteroscopic
myomectomy (Grade 1B). Submucosal fibroids include International Federation of
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) type 0, type 1, or some type 2 (figure 1).
Hysteroscopic myomectomy is an outpatient procedure with rapid recovery, a low risk
of complications compared with abdominal procedures, rapid improvement in quality
of life, and low risk of reintervention for fibroids. (See 'Hysteroscopic resection of
submucosal fibroids' above.)-
For patients with all other types of fibroids (ie, not exclusively submucosal) who do not
desire pregnancy, we suggest initial treatment with a combined estrogen-progestin
contraceptive (oral pills, transdermal patch, or vaginal ring) (Grade 2C). Although
supporting data are of low quality, these products typically work quickly and are widely
available, are low in cost, and are generally well-tolerated. Alternatives that are also-23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 23/39considered include levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine devices, tranexamic acid, and
progestin-only pills. As direct comparator data are sparse, treatment selection is
patient-driven and considers variables such as efficacy, safety, tolerability, ease of use,
and cost. (See 'Medical therapy' above.)
Second tier – For patients whose symptoms persist despite trial of one or more first-tier
therapies, second-tier medical treatments for fibroid-associated HMB include
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists and antagonists. Uterine artery
embolization (UAE) is a minimally invasive treatment option that treats both bleeding
and bulk symptoms. Treatment choice is based on patient preferences around side
effects, invasiveness, and recovery. Other deciding factors include availability and cost.
(See 'Second tier' above.)•
Third tier – For patients with persistent symptoms, third-tier treatments include focused
ultrasound surgery and, in rare cases, endometrial ablation. These provide less invasive
therapies for patients who desire less time away from work and/or uterine preservation.
Procedure selection is determined by patient preferences around invasiveness and
recovery time as well as treatment availability. (See 'Third tier' above.)•
Last line – For patients who do not desire future fertility and have persistent fibroid-
related symptoms despite the above treatments or who desire surgical therapy, options
include hysterectomy and myomectomy. While hysterectomy is the definitive procedure
for relief of symptoms and prevention of recurrent fibroid-related problems (eg,
hydronephrosis), it is also associated with long-term morbidity. Given the success of less
invasive alternative treatments, including UAE and focused ultrasound surgery,
myomectomy is performed only in patients who do not have another uterine-sparing
option or if there is a suspicion of sarcoma and the patient strongly desires a uterine-
sparing technique knowing it may compromise outcome if sarcoma is found. (See
'Traditional surgery' above.)•
Patients with bulk or pain symptoms who do not desire future fertility – For patients
whose main symptoms include bulk or pain, with or without HMB, treatment options
include GnRH analogs and UAE. Patients and clinicians must balance the hypoestrogenic
symptoms associated with long-term use of GnRH analogs with the procedure risk and
longer recovery of UAE. If not effective, or if patients desire more definitive surgical
therapy, then myomectomy and hysterectomy are options. Selection of medication,
embolization, or surgery depends on patient preferences around side effects,
invasiveness, recovery time, need for prolonged treatment, and risk of the treatment
compared with risk of symptom recurrence. (See 'Bulk or pain symptoms with or without
bleeding' above.)●23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 24/39Use of UpToDate is subject to the Terms of Use.Patients who desire fertility – For patients who desire pregnancy and present with
symptoms that are reasonably attributed to fibroids (bleeding, bulk, and, possibly,
infertility), myomectomy is typically the first option. Most medical therapies are not used in
patients desiring pregnancy because they preclude conception, cause adverse effects
when employed long-term, and result in rapid symptom rebound when discontinued. (See
'Treatment options' above.)●
For patients desiring pregnancy who have symptoms likely caused by fibroids FIGO type
0, type 1, or some type 2 (figure 1), we recommend hysteroscopic myomectomy
(Grade 1B). Symptoms typically include abnormal or heavy uterine bleeding.
Hysteroscopic myomectomy is minimally invasive, provides relief of symptoms, and
typically preserves the integrity of the myometrium for future pregnancy. (See
'Submucosal fibroids only' above.)•
For patients desiring pregnancy, wishing to maximize fertility, and presenting with
submucosal fibroid or fibroids (FIGO type 0 or type 1) in the absence of other symptoms,
we suggest hysteroscopic myomectomy (Grade 2C). We offer removal of FIGO types 0
and 1 fibroids but not type 2 (figure 1) due to the greater complexity of that surgery
and higher risk of a two-stage procedure. Support for this approach mainly stems from
the minimally invasive nature of the procedure and anticipated benefit from removal of
fibroids that impact the uterine cavity. However, available evidence is limited, includes
surrogate patient groups (eg, patients with endometrial polyps rather than endometrial
fibroids), and often lacks data on live birth rates, which is the patient-important
endpoint. (See 'Submucosal fibroids only' above.)•
For patients desiring pregnancy who have bulk symptoms (with or without bleeding) or
fibroids that are not amenable to hysteroscopic resection, and in whom there are no
major contraindications to a surgical approach, we offer open abdominal or laparoscopic
myomectomy. Myomectomy is preferred over UAE and focused ultrasound surgery given
the lack of information about the safety of pregnancy with these approaches.•
For patients undergoing myomectomy in whom laparoscopic removal is technically
feasible (eg, uterine size <17 weeks, subserosal/submucosal, few in number, anterior
or fundal location) and who have access to a surgeon with advanced laparoscopic
skills, we suggest a laparoscopic rather than open approach (Grade 2C). However, the
integrity of the uterine incision during pregnancy after laparoscopic myomectomy has
not been evaluated adequately and may be inferior to open abdominal myomectomy.
(See 'Treatment options' above.)-23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 25/39REFERENCES
1. Peddada SD, Laughlin SK, Miner K, et al. Growth of uterine leiomyomata among
premenopausal black and white women. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008; 105:19887.
2. Baird DD, Garrett TA, Laughlin SK, et al. Short-term change in growth of uterine
leiomyoma: tumor growth spurts. Fertil Steril 2011; 95:242.
3. Ghant MS, Sengoba KS, Recht H, et al. Beyond the physical: a qualitative assessment of
the burden of symptomatic uterine fibroids on women's emotional and psychosocial
health. J Psychosom Res 2015; 78:499.
4. Ghant MS, Sengoba KS, Vogelzang R, et al. An Altered Perception of Normal:
Understanding Causes for Treatment Delay in Women with Symptomatic Uterine
Fibroids. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2016; 25:846.
5. Management of Symptomatic Uterine Leiomyomas: ACOG Practice Bulletin, Number
228. Obstet Gynecol 2021; 137:e100.
6. Stewart EA. Clinical practice. Uterine fibroids. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:1646.
7. Laughlin-Tommaso SK, Lu D, Thomas L, et al. Short-term quality of life after
myomectomy for uterine fibroids from the COMPARE-UF Fibroid Registry. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2020; 222:345.e1.
8. Sandberg EM, Tummers FHMP, Cohen SL, et al. Reintervention risk and quality of life
outcomes after uterine-sparing interventions for fibroids: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Fertil Steril 2018; 109:698.
9. Marret H, Fritel X, Ouldamer L, et al. Therapeutic management of uterine fibroid tumors:
updated French guidelines. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2012; 165:156.
10. Bhave Chittawar P, Franik S, Pouwer AW, Farquhar C. Minimally invasive surgical
techniques versus open myomectomy for uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2014; 2014:CD004638.
11. Wamsteker K, Emanuel MH, de Kruif JH. Transcervical hysteroscopic resection of
submucous fibroids for abnormal uterine bleeding: results regarding the degree of
intramural extension. Obstet Gynecol 1993; 82:736.
12. Yao X, Stewart EA, Laughlin-Tommaso SK, et al. Medical therapies for heavy menstrual
bleeding in women with uterine fibroids: a retrospective analysis of a large commercially
insured population in the USA. BJOG 2017; 124:322.
13. Hartmann KE, Fonnesbeck C, Surawicz T, et al. Management of Uterine Fibroids. AHRQ C
omparative Effectiveness Review. Rockville, MD: 2017. https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.g
ov/sites/default/files/pdf/cer-195-uterine-fibroids-final-revision.pdf (Accessed on January
06, 2020).23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 26/3914. Vilos GA, Allaire C, Laberge PY, et al. The management of uterine leiomyomas. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 2015; 37:157.
15. NICE guideline [NG88] Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management. Nation
al Institute for Health and Care Excellence. March 2020 https://www.nice.org.uk/guidanc
e/ng88/chapter/Recommendations#management-of-hmb (Accessed on April 01, 2020).
16. Sangkomkamhang US, Lumbiganon P, Pattanittum P. Progestogens or progestogen-
releasing intrauterine systems for uterine fibroids (other than preoperative medical
therapy). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020; 11:CD008994.
17. Mercorio F, De Simone R, Di Spiezio Sardo A, et al. The effect of a levonorgestrel-
releasing intrauterine device in the treatment of myoma-related menorrhagia.
Contraception 2003; 67:277.
18. Murat Naki M, Tekcan C, Ozcan N, Cebi M. Levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device
insertion ameliorates leiomyoma-dependent menorrhagia among women of
reproductive age without a significant regression in the uterine and leiomyoma
volumes. Fertil Steril 2010; 94:371.
19. Bryant-Smith AC, Lethaby A, Farquhar C, Hickey M. Antifibrinolytics for heavy menstrual
bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018; 4:CD000249.
20. Lukes AS, Moore KA, Muse KN, et al. Tranexamic acid treatment for heavy menstrual
bleeding: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 2010; 116:865.
21. Eder S, Baker J, Gersten J, et al. Efficacy and safety of oral tranexamic acid in women with
heavy menstrual bleeding and fibroids. Womens Health (Lond) 2013; 9:397.
22. Lysteda- tranexamic acid tablet. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved produ
ct information. Revised January, 2020. US National Library of Medicine. www.dailymed.nl
m.nih.gov (Accessed on January 22, 2020).
23. Tosun AK, Tosun I, Suer N. Comparison of levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device
with oral progestins in heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB) cases with uterine leiomyoma
(LNG-IUD and oral progestin usage in myoma uteri). Pak J Med Sci 2014; 30:834.
24. Lethaby A, Puscasiu L, Vollenhoven B. Preoperative medical therapy before surgery for
uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 11:CD000547.
25. Yoon JK, Han K, Kim MD, et al. Five-year clinical outcomes of uterine artery embolization
for symptomatic leiomyomas: An analysis of risk factors for reintervention. Eur J Radiol
2018; 109:83.
26. Murji A, Whitaker L, Chow TL, Sobel ML. Selective progesterone receptor modulators
(SPRMs) for uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 4:CD010770.
27. Mahase E. Uterine fibroid drug is recalled after case of liver failure requiring transplant
prompts EU review. BMJ 2020; 368:m1112.23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 27/3928. FDA delays approval of Esmya, issuing CRL https://www.thepharmaletter.com/article/fda
-delays-approval-of-esmya-issuing-crl (Accessed on November 29, 2018).
29. https://healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-sc/2020/73939a-eng.php (Acce
ssed on September 18, 2020).
30. Taylor HS, Giudice LC, Lessey BA, et al. Treatment of Endometriosis-Associated Pain with
Elagolix, an Oral GnRH Antagonist. N Engl J Med 2017; 377:28.
31. Carr BR, Stewart EA, Archer DF, et al. Elagolix Alone or With Add-Back Therapy in Women
With Heavy Menstrual Bleeding and Uterine Leiomyomas: A Randomized Controlled
Trial. Obstet Gynecol 2018; 132:1252.
32. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). FDA Approves New Option to Treat Heavy Mens
trual Bleeding Associated with Fibroids in Women. https://www.fda.gov/news-events/pre
ss-announcements/fda-approves-new-option-treat-heavy-menstrual-bleeding-associate
d-fibroids-women (Accessed on May 29, 2020).
33. Schlaff WD, Ackerman RT, Al-Hendy A, et al. Elagolix for Heavy Menstrual Bleeding in
Women with Uterine Fibroids. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:328.
34. Al-Hendy A, Bradley L, Owens CD, et al. Predictors of response for elagolix with add-back
therapy in women with heavy menstrual bleeding associated with uterine fibroids. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2021; 224:72.e1.
35. Muneyyirci-Delale O, Archer DF, Owens CD, et al. Efficacy and safety of elagolix with add-
back therapy in women with uterine fibroids and coexisting adenomyosis. F S Rep 2021;
2:338.
36. Simon JA, Al-Hendy A, Archer DF, et al. Elagolix Treatment for Up to 12 Months in Women
With Heavy Menstrual Bleeding and Uterine Leiomyomas. Obstet Gynecol 2020;
135:1313.
37. Brown E, Kroll R, Li H, et al. Low-Dose Elagolix for the Treatment of Heavy Menstrual
Bleeding in Patients With Uterine Leiomyomas: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet
Gynecol 2023; 142:1068.
38. Archer DF, Ng J, Chwalisz K, et al. Elagolix Suppresses Ovulation in a Dose-Dependent
Manner: Results From a 3-Month, Randomized Study in Ovulatory Women. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2020; 105.
39. Vercellini P, Viganò P, Barbara G, et al. Elagolix for endometriosis: all that glitters is not
gold. Hum Reprod 2019; 34:193.
40. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2021/214846s000lbl.pdf (Access
ed on May 27, 2021).
41. Al-Hendy A, Lukes AS, Poindexter AN 3rd, et al. Treatment of Uterine Fibroid Symptoms
with Relugolix Combination Therapy. N Engl J Med 2021; 384:630.23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 28/3942. Stewart EA, Lukes AS, Venturella R, et al. Quality of life with relugolix combination
therapy for uterine fibroids: LIBERTY randomized trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2023;
228:320.e1.
43. Stewart EA, Lukes AS, Venturella R, et al. Relugolix Combination Therapy for Uterine
Leiomyoma-Associated Pain in the LIBERTY Randomized Trials. Obstet Gynecol 2022;
139:1070.
44. Al-Hendy A, Lukes AS, Poindexter AN 3rd, et al. Long-term Relugolix Combination
Therapy for Symptomatic Uterine Leiomyomas. Obstet Gynecol 2022; 140:920.
45. Al-Hendy A, Venturella R, Arjona Ferreira JC, et al. LIBERTY randomized withdrawal study:
relugolix combination therapy for heavy menstrual bleeding associated with uterine
fibroids. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2023; 229:662.e1.
46. MYFEMBREE- relugolix, estradiol hemihydrate, and norethindrone acetate tablet, film co
ated. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved product information. Revised Jan
usary 2023. US National Library of Medicine. www.dailymed.nlm.nih.gov (Accessed on Ja
nuary 31, 2023).
47. Yselty. European Medicines Agency. Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/medici
nes/human/EPAR/yselty (Accessed on September 26, 2022).
48. Donnez J, Taylor HS, Stewart EA, et al. Linzagolix with and without hormonal add-back
therapy for the treatment of symptomatic uterine fibroids: two randomised, placebo-
controlled, phase 3 trials. Lancet 2022; 400:896.
49. Lupron Depot- leuprolide acetate kit. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved
product information. Revised November, 2018. US National Library of Medicine. www.dai
lymed.nlm.nih.gov (Accessed on April 01, 2020).
50. Lupron depot- leuprolide acetate kit. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved p
roduct information. Revised November, 2018. US National Library of Medicine. https://da
ilymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=00c486b0-bd7b-4898-834d-8c656e5e7
3cb (Accessed on January 22, 2020).
51. Gupta JK, Sinha A, Lumsden MA, Hickey M. Uterine artery embolization for symptomatic
uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; :CD005073.
52. Stewart EA. Comparing Apples to Apples for Fibroids. N Engl J Med 2020; 383:489.
53. Manyonda I, Belli AM, Lumsden MA, et al. Uterine-Artery Embolization or Myomectomy
for Uterine Fibroids. N Engl J Med 2020; 383:440.
54. Sirkeci F, Moss J, Belli AM, et al. Effects on heavy menstrual bleeding and pregnancy of
uterine artery embolization (UAE) or myomectomy for women with uterine fibroids
wishing to avoid hysterectomy: The FEMME randomized controlled trial. Int J Gynaecol
Obstet 2023; 160:492.23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 29/3955. Anchan RM, Spies JB, Zhang S, et al. Long-term health-related quality of life and
symptom severity following hysterectomy, myomectomy, or uterine artery embolization
for the treatment of symptomatic uterine fibroids. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2023;
229:275.e1.
56. Chen J, Chen W, Zhang L, et al. Safety of ultrasound-guided ultrasound ablation for
uterine fibroids and adenomyosis: A review of 9988 cases. Ultrason Sonochem 2015;
27:671.
57. Chen J, Li Y, Wang Z, et al. Evaluation of high-intensity focused ultrasound ablation for
uterine fibroids: an IDEAL prospective exploration study. BJOG 2018; 125:354.
58. Stewart EA, Gedroyc WM, Tempany CM, et al. Focused ultrasound treatment of uterine
fibroid tumors: safety and feasibility of a noninvasive thermoablative technique. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2003; 189:48.
59. Stewart EA, Rabinovici J, Tempany CM, et al. Clinical outcomes of focused ultrasound
surgery for the treatment of uterine fibroids. Fertil Steril 2006; 85:22.
60. Fennessy FM, Tempany CM, McDannold NJ, et al. Uterine leiomyomas: MR imaging-
guided focused ultrasound surgery--results of different treatment protocols. Radiology
2007; 243:885.
61. Gorny KR, Borah BJ, Weaver AL, et al. Clinical predictors of successful magnetic
resonance-guided focused ultrasound (MRgFUS) for uterine leiomyoma. J Ther
Ultrasound 2013; 1:15.
62. Gorny KR, Borah BJ, Brown DL, et al. Incidence of additional treatments in women
treated with MR-guided focused US for symptomatic uterine fibroids: review of 138
patients with an average follow-up of 2.8 years. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2014; 25:1506.
63. Hesley GK, Gorny KR, Henrichsen TL, et al. A clinical review of focused ultrasound
ablation with magnetic resonance guidance: an option for treating uterine fibroids.
Ultrasound Q 2008; 24:131.
64. Yoon SW, Lee C, Cha SH, et al. Patient selection guidelines in MR-guided focused
ultrasound surgery of uterine fibroids: a pictorial guide to relevant findings in screening
pelvic MRI. Eur Radiol 2008; 18:2997.
65. Funaki K, Fukunishi H, Sawada K. Clinical outcomes of magnetic resonance-guided
focused ultrasound surgery for uterine myomas: 24-month follow-up. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 2009; 34:584.
66. Stewart EA, Gostout B, Rabinovici J, et al. Sustained relief of leiomyoma symptoms by
using focused ultrasound surgery. Obstet Gynecol 2007; 110:279.
67. Gorny KR, Woodrum DA, Brown DL, et al. Magnetic resonance-guided focused
ultrasound of uterine leiomyomas: review of a 12-month outcome of 130 clinical
patients. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2011; 22:857.23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 30/3968. Kim HS, Baik JH, Pham LD, Jacobs MA. MR-guided high-intensity focused ultrasound
treatment for symptomatic uterine leiomyomata: long-term outcomes. Acad Radiol
2011; 18:970.
69. O'Sullivan AK, Thompson D, Chu P, et al. Cost-effectiveness of magnetic resonance
guided focused ultrasound for the treatment of uterine fibroids. Int J Technol Assess
Health Care 2009; 25:14.
70. Zowall H, Cairns JA, Brewer C, et al. Cost-effectiveness of magnetic resonance-guided
focused ultrasound surgery for treatment of uterine fibroids. BJOG 2008; 115:653.
71. NICE Guidance. Magnetic resonance image-guided transcutaneous focused ultrasound f
or uterine fibroids. 2011. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg413/chapter/1-Guidance
(Accessed on January 08, 2020).
72. NICE Guidance. Ultrasound-guided high-intensity transcutaneous focused ultrasound fo
r symptomatic uterine fibroids. 2019. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg657/chapter/
1-Recommendations (Accessed on January 08, 2020).
73. Jin J, Zhao Y, Huang P. Combination of HIFU with sulfur hexafluoride microbubbles in the
treatment of solitary uterine fibroids: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Radiol
2024; 34:3786.
74. AbdElmagied AM, Vaughan LE, Weaver AL, et al. Fibroid interventions: reducing
symptoms today and tomorrow: extending generalizability by using a comprehensive
cohort design with a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2016; 215:338.e1.
75. Barnard EP, AbdElmagied AM, Vaughan LE, et al. Periprocedural outcomes comparing
fibroid embolization and focused ultrasound: a randomized controlled trial and
comprehensive cohort analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017; 216:500.e1.
76. Laughlin-Tommaso S, Barnard EP, AbdElmagied AM, et al. FIRSTT study: randomized
controlled trial of uterine artery embolization vs focused ultrasound surgery. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2019; 220:174.e1.
77. Hanstede MM, Tempany CM, Stewart EA. Focused ultrasound surgery of intramural
leiomyomas may facilitate fertility: a case report. Fertil Steril 2007; 88:497.e5.
78. Gavrilova-Jordan LP, Rose CH, Traynor KD, et al. Successful term pregnancy following
MR-guided focused ultrasound treatment of uterine leiomyoma. J Perinatol 2007; 27:59.
79. Morita Y, Ito N, Ohashi H. Pregnancy following MR-guided focused ultrasound surgery
for a uterine fibroid. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2007; 99:56.
80. Rabinovici J, David M, Fukunishi H, et al. Pregnancy outcome after magnetic resonance-
guided focused ultrasound surgery (MRgFUS) for conservative treatment of uterine
fibroids. Fertil Steril 2010; 93:199.
81. Qin J, Chen JY, Zhao WP, et al. Outcome of unintended pregnancy after ultrasound-
guided high-intensity focused ultrasound ablation of uterine fibroids. Int J Gynaecol23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 31/39Obstet 2012; 117:273.
82. Zou M, Chen L, Wu C, et al. Pregnancy outcomes in patients with uterine fibroids treated
with ultrasound-guided high-intensity focused ultrasound. BJOG 2017; 124 Suppl 3:30.
83. El-Nashar SA, Hopkins MR, Feitoza SS, et al. Global endometrial ablation for
menorrhagia in women with bleeding disorders. Obstet Gynecol 2007; 109:1381.
84. Wright JD, Herzog TJ, Tsui J, et al. Nationwide trends in the performance of inpatient
hysterectomy in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 2013; 122:233.
85. Stewart EA, Shuster LT, Rocca WA. Reassessing hysterectomy. Minn Med 2012; 95:36.
86. Kuppermann M, Learman LA, Schembri M, et al. Predictors of hysterectomy use and
satisfaction. Obstet Gynecol 2010; 115:543.
87. Kuppermann M, Learman LA, Schembri M, et al. Contributions of hysterectomy and
uterus-preserving surgery to health-related quality of life. Obstet Gynecol 2013; 122:15.
88. Nicholson WK, Wegienka G, Zhang S, et al. Short-Term Health-Related Quality of Life
After Hysterectomy Compared With Myomectomy for Symptomatic Leiomyomas. Obstet
Gynecol 2019; 134:261.
89. Farquhar CM, Sadler L, Stewart AW. A prospective study of outcomes five years after
hysterectomy in premenopausal women. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2008; 48:510.
90. Melton LJ 3rd, Khosla S, Malkasian GD, et al. Fracture risk after bilateral oophorectomy in
elderly women. J Bone Miner Res 2003; 18:900.
91. Rocca WA, Gazzuola-Rocca L, Smith CY, et al. Accelerated Accumulation of
Multimorbidity After Bilateral Oophorectomy: A Population-Based Cohort Study. Mayo
Clin Proc 2016; 91:1577.
92. Rocca WA, Grossardt BR, de Andrade M, et al. Survival patterns after oophorectomy in
premenopausal women: a population-based cohort study. Lancet Oncol 2006; 7:821.
93. Rivera CM, Grossardt BR, Rhodes DJ, et al. Increased cardiovascular mortality after early
bilateral oophorectomy. Menopause 2009; 16:15.
94. Rivera CM, Grossardt BR, Rhodes DJ, Rocca WA. Increased mortality for neurological and
mental diseases following early bilateral oophorectomy. Neuroepidemiology 2009;
33:32.
95. Rocca WA, Bower JH, Maraganore DM, et al. Increased risk of cognitive impairment or
dementia in women who underwent oophorectomy before menopause. Neurology
2007; 69:1074.
96. Farquhar CM, Sadler L, Harvey SA, Stewart AW. The association of hysterectomy and
menopause: a prospective cohort study. BJOG 2005; 112:956.
97. Trabuco EC, Moorman PG, Algeciras-Schimnich A, et al. Association of Ovary-Sparing
Hysterectomy With Ovarian Reserve. Obstet Gynecol 2016; 127:819.23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 32/3998. Moorman PG, Myers ER, Schildkraut JM, et al. Effect of hysterectomy with ovarian
preservation on ovarian function. Obstet Gynecol 2011; 118:1271.
99. Laughlin-Tommaso SK, Satish A, Khan Z, et al. Long-term risk of de novo mental health
conditions after hysterectomy with ovarian conservation: a cohort study. Menopause
2020; 27:33.
100. Laughlin-Tommaso SK, Khan Z, Weaver AL, et al. Cardiovascular and metabolic morbidity
after hysterectomy with ovarian conservation: a cohort study. Menopause 2018; 25:483.
101. Gazzuola Rocca L, Smith CY, Stewart EA, Rocca WA. Adverse childhood experiences and
adult abuse are predictors of hysterectomy and oophorectomy. Maturitas 2017; 106:95.
102. Osuga Y, Enya K, Kudou K, Hoshiai H. Relugolix, a novel oral gonadotropin-releasing
hormone antagonist, in the treatment of pain symptoms associated with uterine
fibroids: a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3 study in Japanese women. Fertil
Steril 2019; 112:922.
103. Osuga Y, Enya K, Kudou K, et al. Oral Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Antagonist
Relugolix Compared With Leuprorelin Injections for Uterine Leiomyomas: A Randomized
Controlled Trial. Obstet Gynecol 2019; 133:423.
104. Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Electronic
address: ASRM@asrm.org, Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive
Medicine. Removal of myomas in asymptomatic patients to improve fertility and/or
reduce miscarriage rate: a guideline. Fertil Steril 2017; 108:416.
105. Bosteels J, van Wessel S, Weyers S, et al. Hysteroscopy for treating subfertility associated
with suspected major uterine cavity abnormalities. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;
12:CD009461.
106. Metwally M, Raybould G, Cheong YC, Horne AW. Surgical treatment of fibroids for
subfertility. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020; 1:CD003857.
107. Pritts TL, Ogden M, Parker W, et al. Intramural Leiomyomas and Fertility: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2024; 144:171.
108. Hartmann KE, Velez Edwards DR, Savitz DA, et al. Prospective Cohort Study of Uterine
Fibroids and Miscarriage Risk. Am J Epidemiol 2017; 186:1140.
109. Infertility Workup for the Women's Health Specialist: ACOG Committee Opinion, Number
781. Obstet Gynecol 2019; 133:e377. Reaffirmed 2023.
110. Casini ML, Rossi F, Agostini R, Unfer V. Effects of the position of fibroids on fertility.
Gynecol Endocrinol 2006; 22:106.
111. Pérez-Medina T, Bajo-Arenas J, Salazar F, et al. Endometrial polyps and their implication
in the pregnancy rates of patients undergoing intrauterine insemination: a prospective,
randomized study. Hum Reprod 2005; 20:1632.23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 33/39112. Stewart EA, Cookson CL, Gandolfo RA, Schulze-Rath R. Epidemiology of uterine fibroids:
a systematic review. BJOG 2017; 124:1501.
113. Parker WH, Rodi IA. Patient selection for laparoscopic myomectomy. J Am Assoc Gynecol
Laparosc 1994; 2:23.
114. Gargiulo AR, Srouji SS, Missmer SA, et al. Robot-assisted laparoscopic myomectomy
compared with standard laparoscopic myomectomy. Obstet Gynecol 2012; 120:284.
115. Reilly R, Nour N. Abdominal myomectomy is associated with few surgical complications.
J Gynecol Techniques 1998; 4:107.
116. West S, Ruiz R, Parker WH. Abdominal myomectomy in women with very large uterine
size. Fertil Steril 2006; 85:36.
117. Oladapo OT, Akinsanya AF. Relative morbidity of abdominal myomectomy for very large
uterine fibroids in a developing country hospital. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2011; 283:825.
118. Pundir J, Krishnan N, Siozos A, et al. Peri-operative morbidity associated with abdominal
myomectomy for very large fibroid uteri. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2013;
167:219.
119. Jin C, Hu Y, Chen XC, et al. Laparoscopic versus open myomectomy--a meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2009; 145:14.
120. Bulletti C, Polli V, Negrini V, et al. Adhesion formation after laparoscopic myomectomy. J
Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 1996; 3:533.
121. Dallas K, Dubinskaya A, Andebrhan SB, et al. Racial Disparities in Outcomes of Women
Undergoing Myomectomy. Obstet Gynecol 2021; 138:845.
122. Aharon D, Sekhon L, Getrajdman C, et al. Association of Myomectomy With Anti-
Müllerian Hormone Levels and Ovarian Reserve. Obstet Gynecol 2022; 140:1000.
123. Baird DD, Dunson DB, Hill MC, et al. High cumulative incidence of uterine leiomyoma in
black and white women: ultrasound evidence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 188:100.
124. Hartmann KE, Fonnesbeck C, Surawicz T, et al. Management of Uterine Fibroids. AHRQ C
omparative Effectiveness Review. Rockville, MD: 2017. https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.g
ov/sites/default/files/pdf/cer-195-uterine-fibroids-final-revision.pdf (Accessed on March
19, 2020).
125. European Medicines Agency. PRAC recommends new measures to minimise risk of rare
but serious liver injury with Esmya for fibroids. 2018. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/ne
ws/prac-recommends-new-measures-minimise-risk-rare-serious-liver-injury-esmya-fibroi
ds (Accessed on March 26, 2020).
126. Esmya: New measures to minimise risk of rare but serious liver injury http s://www.ema.
europa.eu/medicines/human/referrals/esmya (Accessed on August 08, 2018).23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 34/39127. Ulipristal acetate for uterine fibroids: EMA recommends restricting use. European Medici
nes Agency. November 13, 2020. Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/ulip
ristal-acetate-uterine-fibroids-ema-recommends-restricting-use (Accessed on July 26, 20
23).
128. Lukes AS, Soper D, Harrington A, et al. Health-Related Quality of Life With Ulipristal
Acetate for Treatment of Uterine Leiomyomas: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet
Gynecol 2019; 133:869.
129. Donnez J, Tatarchuk TF, Bouchard P, et al. Ulipristal acetate versus placebo for fibroid
treatment before surgery. N Engl J Med 2012; 366:409.
130. Donnez J, Tomaszewski J, Vázquez F, et al. Ulipristal acetate versus leuprolide acetate for
uterine fibroids. N Engl J Med 2012; 366:421.
131. Stewart EA. Uterine fibroids and evidence-based medicine--not an oxymoron. N Engl J
Med 2012; 366:471.
132. Liu JH, Soper D, Lukes A, et al. Ulipristal Acetate for Treatment of Uterine Leiomyomas: A
Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet Gynecol 2018; 132:1241.
133. Simon JA, Catherino W, Segars JH, et al. Ulipristal Acetate for Treatment of Symptomatic
Uterine Leiomyomas: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet Gynecol 2018; 131:431.
134. Donnez J, Vázquez F, Tomaszewski J, et al. Long-term treatment of uterine fibroids with
ulipristal acetate ☆ . Fertil Steril 2014; 101:1565.
135. Tristan M, Orozco LJ, Steed A, et al. Mifepristone for uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2012; 2012:CD007687.
136. Fiscella K, Eisinger SH, Meldrum S, et al. Effect of mifepristone for symptomatic
leiomyomata on quality of life and uterine size: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet
Gynecol 2006; 108:1381.
137. Bagaria M, Suneja A, Vaid NB, et al. Low-dose mifepristone in treatment of uterine
leiomyoma: a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 2009; 49:77.
138. Engman M, Granberg S, Williams AR, et al. Mifepristone for treatment of uterine
leiomyoma. A prospective randomized placebo controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2009;
24:1870.
139. Coutinho EM. Treatment of large fibroids with high doses of gestrinone. Gynecol Obstet
Invest 1990; 30:44.
140. Ke LQ, Yang K, Li J, Li CM. Danazol for uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;
:CD007692.
141. Song H, Lu D, Navaratnam K, Shi G. Aromatase inhibitors for uterine fibroids. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2013; 2013:CD009505.23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 35/39142. Bizzarri N, Ghirardi V, Remorgida V, et al. Three-month treatment with triptorelin,
letrozole and ulipristal acetate before hysteroscopic resection of uterine myomas:
prospective comparative pilot study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2015; 192:22.
143. Leone Roberti Maggiore U, Scala C, Venturini PL, Ferrero S. Preoperative treatment with
letrozole in patients undergoing laparoscopic myomectomy of large uterine myomas: a
prospective non-randomized study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2014; 181:157.
144. Deng L, Wu T, Chen XY, et al. Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) for uterine
leiomyomas. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 10:CD005287.
145. Moroni RM, Martins WP, Ferriani RA, et al. Add-back therapy with GnRH analogues for
uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 2015:CD010854.
146. Xi S, Liske E, Wang S, et al. Effect of Isopropanolic Cimicifuga racemosa Extract on
Uterine Fibroids in Comparison with Tibolone among Patients of a Recent Randomized,
Double Blind, Parallel-Controlled Study in Chinese Women with Menopausal Symptoms.
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2014; 2014:717686.
147. Liu JP, Yang H, Xia Y, Cardini F. Herbal preparations for uterine fibroids. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2013; 2013:CD005292.
148. Chen NN, Han M, Yang H, et al. Chinese herbal medicine Guizhi Fuling Formula for
treatment of uterine fibroids: a systematic review of randomised clinical trials. BMC
Complement Altern Med 2014; 14:2.
149. Zhang Y, Peng W, Clarke J, Liu Z. Acupuncture for uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2010; 2010:CD007221.
150. Cruz J, Carrington L, Hong H. A Feasibility Study on Treatment of Uterine Fibroids with
Tung's Acupuncture. Med Acupunct 2019; 31:384.
Topic 5478 Version 66.023/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 36/39GRAPHICS
PALM-COEIN subclassification system for leiomyomas
FIGO leiomyoma subclassification system. System 2 classification system including the FIGO
leiomyoma subclassification system. The system that includes the tertiary classification of leiomyomas
categorizes the submucous group according to the original Wamsteker et al system and adds
categorizations for intramural, subserosal, and transmural lesions. Intracavitary lesions are attached
to the endometrium by a narrow stalk ( ≤ 10% or the mean of three diameters of the leiomyoma) and
are classified as Type 0, whereas Types 1 and 2 require a portion of the lesion to be intramural: with
Type 1 being less than 50% of the mean diameter and Type 2 at least 50%. Type 3 lesions are totally
intramural but also about the endometrium. Type 3 are formally distinguished from Type 2 with
hysteroscopy using the lowest possible intrauterine pressure necessary to allow visualization. Type 4
lesions are intramural leiomyomas that are entirely within the myometrium, with no extension to the
endometrial surface or to the serosa. Subserous (Types 5, 6, and 7) leiomyomas represent the mirror
image of the submucous leiomyomas: with Type 5 being at least 50% intramural, Type 6 being less
than 50% intramural, and Type 7 being attached to the serosa by a stalk that is also ≤ 10% or the
mean of three diameters of the leiomyoma. Classification of lesions that are transmural are
categorized by their relationship to both the endometrial and the serosal surfaces. The endometrial
relationship is noted first, with the serosal relationship second (eg, Type 2-5). An additional category,
Type 8, is reserved for leiomyomas that do not relate to the myometrium at all, and would include
cervical lesions (demonstrated), those that exist in the round or broad ligaments without direct
attachment to the uterus, and other so-called "parasitic" lesions.[1]23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 37/39FIGO: International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics.
Reference:
1. Wamsteker K, Emanuel MH, de Kruif JH. Transcervical hysteroscopic resection of submucous ﬁbroids for abnormal
uterine bleeding: Results regarding the degree of intramural extension. Obstet Gynecol 1993; 82:736.
From: Munro MG. Abnormal Uterine Bleeding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010. Copyright © 2010 M. Munro.
Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.
Updated with information from:
Munro MG, Critchley HOD, Fraser IS, FIGO Menstrual Disorders Commi ttee. The two FIGO systems for normal and
abnormal uterine bleeding symptoms and classiﬁcation of causes of abnormal uterine bleeding in the reproductive
years: 2018 revisions. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2018; 143:393.
Graphic 91085 Version 4.023/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 38/39Contributor Disclosures
Elizabeth A Stewart, MDGrant/Research/Clinical Trial Support: NIH Grants [Uterine fibroids and
adenomyosis]; PCORI [Infertility]. Consultant/Advisory Boards: AbbVie [Uterine fibroids]; Alnylam
[Heavy menstrual bleeding]; ASKA [Uterine fibroids]. Other Financial Interest: Omnia [CME course];
Omnicuris [CME course]; PER [CME course]. All of the relevant financial relationships listed have been
mitigated.Robert L Barbieri, MDNo relevant financial relationship(s) with ineligible companies to
disclose.Alana Chakrabarti, MDNo relevant financial relationship(s) with ineligible companies to
disclose.
Contributor disclosures are reviewed for conflicts of interest by the editorial group. When found, these
are addressed by vetting through a multi-level review process, and through requirements for
references to be provided to support the content. Appropriately referenced content is required of all
authors and must conform to UpToDate standards of evidence.
Conflict of interest policy
23/02/2025, 23:47 Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas): Treatment overview - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/uterine-fibroids-leiomyomas-treatment-overview/print?search=ryeqo&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3… 39/39