# Extracted from: Uptodate - 2025 - Preexisting and gestational diabetes - Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management.pdf
# Guideline ID: uptodate-2025-preexisting-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management
# Content length: 66426 characters
# Processing date: 1740354353.283942

Official reprint from UpToDate
www.uptodate.com © 2025 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes:
Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management
INTRODUCTION
In pregnancies complicated by diabetes, a key therapeutic goal across gestation is avoidance
of maternal hyperglycemia, which increases the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes,
including preeclampsia, fetal macrosomia, and neonatal hypoglycemia, among others. Strict
avoidance of hyperglycemia remains important during labor because maternal
hyperglycemia at that time has been linked to fetal hypoxemia and neonatal hypoglycemia.
Glycemic targets are relaxed postpartum both because the fetus is no longer exposed to
maternal hyperglycemia and because the risk for maternal hypoglycemia increases when
insulin resistance dramatically falls after placental expulsion.
This topic will discuss inpatient glycemic management in preexisting (also called
pregestational) and gestational diabetes, with a focus on the intrapartum and postpartum
periods. Other issues in the management of diabetes in pregnancy are reviewed separately:®
AUTHOR:Camille E Powe, MD
SECTION EDITORS:David M Nathan, MD, Erika F Werner, MD, MS
DEPUTY EDITOR:Vanessa A Barss, MD, FACOG
All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our peer review process is complete.
Literature review current through: Jan 2025.
This topic last updated: Oct 23, 2024.
(See "Preexisting (pregestational) diabetes: Preconception counseling, evaluation, and
management".)●
(See "Preexisting (pregestational) diabetes mellitus: Antenatal glycemic management".) ●
(See "Preexisting (pregestational) diabetes mellitus: Obstetric issues and pregnancy
management".)●
(See "Diabetic ketoacidosis in pregnancy".) ●
(See "Gestational diabetes mellitus: Glucose management, maternal prognosis, and follow-
up".)●
(See "Gestational diabetes mellitus: Obstetric issues and management".) ●23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 1/27INTRAPARTUM MANAGEMENT
Factors affecting glycemic management — Intensive management of maternal glycemia
during labor and delivery is commonly recommended to optimize fetal outcomes. During
labor, a variety of factors impact glycemic management and should be considered:
Glycemic targets — A reasonable target range for intrapartum glucose levels is 70 to 125
mg/dL (3.9 to 6.9 mmol/L). This target range encompasses recommendations of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG; 70 to 110 mg/dL [3.9 to 6.1
mmol/L]) [1].
Rationale — Attention to intrapartum avoidance of hyperglycemia is based on evidence
that it reduces the risk of two major complications: fetal hypoxemia and neonatal
hypoglycemia.Metabolic demands of labor – During the active phase of labor, glucose uptake by the
contracting uterus lowers blood glucose and reduces insulin requirements, analogous to
exercise (see "Exercise guidance in adults with diabetes mellitus").●
Food restriction – Many people in labor are placed on a clear liquid diet. Caloric restriction
can reduce insulin requirements, but clear liquid diets that include sugar-sweetened
beverages can cause hyperglycemia (see "Labor and delivery: Management of the normal
first stage", section on 'Oral intake').●
Dextrose-containing intravenous fluids – Administration of dextrose-containing fluids
may prevent dehydration, shorten the length of labor, and prevent ketosis, but may also
lead to hyperglycemia if insulin is not present in sufficient quantities (see "Labor and
delivery: Management of the normal first stage", section on 'Intravenous fluids').●
Fetal hypoxemia — Most of the literature relating fetal hypoxemia to maternal
hyperglycemia was published prior to 1990, before the availability of rapid-acting insulin
analogues and the publication of seminal studies demonstrating the benefits of
intensive glycemic control in diabetes [2]; yet, this literature provides strong evidence for
a causal relationship between maternal hyperglycemia and fetal hypoxemia during
labor. For example:●
Experimental studies in sheep suggest that fetal hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia
(resulting from maternal hyperglycemia) increase fetal oxygen consumption and can
lead to fetal hypoxemia, acidemia, and (if severe enough) death [3,4].•
In pregnant individuals without diabetes, rapid infusion of 50 grams of dextrose
during labor (as compared with lactated ringers or normal saline) resulted in maternal•23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 2/27and fetal hyperglycemia and reduced cord blood pH in a randomized trial [5].
In pregnant individuals with diabetes, an observational study found that glycemic
control in the six hours prior to giving birth was associated with perinatal asphyxia
(defined as late decelerations, prolonged fetal bradycardia, one-minute APGAR <6, or
intrauterine fetal death), while maternal glycated hemoglobin (A1C) in the third
trimester was not [6]. Participants in this study with and without perinatal asphyxia
had a mean blood glucose during labor of 161 mg/dL (8.9 mmol/L) and 127 mg/dL (7.1
mmol/L), respectively; average A1C at 36 weeks of gestation was 8.5 and 8.0 percent.•
Theoretically, if intrapartum hyperglycemia occurs on a background of chronic
maternal hyperglycemia (high A1C), which reduces red blood cell 2.3-
diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) concentrations, then maternal hemoglobin will bind
oxygen more tightly and therefore release it less well in areas of low oxygen tension,
such as the intervillous space [7,8]. This could compound intrapartum fetal hypoxemia
and acidemia [6].•
Neonatal hypoglycemia — Maternal hyperglycemia causes fetal hyperinsulinemia,
which can result in hypoglycemia after birth [9-11]. Neonatal hypoglycemia is usually
transient, but neurologic sequelae can occur and neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)
admission may be needed. (See "Management and outcome of neonatal hypoglycemia".)●
Whether antenatal or intrapartum glucose control is more important for reducing the
risk of neonatal hypoglycemia is uncertain. Antenatal hyperglycemia may result in
chronic fetal hyperinsulinemia, while intrapartum hyperglycemia may result in acute
fetal hyperinsulinemia, both of which may persist temporarily after birth in newborns.
In a 2002 study of 107 individuals with type 1 diabetes, mean intrapartum glucose
levels >140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) resulted in hypoglycemia in over 80 percent of
neonates, while A1C levels from the first, second, and third trimester were not
associated with neonatal blood glucose [10].•
However, a 2018 systematic review found that results of studies evaluating the
association between intrapartum glucose levels and neonatal hypoglycemia were
mixed; many studies reporting a relationship were older (ie, not reflecting
contemporary management for diabetes in pregnancy) and failed to account for
confounders such as antenatal glycemic control, preterm birth, and large for
gestational age birth weight [11].•
In a 2020 observational study that adjusted for these factors (157 type 1 diabetes, 237
type 2 diabetes, 3256 gestational diabetes), intrapartum glycemic control was not
significantly associated with neonatal hypoglycemia [12].•23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 3/27Glucose monitoring — The optimum method and frequency of glucose monitoring have not
been established. We measure capillary glucose levels and determine the frequency based
on a combination of factors, including the phase of labor, whether food is restricted, and the
insulin regimen.A 2019 secondary analysis of the CONCEPTT randomized trial of continuous glucose
monitoring (CGM) during pregnancy also found that intrapartum glucose levels
(available in only 33 participants) were not associated with neonatal hypoglycemia
[13]. In this small study, antenatal glycemia (by CGM and A1C) and fetal/neonatal
markers of chronic exposure to maternal hyperglycemia were stronger correlates of
neonatal hypoglycemia.•
Latent phase capillary glucose monitoring ●
Food not restricted – During the latent phase, if the patient is eating, we generally
continue the standard glucose monitoring schedule that was used antenatally: capillary
glucose monitoring fasting and one to two hours after meals. If prandial insulin has
been required, we also check capillary blood glucose prior to meals.•
Food restricted – Once food is restricted, we measure capillary glucose levels every four
hours and administer insulin as needed to maintain euglycemia (see 'Insulin
management' below).•
Active phase capillary glucose monitoring (food is typically restricted during this phase) ●
During the active phase, we monitor capillary blood glucose every hour in patients on an
intravenous insulin infusion or an insulin pump; this includes all patients with type 1
diabetes.•
In patients on subcutaneous insulin or on no insulin during labor, we measure capillary
blood glucose every two to four hours, depending on the stability of the blood glucose
levels. In a randomized trial of strict versus liberal intrapartum glycemic management
for gestational diabetes, monitoring and treating capillary blood glucose with
correctional insulin every four hours as compared with hourly did not result in a greater
risk of neonatal hypoglycemia [14]. In fact, neonatal blood glucose in the first 24 hours
of life was lower in the group that had hourly monitoring and a stricter glucose target
(60 to 100 mg/dL [3.3 to 5.6 mmol/L] versus 60 to 120 mg/dL [3.3 to 6.7 mmol/L]).•
Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices – An increasing number of people with
diabetes are using CGM devices throughout pregnancy. There is limited evidence
supporting the accuracy of these devices in the inpatient setting, though hospital use
increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. (See "COVID-19: Issues related to diabetes
mellitus in adults".) In a single study that compared glucose measured by intermittently●23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 4/27Insulin management — We individualize insulin management during labor, considering the
type of diabetes, regimen prior to labor, and glucose level on presentation. The following
approaches should not be considered absolute protocols and may need to be adjusted to
meet changing intrapartum needs.
Type 1 diabetes — People with type 1 diabetes have minimal to no endogenous insulin
production and require exogenous basal insulin without interruption to prevent diabetic
ketoacidosis. Euglycemia should not preclude the administration of basal insulin.
Additional insulin is required for any carbohydrate intake. A review of these principles can
be found elsewhere. (See "Management of blood glucose in adults with type 1 diabetes
mellitus".)
In the active phase of labor, patients with type 1 diabetes may have a considerable drop in
insulin requirements, and often require dextrose infusion to allow continued and
necessary insulin administration [16].
Patients on multiple daily insulin injectionsscanned CGM and capillary blood glucose using a hospital point-of-care glucometer in
patients undergoing cesarean birth, the mean absolute relative difference of paired
glucose measurements (a measure of accuracy) was similar to that reported in studies in
pregnant and nonpregnant individuals in the outpatient setting [15]. Sixty-eight percent of
glucose values were "concordant" (ie, they would have resulted in the same intrapartum
glycemic management) and the discordant glucose values only occurred when the glucose
was <70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) or >110 mg/dL (6.1 mmol/L).
Most hospitals require confirmation of CGM glucose readings via capillary blood glucose
monitoring for insulin dosing decisions. It is our practice to perform capillary blood
glucose monitoring at the frequencies described above even if patients continue to use
their home CGM devices as an adjunct for self-management. CGM sensors should be worn
at a site away from the lower abdomen (eg, flank or upper arm). Discrepancies between
capillary glucose measurements and CGM measurements should be noted and addressed
with calibration if available on the CGM device being used. (See "Glucose monitoring in the
ambulatory management of nonpregnant adults with diabetes mellitus", section on 'CGM
systems'.)
Before food is restricted, patients with type 1 diabetes need basal, preprandial, and
correctional insulin. We typically provide preprandial and correctional coverage using
the home subcutaneous insulin regimen. If the patient's blood glucose levels have
been tightly controlled at home or if the patient is not eating full meals on the labor
unit, a dose reduction of 20 to 30 percent may be necessary to prevent hypoglycemia.●23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 5/27After food is restricted – As the patient enters active labor or when food becomes
restricted, we administer dextrose-containing intravenous fluids (5 or 10 percent
dextrose) and start an insulin infusion using a standardized protocol, such as that
published by Dude et al [17]. Patients who present with significant hyperglycemia (eg,
>200 mg/dL [11.1 mmol/L]) may have an insulin infusion initiated in early labor, rather
than waiting until active labor. Use of an insulin infusion for intrapartum glycemic
management is recommended by ACOG [1].●
In patients starting insulin infusions, we hold dextrose-containing fluids if the blood
glucose prior to starting the insulin infusion is ≥ 160 mg/dL (8.9 mmol/L), to bring
blood glucose into the target range (70 to 125 mg/dL [3.9 to 6.9 mmol/L]) more
rapidly. After the blood glucose declines below 160 mg/dL (8.9 mmol/L), the dextrose-
containing fluids can be started and continued, with further hyperglycemia managed
using a change in the rate of the insulin infusion, per protocol. A small dose of basal
insulin (equivalent to the postpartum insulin dose) can be given in addition to the
insulin infusion protocol to prevent inadvertent interruptions to basal insulin delivery
in type 1 diabetes.
Protocols – Various reasonable protocols for intrapartum intravenous insulin are
available [1,17-20]. Two studies of specific protocols have reported excellent maternal
glycemic outcomes:●
A pre-post implementation study by Dude et al evaluated an intrapartum
management protocol for laboring patients that accounted for an individual
patient's antenatal insulin requirement (a proxy for insulin resistance) [18]. As
compared with nonprotocolized management prior to protocol implementation, this
protocol was associated with lower peak maternal intrapartum glucose (127 mg/dL
pre versus 116 mg/dL post), reduced maternal hyperglycemia (>125 mg/dL [6.9
mmol/L], 51 percent pre versus 38 percent post), and less frequent maternal
hypoglycemia (<60 mg/dL [3.3 mmol/L], 6.1 percent pre- versus 2.5 percent post).
The intravenous insulin protocol [17] includes an infusion of 10 percent dextrose at
50 mL per hour if the patient is not hyperglycemic (ie, it is initiated if blood glucose
is <160 mg/dL [8.9 mmol/L]). We typically use 5 percent dextrose at 75 to 125 mL per
hour.•
A small observational study of intrapartum use of a computer-driven insulin infusion
protocol reported the protocol improved mean glucose (103 mg/dL versus 122
mg/dL [5.7 versus 6.8 mmol/L]) and increased the proportion of patients who
achieved target blood glucose by delivery (82 versus 9 percent), without a significant
difference in maternal hypoglycemia (0 versus 4 percent) when compared with a
"standard" insulin infusion protocol based on the current blood glucose level alone•23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 6/27Patients on insulin pumps — Many pregnant people with type 1 diabetes use
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII or pump therapy) to manage glycemia
antenatally and prefer to remain on their insulin pump during labor and throughout
their delivery hospitalization. Although data are limited, this is reasonable as a
randomized trial (70 participants) found no significant difference in first neonatal blood
glucose (primary outcome) or any secondary neonatal outcomes in patients assigned to
use their own insulin pump during labor versus intravenous insulin infusion [22].
Participants assigned to intravenous insulin had more maternal hyperglycemia during
labor (maternal glucose >200 mg/dL [11.1 mmol/L]). A prospective observational study
also reported that advanced hybrid closed-loop therapy was safe and effective in
maintaining target glucose levels intrapartum and in the early postpartum period [23].
(See "Management of blood glucose in adults with type 1 diabetes mellitus", section on
'Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (insulin pump)'.)[20]. The computer algorithm calculates the insulin infusion rate based on the
current blood glucose plus a "multiplier," which starts at a standard figure and
increases or decreases depending on whether the blood glucose is in the target
range [21].
For patients who prefer not to use their pumps or who are unable to self-manage
their pump while hospitalized, management of insulin infusion is the same as that
for patients who normally take multiple daily insulin injections (see 'Patients on
multiple daily insulin injections' above).●
For patients who wish to use their own insulin pumps while in the hospital,
hospitals should have written policies/protocols. Those who use their pump during
labor should move the infusion site away from the lower abdomen (eg, to the flank,
thigh, or buttock). If the patient has persistent hyperglycemia on the insulin pump, the
pump site, tubing, and control device should be evaluated to ensure they are working
properly. We have a low threshold for switching to an insulin infusion for persistent
hyperglycemia greater than target (>125 mg/dL [6.9 mmol/L]).●
Before food is restricted – In the latent phase before food is restricted, patients
using an insulin pump will continue to need prandial insulin coverage, which we
typically provide by continuing the antenatal insulin pump settings. If the patient's
blood glucose levels have been tightly controlled at home or if the patient is not
eating full meals on the labor unit, we consider a dose reduction of 20 to 30 percent.•
After food is restricted – Once food is restricted and/or the patient is in the active
phase of labor, we start a constant infusion of dextrose-containing fluids in patients
whose blood glucose is ≤ 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L, a lower threshold for dextrose-
containing fluids than for our insulin infusion protocol because of the presumed•23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 7/27Type 2 diabetes — Intrapartum insulin requirements vary widely in these patients and
many require no administration of insulin because of the combination of food restriction
and active labor.
Patients on multiple daily injections — Most patients with type 2 diabetes are treated
in pregnancy with multiple daily insulin injections. (See "Preexisting (pregestational)lower risk of hypoglycemia when using the home insulin pump). This allows for a
stable basal rate of subcutaneous insulin infusion that can be adjusted to achieve
glycemic targets as labor progresses. Once we initiate the dextrose infusion, we
continue it unless the patient is markedly hyperglycemic, and adjust the insulin
pump basal rate based on the trends in blood glucose. Bolus insulin is administered
through the pump to provide rapid correction of hyperglycemia.
Few protocols for intrapartum insulin pump management have been published:
A multicenter retrospective study described a standardized protocol for intrapartum
CSII in a series of 65 patients with type 1 diabetes [24]. The protocol involved using
three potential basal rates. Patients who were euglycemic on presentation
continued the basal rate at the last antepartum level; this was reduced to 30 to 70
percent of the last antepartum level when active labor began and intravenous
glucose commenced. A lower basal rate of 0.1 to 0.2 units per hour was used if
hypoglycemia developed.•
Another protocol suggests increasing or decreasing the pump basal rate by 20
percent as needed every hour to maintain glucose in the target range (with 10
percent dextrose infusion at 50 mL per hour if blood glucose was ≤ 100 mg/dL [5.6
mmol/L]) [17].•
The protocol in a randomized trial comparing intrapartum insulin pump versus
intravenous insulin infusion described above involved increasing the pump basal
rate by 5 to 20 percent for hyperglycemia, depending on the current blood glucose
level and rate of change [22]. For hypoglycemia, the pump was suspended and
intravenous dextrose was given.•
Patients using hybrid closed-loop insulin pumps – There are few data on the
intrapartum use of the hybrid closed-loop insulin pumps available in the United States.
These pumps are not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
pregnant individuals, but off-label use is increasingly common. The autho r's practice is
to continue hybrid closed-loop insulin therapy intrapartum in patients who were using
it off-label in pregnancy, provided that CGM readings remain congruent with frequent
hospital glucometer blood glucose checks. Hospital policies on inpatient use of
patient-managed insulin pumps vary widely.●23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 8/27diabetes mellitus: Antenatal glycemic management".)
Patients on metformin or an insulin pumpBefore food is restricted – Before labor and in the latent phase of labor before food is
restricted, we typically provide 70 to 80 percent of the total daily dose of insulin that
was used at home. The exact dose reduction from the home insulin regimen depends
on the recent level of glycemic control, the patient diet, the blood glucose level on
presentation, and the anticipated labor course.●
Approximately half of the hospital-provided total daily dose (35 to 40 percent of the
home total daily dose) is given as intermediate-acting insulin (NPH) in two divided
doses every 12 hours. We use NPH instead of longer-acting formulations because of
the greater ease in making frequent adjustments. We may give an even lower dose of
NPH insulin if active labor is anticipated in the next six to eight hours, given the
duration of action of NPH and anticipated decline in insulin requirement with uterine
contractions.
Before labor and in the latent phase of labor before food is restricted, half of the
hospital-provided total daily dose is given as rapid-acting insulin prior to meals in
three divided doses (approximately 12 to 15 percent of the home total daily dose with
each of three meals) plus correctional rapid-acting insulin (table 1).
After food restriction and/or in the active phase of labor, we use either an
intravenous insulin infusion according to a standardized protocol (such as that
published by Dude et al [17]) or subcutaneous correctional insulin administered via a
sliding scale every two to four hours (table 1). If the patient is very or persistently
hyperglycemic (glucose >200 mg/dL [11.1 mmol/L] on presentation or glucose >125
mg/dL [6.9 mmol/L] on multiple checks), we use intravenous insulin infusion rather
than subcutaneous insulin. Use of an insulin infusion for intrapartum glycemic
management is recommended by ACOG [1].●
In active labor, we start a constant infusion of dextrose-containing fluids in patients
whose capillary blood glucose is <160 mg/dL (8.9 mmol/L) if using an insul in infusion.
In patients on subcutaneous correctional insulin, we start a constant infusion of
dextrose-containing fluids in patients whose blood glucose is ≤ 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L,
a lower threshold because of a presumed lower risk of hypoglycemia when using
subcutaneous versus intravenous insulin). Once we initiate the dextrose infusion, we
continue it while adjusting the insulin infusion or administering the correctional
subcutaneous insulin dose unless the patient is markedly hyperglycemic.
Metformin – For patients taking metformin at home, we hold this agent on admission
to the hospital for delivery.●23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print?… 9/27Gestational diabetes
Special situations
Scheduled cesarean birth in patients receiving insulinInsulin pump – Patients managed with insulin pumps antepartum can be managed
similarly to patients with type 1 diabetes who use pumps. (See 'Patients on insulin
pumps' above.)●
Subcutaneous correctional insulin – Patients with gestational diabetes can often be
managed with subcutaneous correctional insulin during labor (table 2). If blood
glucose levels are persistently above the goal of ≤ 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L) despite
subcutaneous insulin, insulin infusion can be initiated.●
A randomized trial comparing intensive glucose management (goal blood glucose 70 to
100 mg/dL [3.3-5.6 mmol/L], hourly monitoring) versus liberalized glucose management
(goal blood glucose 70 to 120 mg/dL [3.9-6.7 mmol/L], every-four-hours monitoring) in
patients with gestational diabetes using subcutaneous rapid-acting correctional insulin
to manage intrapartum glycemia supports the use of a liberalized protocol in these
patients, as shown in the table (table 2) [14]. In this trial, the mean neonatal blood
glucose level in the first 24 hours of life was lower in the intensive management group,
but neonatal hypoglycemia rates were similar in both groups.
Rotating fluids – A strategy of "rotating fluids" (table 3) has also been used in
patients with gestational diabetes, and reduced the need for intrapartum insul in
infusion.●
A small randomized trial found similar mean glucose levels (103 mg/dL [5.7 mmol/L])
and neonatal outcomes in insulin-treated patients (primarily gestational diabetes) who
were treated with the rotating fluids protocol and those receiving continuous insulin
infusion to achieve glucose targets of 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) [25].
When cesarean birth is planned in patients on insulin for diabetes, the procedure
should be scheduled early in the morning.●
Patients on multiple daily injections should maintain their usual dose of NPH on the
night prior to admission. If they use a longer-acting basal insulin at night (eg,
glargine), the dose should be decreased by 20 to 50 percent, with the exact
percentage dose reduction determined by the risk of morning hypoglycemia based on
recent fasting self-monitored glucose values. Those on insulin pumps should generally
maintain the basal rate until admission to the hospital, unless they are prone to early●23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 10/27morning hypoglycemia, in which case the overnight basal rate can be decreased by 20
to 50 percent.
On the morning of the cesarean: ●
Type 1 diabetes – On the morning of the cesarean, patients on multiple daily
injections who administer their basal insulin (other than insulin degludec) in the
morning should administer either a) the anticipated postpartum dose or b) be
admitted for possible intravenous dextrose on the morning of the cesarean and
administer 50 to 70 percent of the most recent home morning basal insulin dose. If
the cesarean will be delayed past the early morning, the latter approach should be
taken. Insulin degludec is a long-acting insulin with a duration of action up to 42
hours. Thus, we hold the insulin degludec dose on the morning of a planned
cesarean birth to prevent postpartum hypoglycemia [26].•
Patients on insulin pumps can continue using them if congruent with hospital policy.
We reduce the basal insulin dose by approximately 20 percent if the patient is prone to
morning hypoglycemia and switch to postpartum settings during or immediately after
the procedure. Prandial insulin is held on the morning of the cesarean consistent with
taking nothing by mouth status, but correctional insulin can be given if the blood
glucose is above target (>125 mg/dL [6.9 mmol/L]).
We provide dextrose-containing fluids if the blood glucose falls below 100 mg/dL
(5.6 mmol/L).
Type 2 or gestational diabetes – On the morning of the cesarean, the dose of
insulin can generally be held. If the cesarean will be delayed past the early morning,
50 to 70 percent of the usual basal insulin dose can be given and intravenous
dextrose should be administered if the blood glucose is below 100 mg/dL (5.6
mmol/L).•
We monitor glucose levels every hour in patients with type 1, type 2, and gestational
diabetes who take insulin because of their risk of developing hypoglycemia in the
setting of taking nothing by mouth.●
Pre- and intraoperative hyperglycemia is treated with either intravenous insulin or
subcutaneous rapid-acting insulin, as needed, to manage glucose levels.●
Corticosteroids are now frequently used as antiemetic prophylaxis during cesarean
birth. However, the dosages typically used have significant effects on postpartum
glycemia, thus we generally prefer to avoid them in most patients with diabetes. If
used, they may increase postpartum insulin requirements beyond what is●23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 11/27Scheduled cesarean birth in patients using metformin — Patients using metformin
should hold this medication on the morning of the cesarean.
Scheduled cesarean birth in patients with gestational diabetes managed with
nutritional therapy alone — These patients are managed similarly to pregnant
individuals without diabetes undergoing scheduled cesarean birth.
Induction of labor — Patients undergoing induction of labor can be managed similarly
to those who have spontaneous labor. In patients on long-acting basal insulin (>24 hour
duration of action), particularly multiparous patients who may have a shorter labor,
some clinicians reduce the dose by 20 to 50 percent on the night prior to an induction of
labor.
POSTPARTUM MANAGEMENT
Type 1 diabetes
Pathophysiology — Insulin requirements drop precipitously immediately after birth
because pregnancy-associated insulin resistance rapidly dissipates after expulsion of the
placenta [27]. The insulin requirement reaches a nadir at approximately 48 hours
postpartum and is lower than the prepregnancy requirement [28]. Insulin resistance (and
therefore insulin requirement) then increases over the subsequent two to four weeks
postpartum, but does not reach prepregnancy levels as long as the individual is
breastfeeding [29-31]. (See 'Breastfeeding mothers' below.)
Glycemic monitoring and targetsrecommended below. (See "Postoperative nausea and vomiting", section on
'Glucocorticoids'.)
Postoperative management is discussed below. (See 'Postpartum management'
below.)●
Capillary blood glucose levels are monitored fasting, before meals, and at bedtime. The
author also performs an overnight blood glucose check (at 2 or 3 AM) on the first two
nights postpartum because of the risk of overnight hypoglycemia.●
If the patient is not eating, capillary blood glucose can be monitored every four to six
hours. Given the risk of hypoglycemia and the need to administer basal insulin,
dextrose-containing fluids are infused in patients who are not reliably eating.
Maternal glucose targets can be relaxed postpartum because glycemic effects on fetal
outcomes are no longer a concern. The targets are generally the same as those in other●23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 12/27Insulin management — If information about the prepregnancy dose is available, we
initially provide 60 to 70 percent of the prepregnancy total daily insulin dose, with half
given as basal insulin. Given that people with type 1 diabetes typically double their insulin
requirements during pregnancy [32], this initial postpartum insulin dosing is usually 30 to
35 percent of the antenatal doses. However, close attention to glucose levels and
adjustment of the insulin regimen in the first few days postpartum is necessary because of
wide patient variation in insulin requirements, as demonstrated in a study of patients with
type 1 diabetes using a closed-loop insulin delivery during labor and on days 1 and 2
postpartum [33]. Because insulin degludec is a long-acting insulin with a duration of action
up to 42 hours, some clinicians hold the first postpartum insulin degludec dose after
delivery to prevent postpartum hypoglycemia related to the higher doses administered
prior to delivery [26].
Basal, prandial, and correctional insulin is provided via multiple daily injections or insul in
pump (see "Management of blood glucose in adults with type 1 diabetes mellitus"). A
correctional sliding scale for hospitalized postpartum patients on multiple daily injections
is available in the table (table 4). Patients who were using hybrid closed-loop insulin
pump therapy prior to pregnancy and suspended it during pregnancy may resume
automated insulin delivery postpartum, but the exact timing of resumption should be
determined by the specific hybrid closed-loop algorithm being used. Some algorithms rely
on the insulin delivery in the preceding days to weeks, thus patients may need to run the
pump without automated features temporarily to avoid overly aggressive insul in delivery
based on pregnancy insulin requirements.
The only trial of use of a hybrid closed-loop insulin pump in the postpartum setting
demonstrated less hypoglycemia (and without excess hyperglycemia) in those randomly
assigned to closed-loop insulin delivery compared with those assigned to automated
insulin suspension only [34]. However, participants were randomized at day 7 postpartum
to avoid the issue of the need for the closed-loop system to adapt to rapid changes in
insulin requirement in the immediate postpartum setting.
Close outpatient follow-up for insulin titration is important until the individual's insulin
requirement stabilizes in the first two to four weeks postpartum.
Breastfeeding mothers — Insulin requirements remain 15 to 20 percent lower than
prepregnancy requirements in breastfeeding mothers with type 1 diabetes [29-31,35].hospitalized patients (<140 mg/dL [7.8 mmol/L] preprandial glucose, <180 mg/dL [10.0
mmol/L] any random glucose); the author prefers to keep the blood glucose above 100
mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) in the first 24 to 28 hours postpartum given the high risk of
hypoglycemia. (see "Management of diabetes mellitus in hospitalized patients", section
on 'Glycemic targets').23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 13/27Studies examining glucose control via continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) in
individuals with type 1 diabetes and established breastfeeding (eg, one to two months
after birth) suggest no increase in episodes of hypoglycemia compared with those
feeding formula [36] or matched, nonpregnant [29] females with type 1 diabetes.
It has been suggested that breastfeeding individuals with type 1 diabetes should
consume a minimum of 210 grams of carbohydrates daily [35].
Exogenous insulin use is compatible with breastfeeding; insulin is a normal component
of human milk and is not expected to be orally bioavailable to the infant [35,37].
Type 2 diabetes
Pathophysiology — Insulin resistance rapidly dissipates after expulsion of the placenta, as
described above (see 'Pathophysiology' above). Glucose levels tend to be normal or only
modestly elevated in the immediate postpartum period in individuals with type 2 diabetes
not receiving glucose-lowering therapy.
Glycemic monitoring and targets
Insulin management — Many patients who were not on insulin before pregnancy or who
started insulin in the setting of planning pregnancy can stop insulin in the immediate
postpartum period. In the minority of patients who were on long-standing insulin therapy
prior to pregnancy, we follow a similar management plan as for type 1 diabetes (see
'Insulin management' above), with the addition of metformin if not contraindicated.
Patients who were not on long-standing insulin therapy should continue or initiate
metformin if no contraindication exists and start additional noninsulin therapies as
indicated (see below).Capillary blood glucose levels are monitored fasting, before meals, and at bedtime
during the postpartum hospitalization. The targets are generally the same as those in
other hospitalized patients (<140 mg/dL [7/8 mmol/L] preprandial glucose, <180 mg/dL
[10.0 mmol/L] any random glucose).●
After discharge, we ask patients who are not on insulin to monitor blood glucose levels
twice daily (fasting and either two hours after the largest meal or at bedtime) to identify
hyperglycemia in the first two to four weeks postpartum. While nonpregnant patients
with type 2 diabetes on noninsulin agents do not necessarily have to monitor blood
glucoses on a regular basis and can be monitored with A1C, the A1C is not reliable in the
immediate postpartum period due to alterations in red blood cell turnover that occur
during pregnancy and at delivery.23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 14/27Metformin management — In patients with type 2 diabetes, we start or continue
metformin after birth if there are no contraindications. Metformin is first-line therapy in
type 2 diabetes and in the absence of other contraindications should be continued even if
other agents are used. (See "Metformin in the treatment of adults with type 2 diabetes
mellitus", section on 'Contraindications'.)
We start with 500 mg orally once daily with food and increase the total daily dose by 500
mg weekly until a target dose of 1000 mg twice daily is reached. (See "Initial management
of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus" and "Metformin in the treatment
of adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus".)
While the patient is hospitalized, in addition to metformin, hyperglycemia is treated using
correctional insulin dosed via a sliding scale before meals (table 4). The sliding scale
insulin is discontinued prior to discharge. For patients who are not meeting glycemic
targets despite metformin, combination therapy is necessary to achieve optimal results
(see "Initial management of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus", section
on 'Persistent hyperglycemia'). Options for additional therapies for those who have
contraindications to metformin or who are persistently hyperglycemic on metformin are
limited in breastfeeding patients (see 'Breastfeeding mothers' below). Patients who are not
breastfeeding can be treated similarly to other nonpregnant patients. (See "Initial
management of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus", section on
'Persistent hyperglycemia'.)
Other diabetes medications — Other diabetes medications can be used in the
postpartum setting, similar to use outside of pregnancy, but most options (other than
insulin and metformin) are not compatible with breastfeeding (see below).
Breastfeeding mothers — Breastfeeding is encouraged in mothers with type 2 diabetes
and may have metabolic benefits. (See "Preexisting (pregestational) diabetes mellitus:
Obstetric issues and pregnancy management".)
Metformin is excreted at low levels in breastmilk and is considered compatible with
breastfeeding [38]. Exogenous insulin use is also compatible with breastfeeding [35,37].
If additional pharmacologic therapy beyond or instead of metformin or insulin is needed,
glyburide [39] is considered compatible with breastfeeding (see "Breastfeeding: Parental
education and support", section on 'Maternal medication safety').
Data on GLP-1 receptor agonists and SGLT2-inhibitors in lactation are not available, thus
are not recommended in breastfeeding patients. In particularly, SGLT2-inhibitors have
high oral bioavailability and were present in the milk of lactating animals who were
administered these medications. Thus, there is considerable concern for infant exposure
and adverse effects if a lactating parent uses these medications.23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 15/27Gestational diabetes
Pathophysiology — Insulin resistance rapidly dissipates after expulsion of the placenta, as
described above (see 'Pathophysiology' above). Diabetes medications are not routinely
given after birth to patients with gestational diabetes as glucose levels tend to be normal
without exogenous glucose-lowering therapy.
Glucose monitoring and targets
Breastfeeding — Based on observational studies, breastfeeding may prevent the
development of type 2 diabetes in mothers with a history of gestational diabetes (See
"Gestational diabetes mellitus: Obstetric issues and management", section on
'Breastfeeding'.)
SOCIETY GUIDELINE LINKS
Links to society and government-sponsored guidelines from selected countries and regions
around the world are provided separately. (See "Society guideline links: Diabetes mellitus in
pregnancy".)
INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS
UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the
Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5 to 6
grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have
about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview
and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are
longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10 to 12Many obstetrics services, including our own, assess fasting glucose levels 24 to 72 hours
after birth to check for overt diabetes (fasting glucose ≥ 126 mg/dL [7.0 mmol/L]) in
patients with gestational diabetes and continue to treat patients with hyperglycemia. A
normal postpartum fasting glucose does not obviate the need for additional postpartum
glucose testing. Typically, this consists of a two-hour oral glucose tolerance test at 4 to
12 weeks postpartum. However, some obstetrics services are now performing an early
two-hour oral glucose tolerance test during the delivery hospitalization. If overt diabetes
is not diagnosed while the patient is in the hospital postpartum, follow-up for
development of overt diabetes is recommended. Follow-up is discussed in detail
separately. (See "Gestational diabetes mellitus: Glucose management, maternal
prognosis, and follow-up", section on 'Follow-up' and "Gestational diabetes mellitus:
Obstetric issues and management", section on 'Screening for overt diabetes'.)●
th th
th th23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 16/27grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are
comfortable with some medical jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to
print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles
on a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.)
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONSBasics topics (see "Patient education: Care during pregnancy for people with type 1 or type
2 diabetes (The Basics)")●
Beyond the Basics topics (see "Patient education: Care during pregnancy for patients with
type 1 or 2 diabetes (Beyond the Basics)")●
Type 1 diabetes ●
Patients on multiple daily injections •
In early labor, if food is not restricted, the patient on multiple daily insulin injections
follows their home subcutaneous insulin regimen, including basal, prandial, and
correctional coverage. If the patient's blood glucose levels have been tightly controlled
at home or if the patient is not eating full meals on the labor unit, a dose reduction
may be necessary. (See 'Patients on multiple daily insulin injections' above.)-
Once food is restricted and/or the active phase is reached, an intravenous insulin
infusion is started using a standardized protocol. Dextrose-containing intravenous
fluids are administered along with the insulin infusion as long as the patient is not
hyperglycemic (ie, administer if blood glucose <160 mg/dL [8.9 mmol/L]). (See 'Patients
on multiple daily insulin injections' above.)-
Postpartum insulin requirements in the first few days are lower than prior to
pregnancy, reaching a nadir at 48 hours before increasing and stabilizing by two to
four weeks after birth. If the prepregnancy insulin dosages are known, we provide an
initial postpartum regimen that is 60 to 70 percent of the prepregnancy regimen. This
usually equates to insulin dosages that are 30 to 35 percent of the insulin dosages
prior to delivery. Postpartum insulin requirements vary widely; close monitoring and
adjustment are needed. (See 'Insulin management' above and 'Glycemic monitoring
and targets' above.)-
In breastfeeding patients with type 1 diabetes, insulin requirements may remain 15
to 20 percent lower than prior to pregnancy. (See 'Breastfeeding mothers' above.)23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 17/27Patients who use an insulin pump may continue to do so intrapartum if hospital
policies allow, but need to move the infusion site away from the lower abdomen (eg, to
the flank, thigh, or buttock), which is used for contraction and fetal monitoring. Data on
the use of hybrid closed-loop insulin pumps in the intrapartum and postpartum period
are limited. (See 'Patients on insulin pumps' above.)•
Target blood glucose levels are 70 to 125 mg/dL (3.9 to 6.9 mmol/L) during active labor.
Higher blood glucose levels have been associated with fetal acidemia and neonatal
hypoglycemia. These levels may be relaxed after birth (<140 mg/dL [7.8 mmol/L]
preprandial glucose, <180 mg/dL [10.0 mmol/L] any random glucose) and until the
patient stabilizes to avoid hypoglycemia. (See 'Glycemic targets' above and 'Glycemic
monitoring and targets' above.)•
Type 2 diabetes ●
In early labor, if food is not restricted, the patient on multiple daily insulin injections
takes 70 to 80 percent of the home antenatal total daily insulin dose. Half of this
provided dose is given as intermediate-acting insulin (NPH) in two divided doses every
12 hours. The other half is given as standing prandial rapid-acting insulin in three
divided doses before meals. Correctional rapid-acting insulin is also given before meals
(table 1). (See 'Patients on multiple daily injections' above.)•
After food restriction and/or in the active phase of labor, either an intravenous
insulin infusion or correctional insulin administered via a sliding scale every two to four
hours (table 1) is acceptable. Dextrose-containing fluids are infused if the patient is
not hyperglycemic. If the patient is very or persistently hyperglycemic (glucose >200
mg/dL [11.1 mmol/L] on presentation or glucose >125 mg/dL [6.9 mmol/L] on multiple
checks), we use an intravenous insulin infusion rather than subcutaneous insulin. (See
'Intrapartum management' above.)•
Patients on metformin should hold this medication during labor. (See 'Patients on
metformin or an insulin pump' above.)•
Patients managed with insulin pumps antepartum can be managed similarly to
patients with type 1 diabetes who use pumps. (See 'Patients on insulin pumps' above.)•
Postpartum – Most patients with type 2 diabetes should be treated with metformin
unless there are contraindications. Those who were on long-standing insulin before
pregnancy should follow a similar management plan as for type 1 diabetes, with the
addition of metformin. Breastfeeding may have metabolic benefits and should be
encouraged, but options for agents to treat hyperglycemia in breastfeeding patients are
limited to metformin, glyburide, and insulin. (See 'Metformin management' above and
'Insulin management' above.)•23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 18/27ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The UpToDate editorial staff acknowledges Michael F Greene, MD and Siri Kjos, MD, who
contributed to earlier versions of this topic review.
Use of UpToDate is subject to the Terms of Use.
REFERENCES
1. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists' Committee on Practice Bulletins—
Obstetrics. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 201: Pregestational Diabetes Mellitus. Obstet
Gynecol 2018; 132:e228. Reaffirmed 2023.
2. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group, Nathan DM, Genuth S, et al.
The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of
long-term complications in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;
329:977.
3. Carson BS, Philipps AF, Simmons MA, et al. Effects of a sustained insulin infusion upon
glucose uptake and oxygenation of the ovine fetus. Pediatr Res 1980; 14:147.
4. Philipps AF, Rosenkrantz TS, Porte PJ, Raye JR. The effects of chronic fetal hyperglycemia
on substrate uptake by the ovine fetus and conceptus. Pediatr Res 1985; 19:659.
5. Philipson EH, Kalhan SC, Riha MM, Pimentel R. Effects of maternal glucose infusion on
fetal acid-base status in human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987; 157:866.
6. Mimouni F, Miodovnik M, Siddiqi TA, et al. Perinatal asphyxia in infants of insulin-
dependent diabetic mothers. J Pediatr 1988; 113:345.
7. Madsen H, Ditzel J. Changes in red blood cell oxygen transport in diabetic pregnancy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1982; 143:421.Gestational diabetes ●
During labor, patients with gestational diabetes can often be managed with
subcutaneous correctional insulin (table 1). If blood glucose levels are persistently
above the goal of 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L) despite subcutaneous insulin, insul in infusion
can be initiated.•
Close follow-up for the development of overt diabetes is required. Choice of test, timing,
interpretation, and ongoing testing are discussed separately. (See "Gestational diabetes
mellitus: Glucose management, maternal prognosis, and follow-up", section on 'Follow-
up'.)•23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 19/278. Widness JA, Teramo KA, Clemons GK, et al. Direct relationship of antepartum glucose
control and fetal erythropoietin in human type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetic pregnancy.
Diabetologia 1990; 33:378.
9. Kline GA, Edwards A. Antepartum and intra-partum insulin management of type 1 and
type 2 diabetic women: Impact on clinically significant neonatal hypoglycemia. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract 2007; 77:223.
10. Taylor R, Lee C, Kyne-Grzebalski D, et al. Clinical outcomes of pregnancy in women with
type 1 diabetes(1). Obstet Gynecol 2002; 99:537.
11. Yamamoto JM, Benham J, Mohammad K, et al. Intrapartum glycaemic control and
neonatal hypoglycaemia in pregnancies complicated by diabetes: a systematic review.
Diabet Med 2018; 35:173.
12. Yamamoto JM, Donovan LE, Mohammad K, Wood SL. Severe neonatal hypoglycaemia
and intrapartum glycaemic control in pregnancies complicated by type 1, type 2 and
gestational diabetes. Diabet Med 2020; 37:138.
13. Yamamoto JM, Corcoy R, Donovan LE, et al. Maternal glycaemic control and risk of
neonatal hypoglycaemia in Type 1 diabetes pregnancy: a secondary analysis of the
CONCEPTT trial. Diabet Med 2019; 36:1046.
14. Hamel MS, Kanno LM, Has P, et al. Intrapartum Glucose Management in Women With
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet Gynecol 2019;
133:1171.
15. Citro F, Bianchi C, Aragona M, et al. Accuracy of intermittently scanned continuous
glucose monitoring during caesarean delivery in pregnant women with insulin-treated
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2024; 210:111611.
16. Jovanovic L, Peterson CM. Insulin and glucose requirements during the first stage of
labor in insulin-dependent diabetic women. Am J Med 1983; 75:607.
17. Dude A, Niznik CM, Szmuilowicz ED, et al. Management of Diabetes in the Intrapartum
and Postpartum Patient. Am J Perinatol 2018; 35:1119.
18. Dude AM, Niznik C, Peaceman AM, Yee LM. Evaluation of an Intrapartum Insul in
Regimen for Women With Diabetes. Obstet Gynecol 2020; 136:411.
19. Kitzmiller JL, Gavin L. Preexisting diabetes and pregnancy. In: Manual of Endocrinology a
nd Metabolism, 3rd ed, Lavin N (Ed), Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia 2002. p.6
60.
20. Dinglas C, Muscat J, Adams T, et al. Software-guided insulin dosing improves
intrapartum glycemic management in women with diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2018; 219:191.e1.
21. Bouw JW, Campbell N, Hull MA, et al. A retrospective cohort study of a nurse-driven
computerized insulin infusion program versus a paper-based protocol in critically ill23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 20/27patients. Diabetes Technol Ther 2012; 14:125.
22. Wilkie GL, Delpapa E, Leftwich HK. Intrapartum continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion vs intravenous insulin infusion among pregnant individuals with type 1
diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2023; 229:680.e1.
23. Beunen K, Gillard P, Van Wilder N, et al. Advanced Hybrid Closed-Loop Therapy
Compared With Standard Insulin Therapy Intrapartum and Early Postpartum in Women
With Type 1 Diabetes: A Secondary Observational Analysis From the CRISTAL
Randomized Controlled Trial. Diabetes Care 2024; 47:2002.
24. Fresa R, Visalli N, Di Blasi V, et al. Experiences of continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion in pregnant women with type 1 diabetes during delivery from four Italian
centers: a retrospective observational study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2013; 15:328.
25. Rosenberg VA, Eglinton GS, Rauch ER, Skupski DW. Intrapartum maternal glycemic
control in women with insulin requiring diabetes: a randomized clinical trial of rotating
fluids versus insulin drip. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006; 195:1095.
26. Keller MF, Vestgaard M, Damm P, et al. Treatment with the long-acting insulin analog
degludec during pregnancy in women with type 1 diabetes: An observational study of 22
cases. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019; 152:58.
27. Waters TP, Kim SY, Sharma AJ, et al. Longitudinal changes in glucose metabolism in
women with gestational diabetes, from late pregnancy to the postpartum period.
Diabetologia 2020; 63:385.
28. Achong N, Duncan EL, McIntyre HD, Callaway L. Peripartum management of glycemia in
women with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014; 37:364.
29. Ringholm L, Roskjær AB, Engberg S, et al. Breastfeeding at night is rarely followed by
hypoglycaemia in women with type 1 diabetes using carbohydrate counting and flexible
insulin therapy. Diabetologia 2019; 62:387.
30. Riviello C, Mello G, Jovanovic LG. Breastfeeding and the basal insulin requirement in type
1 diabetic women. Endocr Pract 2009; 15:187.
31. Nørgaard SK, Nørgaard K, Roskjær AB, et al. Insulin Pump Settings During Breastfeeding
in Women with Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2020; 22:314.
32. García-Patterson A, Gich I, Amini SB, et al. Insulin requirements throughout pregnancy
in women with type 1 diabetes mellitus: three changes of direction. Diabetologia 2010;
53:446.
33. Stewart ZA, Wilinska ME, Hartnell S, et al. Closed-Loop Insulin Delivery during Pregnancy
in Women with Type 1 Diabetes. N Engl J Med 2016; 375:644.
34. Donovan LE, Feig DS, Lemieux P, et al. A Randomized Trial of Closed-Loop Insulin
Delivery Postpartum in Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2023; 46:2258.23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 21/2735. Ringholm L, Stougaard EB, Nørgaard SK, et al. Diabetes Management During
Breastfeeding in Women with Type 1 Diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2020; 20:34.
36. Achong N, McIntyre HD, Callaway L, Duncan EL. Glycaemic behaviour during
breastfeeding in women with Type 1 diabetes. Diabet Med 2016; 33:947.
37. Insulin. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed). National Library of Medicine (US). Avail
able at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK500991/ (Accessed on March 17, 2022).
38. Metformin. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed). National Library of Medicine (US).
Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501020/ (Accessed on March 17, 2
022).
39. Glyburide. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed). National Library of Medicine (US). A
vailable at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK500865/ (Accessed on March 17, 20
22).
Topic 4441 Version 48.023/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 22/27GRAPHICS
Correctional rapid-acting subcutaneous insulin scale for intrapartum use
Patients on 40 to 79 total units of insulin per day*
Blood sugar Rapid-acting insulin dose
≤125 mg/dL 0 units
126 to 150 mg/dL 1 unit
151 to 175 mg/dL 2 units
176 to 200 mg/dL 3 units
>200 mg/dL Start intravenous insulin infusion
Patients on 80 to 139 total units of insulin per day
Blood sugar Rapid-acting insulin dose
≤125 mg/dL 0 units
126 to 150 mg/dL 2 units
151 to 175 mg/dL 4 units
176 to 200 mg/dL 6 units
>200 mg/dL Start intravenous insulin infusion
Patients on 140 to 200 total units of insulin per day*
Blood sugar Rapid-acting insulin dose
≤125 mg/dL 0 units
126 to 150 mg/dL 3 units
151 to 175 mg/dL 6 units
176 to 200 mg/dL 9 units
>200 mg/dL Start intravenous insulin infusion
* Patients on <40 or >200 units of insulin per day may require customized correctional insulin.
Graphic 135227 Version 1.023/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 23/27Liberalized glycemic control protocol for use in laboring patients with
gestational diabetes
Blood glucose (mg/dL), monitored every
4 hoursRapid-acting insulin administered
≤120* 0 units
121-150 2 units
151-200 4 units
>200 8 units
* When the blood sugar is <60 mg/dL, juice is provided to treat hypoglycemia.
Data from: Hamel MS, Kanno LM, Has P, et al. Intrapartum Glucose Management in Women With Gestational Diabetes
Mellitus: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet Gynecol 2019; 133:1171.
Graphic 135238 Version 1.023/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 24/27Rotating fluids protocol
Maternal plasma glucoseIntravenous insulin
(units/hour)*Intravenous solution
"Rotating fluids." For use in women with gestational diabetes. This protocol should not be
used in women with type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus.
≤100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) Hold D5NS at 125 mL/hour to achieve
CBG of 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L)
101 to 140 mg/dL (5.6 to 7.8
mmol/L)Hold Lacted Ringers or normal saline
at 125 mL/hour to achieve CBG
of 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L)
>140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) Short- or rapid-acting insulin
infusion titrated to achieve CBG
of 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L)Lacted Ringers or normal saline
at 125 mL/hour to achieve CBG
of 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L)
CBG: capillary blood glucose; D5NS: 5 percent dextrose normal saline.
* Mix 25 units regular insulin in 250 mL normal saline (1 unit:10 mL).
Reference:
1. Jovanovic L, Peterson CM. Management of the pregnant, insulin-dependent diabetic woman. Diabetes Care 1980; 3:63.
Data from: Rosenberg VA, Eglinton GS, Rauch ER, Skupski DW. Intrapartum maternal glycemic control in women with insulin
requiring diabetes: a randomized clinical trial of rotating ﬂuids versus insulin drip. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006; 195:1095.
Graphic 76661 Version 12.0[1]23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 25/27Correctional insulin sliding scale for postpartum use
Weight <75 kg (165 pounds)
Blood glucose Rapid-acting insulin
<150 mg/dL [8.3 mmol/L] 0 units
151 to 199 mg/dL [8.4 to 11.0 mmol/L] 1 unit
200 to 249 mg/dL [11.1 to 13.8 mmol/L] 2 units
250 to 299 mg/dL [13.9 to 16.6 mmol/L] 3 units
300 to 350 mg/dL [16.7 to 19.4 mmol/L] 4 units
351 to 400 mg/dL [19.5 to 22.2 mmol/L] 5 units
Weight ≥ 75 kg (165 pounds)
Blood glucose Rapid-acting insulin
<150 mg/dL [8.3 mmol/L] 0 units
151 to 199 mg/dL [8.4 to 11.0 mmol/L] 2 units
200 to 249 mg/dL [11.1 to 13.8 mmol/L] 4 units
250 to 299 mg/dL [13.9 to 16.6 mmol/L] 6 units
300 to 350 mg/dL [16.7 to 19.4 mmol/L] 8 units
351 to 400 mg/dL [19.5 to 22.2 mmol/L] 10 units
Graphic 138403 Version 1.023/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 26/27Contributor Disclosures
Camille E Powe, MDSpeaker's Bureau: American Diabetes Association [Diabetes]. Other Financial
Interest: Associate Editor of Diabetes Care [Diabetes]; Mediflix Inc [Medical information]. All of the
relevant financial relationships listed have been mitigated.David M Nathan, MDConsultant/Advisory
Boards: Lexicon [Diabetes therapy]. All of the relevant financial relationships listed have been
mitigated.Erika F Werner, MD, MSGrant/Research/Clinical Trial Support: Malama [Pilot RCT for
gestational diabetes (PI, funding to institution)]; NIH [Glycemic profiles in pregnancy (Site PI, funding to
institution)]. All of the relevant financial relationships listed have been mitigated.Vanessa A Barss,
MD, FACOGNo relevant financial relationship(s) with ineligible companies to disclose.
Contributor disclosures are reviewed for conflicts of interest by the editorial group. When found, these
are addressed by vetting through a multi-level review process, and through requirements for
references to be provided to support the content. Appropriately referenced content is required of all
authors and must conform to UpToDate standards of evidence.
Conflict of interest policy
23/02/2025, 23:06 Preexisting (pregestational) and gestational diabetes: Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management - UpToDate
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/preexisting-pregestational-and-gestational-diabetes-intrapartum-and-postpartum-glucose-management/print… 27/27