www.eshre.eu/guidelinesEuropean Society of Human 
Reproduction and EmbryologyFollow us!
Unexplained infertility Guideline Development Group
Developed in collaboration with the Monash
University led NHMRC Centre of Research Excellence
in Women’s Health in Reproductive Life (CREWHIRL). 2023Guideline of European Society of Human
Reproduction and EmbryologyUnexplained infertility
 
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite this guideline  
The Unexplained Infertility guideline group, Romualdi D, Ata B, Bhattacharya S, Bosch E, Costello M, 
Gersak K, Homburg R, Le Clef N, Mincheva M  et al.  Evidence -based guideline: Unexplained Infertility. 
2023. ESHRE, https://www.eshre.eu/guideline/UI.  
 
DISCLAIMER  
The European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (hereinafter referred to as 'ESHRE ') 
developed the current clinical practice guideline, to provide clinical recommendations to improve the 
quality of healthcare delivery within the field of human reproduction and embryology. This guideline 
represents the views of ESHRE, which were achieved  after careful consideration of the scientific evidence 
available at the time of preparation. In the absence of scientific evidence on certain aspects, a consensus 
between the relevant ESHRE stakeholders has been obtained.  
The aim of clinical practice gui delines is to aid healthcare professionals in everyday clinical decisions 
about appropriate and effective care of their patients.  
However, adherence to these clinical practice guidelines does not guarantee a successful or specific 
outcome, nor does it esta blish a standard of care. Clinical practice guidelines do not override the 
healthcare professional's clinical judgment in diagnosis and treatment of particular patients. Ultimately, 
healthcare professionals must make their own clinical decisions on a case -by-case basis, using their 
clinical judgment, knowledge, and expertise, and considering the condition, circumstances, and wishes 
of the individual patient, in consultation with that patient and/or the guardian or carer.  
ESHRE makes no warranty, express or  implied, regarding the clinical practice guidelines and specifically 
excludes any warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular use or purpose. ESHRE shall not 
be liable for direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages related to the use of the 
information contained herein. While ESHRE makes every effort to compile accurate information and to 
keep it up to date , it cannot, however, guarantee the correctness, completeness, and accuracy of the 
guideline in every respect. In any event, these clinical practice guidelines do not necessarily represent 
the views of all clinicians that are member of ESHRE.  
The information provided in this document does not constitute business, medical or other professional advice, and i s subject to change . 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  3 
Contents  
Disclaimer  2 
CONTENTS  3 
INTRODUCTION TO THE GUIDELINE  5 
LIST OF ALL RECOMMENDATIONS  8 
I. DEFINITION  12 
II. DIAGNOSIS  16 
II.1 Confirmation of ovulation  16 
II.2 Oocyte/corpus luteum quality  20 
II.3 Ovarian reserve  23 
II.4 Tubal factor  29 
II.5 Uterine fact or 41 
II.6 Laparoscopy  45 
II.7 Cervical / vaginal factor  47 
II.8 Male genito -urinary anatomy  50 
II.9 Male additional tests  51 
II.10 Additional tests for systemic conditions 61 
III. TREATMENT  77 
III.0 When to start treatment  77 
III.1 Expectant management  79 
III.2 Active treatment  82 
III.3 Mechanical -surgical procedures  87 
III.4 Alternative therapeutic approaches  93 
IV. QUALITY OF LIFE  97  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  4 
ANNEXES  99 
Annex 1: Guideline development group  100 
Declarations of interest  101 
Annex 2: Abbreviations  103 
Annex 3: Recommendations for research on Unexplained Infertility  105 
Annex 4: Methodology  107 
Annex 5: Stakeholder consultation  112 
Annex 6: Literature study: flowcharts, list of excluded studies        Separate document  
Annex 7: Evidence tables             Separate document  
Annex 8: Summary of Evidence tables           Separate document    
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  5 
Introduction to the guideline  
 
Approximately  30%  of infertile couples are considered to experience  “unexplained infertility” (UI)  
(2019, 2020) . This controversial diagnosis is made when no abnormalities of the female and male 
reproduct ive systems are identified.  UI is inevitably a diagnosis by exclusion, following otherwise  
“standard” investigations. However, a consensual  standardization of the diagnostic work -up is still 
lacking. The International Committee for Monitoring Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ICMART) 
defined UI as “infertility in couples with apparently normal ovarian function, fallopian tubes, uterus, 
cervix and pelvis and with adequate coital frequency; and apparen tly normal testicular function, genito -
urinary anatomy and a normal ejaculate. The potential for this diagnosis is dependent upon the 
methodologies used and/or those methodologies available” (Zegers -Hochschild et al., 2017) . In some 
instances, the terms “unexplained” and “idiopathic” infertility have been used interchang eably. The 
definition of idiopathic infertility varies according to previously published reports depending on the 
hypothesised possible aetiological factors and diagnostic work -up performed by the investigators 
(Ventimiglia et al., 2021) . Generally, idiopathic male infertility is referred in literature to those men from 
couples where female factor is missing and who display abnormal semen parameters and no known 
aetiologic factor for their infertility  (Krausz, 2011, Schubert et al., 2022) . Idiopathic male infertility is 
considered outside the scope of this guideline.  
The proportion of couples with UI is related to the extent of diagnostic exam ination  performed to 
uncover putative causes for unsuccessful attempts at pregnancy (ESHRE Capri Workshop Group, 2004) . 
Furthermore, the criteria for labelling specific features as “ normal ” are heterogeneous. Finally, apart 
from the clearly recognized causes of infertility, several undetectable defects in the reproductive 
process might prevent conception.  
In the absence of  an identified cause, t he management of UI is traditionally empirical . The efficacy, 
safety, costs and risks of treatment options have not been subjected to robust evaluation.  
Existing guidelines for UI were released from the Canadian Fertility and Androl ogy Society (Buckett a nd 
Sierra, 2019)  in 2019 and from the American Society f or Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) in 2020 (20 20). 
Both documents exclusively address the treatment of UI.  
Based on the lack of comprehensive guidelines, the ESHRE Special Interest Group ( SIG) Reproductive 
Endocrinology initiated the development of an ESHRE guideline focussing on both the diagnosis and the 
therapeutic management of couples with UI. The guideline was developed according to a well -
documented methodology, universal to ESHRE guidel ines and described in the Manual for ESHRE 
guideline development (www.eshre.eu /guidelines ). Details on the methodology of the current 
guideline are outlined in Annex 4 .  
The guideline development group (GDG) was composed of members of the SIG Reproductive 
Endocrinology, SIG Andrology, SIG Safety and Quality in ART, and SIG Nurs ing and Midwi fery, and a 
patient representative from Fertility Europe. This guideline was developed in collaboration with Monash University led Australian NHMRC Centre for Research Ex cellence in Women’s Reproductive 
Health . The members of the guideline development group are listed in Annex 1.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  6 
GUIDELINE SCOPE  
Knowledge gaps were identified and prioritized.  
The aims of this guideline are:  
- To provide clinicians with evidence -based inform ation on the optimal diagnostic work -up for 
infertile couples based  on the examination s and procedures available to date, to correctly 
establish the diagnosis of UI.  
- To provide clinicians with evidence -based information on the optimal therapeutic approach 
considering issues like live birth rates, safety, patient compliance, and individualization.  
This guideline aims at assisting healthcare professionals and couples in  decision making about 
appropriate and effective management of all cases of UI. This could inevitably lead to a certain degree 
of generalization. Beyond evidence -based recommendations, the GDG acknowledges that each medical 
decision needs to consider indiv idual characteristics, preferences, beliefs and values. Similarly, even if 
the guideline is applicable in both high - and low- income settings, all recommendations need to be 
contextualized, based on different socio -geographical areas, regulations and econom ic resources.  
Even if not specifically and/or comprehensively addressed in this guideline, some aspects of the pre -
conception care were included, due to the overlap between the phase of diagnosis/treatment of 
infertility and the interventions aimed at impr oving the pregnancy and child- health outcomes.  
The guideline consists of four chapters. The first chapter reviews the ICMART definition of UI. The 
second chapter is about diagnostic tests. Since UI is a diagnosis by exclusion, the GDG first reviewed 
basic fertility tests. This part is applicable to all patients under investigation for infertility. The GDG also 
reviewed additional  tests to facilitate the diagnosis of UI (section II.9 and II.10). The studied population 
in these sections is couples with UI specifically. The third chapter covers treatment. The studied 
population in these sections is couples with UI  specifically. In the fourth chapter, the GDG investigated 
whether there is a difference in quality of life between couples with explained or unexplai ned infertility.  
TARGET USERS OF THE GUIDELINE  
The target users of this guideline include but are not limited to g eneral practitioners, gynaecologists, 
andrologists, infertility specialists, and reproductive surgeons.  
A patient leaflet is available on the ESHRE website (www.eshre.eu/ guideline/UI).  
PATIENT POPULATION  
The current guideline focusses on couples  with UI. 
This guideline, in line with the research, terminology and discussion in UI is focused on couples, women  
and men . The guidelin e group recognises that there are single women, same sex couples or individuals 
who are transgender, who do not menstruate, who do not have a uterus or who do not identify with 
the terms used in the literature. For the purposes of this guideline, we use th e term s “couples with 
unexplained infertility”, “women with unexplained infertility ” and “men with unexplained infertility” , 
however, it is not intended to isolate, exclude, or diminish any individual’s experience nor to 
discriminate against any group.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  7 
TERMINOLOGY  AND DEFINITIONS  
The current guideline applies the terms and definitions as described in the international glossary on 
Infertility and Fertility Care (Zegers -Hochschild et al., 2017) . Specifically, the term medical ly assisted 
reproduction ( MAR ) refers to reproduction brought about through various interventions, procedures, 
surgeries a nd technologies to treat different forms of fertility impairment and infertility. These include 
ovulation induction, ovarian stimulation, ovulation triggering, all ART procedures, uterine 
transplantation and intra -uterine, intracervical and intravaginal in semination with semen of 
husband/partner or donor . A list of further abbreviations can be found in Annex 2.  
Outcomes for this guideline  
The guideline focuses on outcomes of relevance, accuracy, acceptability, reliability, feasibility, value (in 
terms of cost -benefit ratio) for the diagnostic tools.  
The guideline focuses on outcomes of efficacy, safety and patient -related outcomes for the treatment.  
The critical outcomes in this guideline are: live full -term singleton birth, live birth, ongoing pregnancy 
rate, multiple pregnancies/multiple births.  
The important outcomes in this guideline are: clinical symptoms, patient satisfaction, health -related 
quality of life, cost -  effectiveness value.  
Other outcomes are: clinical pregnancy rate, adverse pr egnancy outcome (including miscarriage, 
ectopic, stillbirth, preterm delivery), ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, fetal abnormalities, 
feasibility, acceptability .  
 
 
REFERENCES  
Infertility Workup for the Women's Health Specialist: ACOG Committee Opinion, Number 781. Obstetrics and gynecology  2019;133: e377- e384.  
Evidence- based treatments for couples with unexplained infertility: a guideline. Fertility and sterility  
2020;113: 305- 322.  
Buckett W, Sierra S. The management of unexplai ned infertility: an evidence -based guideline from the 
Canadian Fertility and Andrology Society. Reproductive biomedicine online  2019;39: 633- 640.  
ESHRE Capri Workshop Group. Diagnosis and management of the infertile couple: missing information. Human repro duction update  2004;10: 295- 307.  
Krausz C. Male infertility: pathogenesis and clinical diagnosis. Best practice & research Clinical 
endocrinology & metabolism  2011;25: 271 -285.  
Schubert M, Pérez Lanuza L, Wöste M, Dugas M, Carmona FD, Palomino -Morales RJ, Rassam Y, 
Heilmann -Heimbach S, Tüttelmann F, Kliesch S  et al.  A GWAS in Idiopathic/Unexplained Infertile Men 
Detects a Genomic Region Determining Follicle -Stimulating Hormone Levels. The Journal of clinical 
endocrinology and metabolism  2022;107: 2350 -2361.  
Ventimiglia E, Pozzi E, Capogrosso P, Boeri L, Alfano M, Cazzaniga W, Matloob R, Abbate C, Viganò P, 
Montorsi F  et al.  Extensive Assessment of Underlying Etiological Factors in Primary Infertile Men 
Reduces the Proportion of Men With Idiopathic Infertility. Frontiers in endocrinology  2021;12: 
801125.  
Zegers -Hochschild F, Adamson GD, Dyer S, Racowsky C, de Mouzon J, Sokol R, Rienzi L, Sunde A, 
Schmidt L, Cooke ID  et al.  The International Glossary on Infertility and Fertility Care, 2017. Human 
reproduction ( Oxford, England)  2017;32: 1786- 1801.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  8 
List of all recommendations  
Diagnosis  Level of 
evidence1 
Confirmation of ovulation  
1 In women with regular menstrual cycles, tests for confirmation of 
ovulation are not routinely recommended.  GPP  
2 In women with regular menstrual cycles, if confirmation of 
ovulation is warranted, tests such as urinary LH measurements, 
ultrasound monitoring or mid -luteal progesterone measurement 
can be used.  Conditional  ⊕ 
Oocyte/corpus luteum quality  
3 In women with regular menstrual cycles, it is suggested not to 
routinely measure midluteal serum progesterone levels.  Conditional  ⊕ 
4 In women investigated for infertility, endometrial biopsy for 
histological examination is not recommended in the absence of 
other indications.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
Ovarian reserve  
5 In women with regular menstrual cycles, o varian reserve testing is 
not required to identify the aetiology of infertility or to predict the 
probability of spontaneous conception over 6 to 12 months.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
Tubal factor  
6 Hystero salpingo -contrast -sonography (HyCoS y) and 
hysterosalpingography (HSG)  are valid tests for tubal patency  
compared to laparoscopy and chromopertubation . Strong  ⊕⊕⊕ 
7 HSG and HyCoSy are comparable in diagnostic capacity, thus 
selection of the technique depends on the preference of the 
clinician and the patient.  GPP  
8 Chlamydia antibody testing for tubal patency could be considered 
a non -invasive test to differentiate between patients at low and at 
high risk for tubal occlusion.  Conditional  ⊕ 
9 In patients at high -risk for tubal abnormality, visual demonstration 
of tubal patency is necessary.  GPP  
Uterine factor  
10 Ultrasound, preferably 3D, is recommended to exclude uterine 
anomalies in women with unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
11 MRI is not recommended as a first -line test to confirm a normal 
uterine structure and anatomy in women with unexplained 
infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
 
1 The level of evidence reports on the quality of the supporting evidence for each recommendation. More 
information regarding methodology is available in Annex 4 (page 106). GPP refers to good practice point and is 
applied for recommendations based primaril y on expert opinion.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  9 
12 If ultrasound assessment of the uterine cavity is normal, no further 
evaluation is needed.  Strong  ⊕ 
Laparoscopy  
13 Routine diagnostic laparoscopy is not recommended for the 
diagnosis of unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
Cervical/ vaginal factor  
14 The post -coital test is not recommended in couples with 
unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
15 Vaginal microbiota testing could be considered in couples with 
unexplained infertility only in a research setting.  Research only   
Male genito -urinary anatomy  
16 Testicular imaging is not recommended when semen analysis 
according to WHO criteria is normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
Male additional tests  
17 Testing for anti -sperm antibodies in the semen is not 
recommended when semen analysis according to WHO criteria is 
normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
18 Testing for sperm DNA fragmentation is not recommended when 
semen analysis according to WHO criteria is normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
19 Sperm chromatin condensation test is not recommended when 
semen analysis according to WHO criteria is normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
20 Sperm aneuploidy screening is not recommended when semen 
analysis according to WHO criteria is normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
21 Serum hormonal testing is not recommended when semen analysis 
according to WHO criteria is normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
22 HPV testing of semen is not recommended when semen analysis 
according to WHO criteria is normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
23 Microbiology testing of semen is not recommended when semen 
analysis according to WHO criteria is normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
Additional tests  for systemic conditions  
24 Testing for anti -sperm antibodies in serum of either males or 
females with unexplained infertility is not recommended.  Strong  ⊕ 
25 Testing for coeliac disease in women with unexplained infertility 
can be considered.  Conditional  ⊕⊕ 
26 Testing for thyroid antibody and other autoimmune conditions 
(apart from coeliac disease) in women with unexplained infertility 
is not recommended.  Strong  ⊕ 
27 TSH measurement is considered good practice in pre -conception 
care.  GPP  
28 No additional thyroid evaluation in women  is recommended if TSH 
is within the normal range.  Strong  ⊕  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  10 
29 Testing for thrombophilia in women  with unexplained infertility  is 
not recommended.  Strong  ⊕ 
30 Measurement of oxidative stress in semen of males with 
unexplained infertility should only be considered in the context of 
research.  Research only   
31 Measurement of oxidative stress in women  with unexplained 
infertility is not recommended.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
32 Genetic or genomic tests are currently not recommended in 
couples with unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
33 Testing for vitamin D deficiency in women  is not recommended for 
diagnosis of unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
34 Prolactin testing in women  is not recommended.  Strong  ⊕ 
35 BMI evaluation in women  is considered good practice in pre -
conception care.  GPP  
Treatment  
Expectant management  
36 IUI with ovarian stimulation is recommended as a first -line 
treatment for couples with unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
37 The GDG advices to base the decision to start active treatment on 
prognosis in couples with unexplained infertility.  GPP  
Active treatment  
38 IUI with ovarian stimulation is recommended as a first -line 
treatment for couples with unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
39 To avoid multiple pregnancies and OHSS, care is needed by using 
gonadotrophin treatment only in a low -dose regimen with 
adequate monitoring.  GPP  
40 IVF is probably not recommended over IUI with ovarian stimulation 
in couples with unexplained infertility.  Conditional  ⊕ 
41 It is expected that the decision to use IVF is individualized by patient 
characteristics such as age, duration of infertility, previous 
treatment and previous pregnancy.  GPP  
42 ICSI is not recommended over conventional IVF in couples with 
unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
Mechanical -surgical procedures  
43 Hysteroscopy for the detection and possible correction of 
intrauterine abnormalities not seen at routine imaging is not 
recommended.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
44 HSG (i.e., tubal flushing) with an oil -soluble contrast medium is 
preferable over a water -soluble contrast medium. Risks and 
benefits of tubal flushing with oil -soluble contrast medium should 
be discussed with all couples with unexplained infertility.  Conditional  ⊕⊕ 
 If incidentally minimal to mild endometriosis is found at 
laparoscopy, this is not further considered unexplained infertility 
by the GDG.   Conclusion   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  11 
45 Endometrial scratching should not be offered for unexplained 
infertility.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
Alternative therapeutic approaches  
46 Adjunct oral antioxidant therapy to women  undergoing fertility 
treatment is probably not recommended.  Conditional  ⊕ 
47 Adjunct oral antioxidant therapy to males undergoing fertility 
treatment is probably not recommended.  Conditional  ⊕ 
48 Acupuncture in women  is probably not recommended  Conditional  ⊕⊕ 
49 Inositol supplementation in women is probably not recommended.  Conditional  ⊕ 
50 Psychological support, including psychotherapy, is recommended 
for patients when needed.  GPP  
51 A healthy diet and regular exercise, supported by behavioural 
therapy, when necessary, are recommended.  GPP  
QoL  
52 Healthcare professionals should be aware that  
- there is probably no difference in QoL between women 
with unexplained infertility versus women in couples with known 
causes of infertility, except when the cause of infertility is PCOS, 
where the QoL is lower.  
- QoL is probably higher in men from a couple  with 
unexplained infertility compared to men from a couple with known 
causes of infertility except when the cause of infertility is men with 
a partner with PCOS, then the men from a couple with unexplained 
infertility have a lower QoL.  Conditional  ⊕  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  12 
I. Definition  
 
NARRATIVE QUESTION : AFTER HOW MANY MONTHS OF UNPROTECTED INTERCOURSE SHOULD A 
COUPLE BE DEFINED AS INFERTILE ? 
Based on a wide -ranging analysis of 237 studies of unexplained infertility  (UI), 85 of these related to the 
time of unprotected intercourse in their definition of UI; 46.5% specified 1 year, 39.5% specified 2 years 
and 14%, 3 years.  
According to the International Committee for Monitoring Assisted Reproductive Technology (ICMART) 
definition of infertility , couples should have at least 12 months of regular, unprotected sexual 
intercourse before fertility interventions may be initiated (Zegers -Hochschild et al., 2017) .  
 
NARRATIVE QUESTION : SHOULD FREQUENCY OF SEXUAL INTERCOURSE AFFECT THE DEFINITION OF UI?  
The definition of infertility includes a broad reference to “regular ” unprotected sex, albeit without 
specifying what this term  entails. In fact, the concept of “ regular ” coital frequency is extremely variable 
and particular to each couple, fluctuating not only over time, but also infl uenced by multiple factors 
including age, education, race, working status, exercise and mood, amongst others (Gaskins et al., 
2018) . Hence, applying strict bounds to define regular unprotected sex is  not only unfeasible, but also 
unadvisable and could cause unnecessary stress in those seeking to conceive.  
In their seminal study, Wilcox et al . assessed prospectively in 221 women whether sexual frequency 
within the six days preceding ovulation could af fect the probability of conception  (Wilcox et al., 1995) . 
The authors found that predicted conception rates did not alter significantly when comparing women 
who perform sexual intercourse daily, every  other day or twice during the fertility window. However, 
the number of conception cycles were indeed lower in those who had intercourse only once within the before mentioned timeframe. These results seem to reiterate that more frequent ejaculations do not  
seem to be detrimental to sperm quality in men with normozoospermia and, in fact, may even be 
beneficial (Agarwal et al., 2016) . Hence, in couples seeking to co nceive, it could be reasonable to advise 
to increase sexual intercourse to  at least every 2 -3 days within the fertility window to the extent that 
such suits their own preference.  
The guideline development group ( GDG ) acknowledges that giving the indication of having sexual 
intercourse at least every 2 -3 days can sometimes be stressful for individuals.  
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  13 
NARRATIVE QUESTION : SHOULD FEMALE OR MALE PARTNER ’S AGE AFFECT THE DEFINITION OF UI?  
Based on the analysis of 237 studies of UI, only 49 related to upper age limits of the female partner. Of 
these, 12 studies referred to 35 years, 8 studies to age 38 and 16 studies to 40 years old. The rest were 
fairly well distributed in small numbers between 36, 37, 39 and 42 years.  
The ICMART definition of UI only refers to the clinical diagnosis without any reference to the duration 
of unprotected intercourse or female partner’s age  (Zegers -Hochschild et al., 2017) . This definition 
could well be further defined for practical purpos es by adding 40 years old as the limit of the female 
partner’s age.  This was illustrated in a mathematical model, showing that after 2 years of regular 
unprotected intercourse, the false positive diagnosis of UI is 10% in women under 35 years of age, and 
increases to 80% in women over 40 years of age (Broer et al., 2011, Somigliana et al., 2016) . 
To a much lesser extent and at more extreme ages, male age could affect fertility potential  (du Fossé 
et al., 2020, Johnson et al., 2015, Laurentino et al., 2020) .  
 
NARRATIVE QUESTION : SHOULD COUPLES WITH MILD INFERTILITY FACTORS BE INCLUDED IN THE 
DEFINITION OF UI?   
Male  
Contextualizing the ICMAR T definition of UI, GDG considers that the initial fertility evaluation of the 
male should include at least one basic semen examination (strictly adhering to WHO 6th edition manual 
for the examination and processing of human semen) from a laboratory subscribed to an external 
quality control programme , and a reproductive (including sexual history) and medical history. The 
results of the basic semen examination should b e interpreted in conjunction with the findings in clinical 
examination and history.  WHO has developed detailed guidance for history taking (reproductive, 
sexual , medical) and physical examination of the infertile man (WHO, 2000) . 
The lower fifth percentile of data from men in the reference population, as desc ribed in the WHO 
manual for the examination and processing of human semen , represents the level under which only 
results from 5% of the men who achieve d conception within 12 months in the reference population 
were found (WHO, 2021) . The GDG proposes that results from a basic semen examination bel ow the 
lower 5th percent ile reference limit (and its 95% confidence interval)  should be considered as clinically 
relevant for decision -making about further clinical investigation. However, anything outside this 
reference excludes unexplained infertility.  
Table 1: The lower fifth percentile of data from men in the reference population (WHO, 2021) . 
Parameter  5th percentile  95% confidence interval  
Semen volume  1.4 ml  1.3-1.5 ml 
Sperm concentration  16 x 106 per ml  15-18 x 106 per ml  
Total sperm number  39 x 106 per ejaculate  35-40 x 106 per ejaculate  
Total motility (PR+NP)  42%  40-43% 
Progressive motility (PR)  30%  29-31% 
Non-progressive motility (NP)  1% 1-1% 
Immotile spermatozoa (IM)  20%  19-20% 
Vitality  54%  50-56%  
Normal forms  4% 3.9-4.0%  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  14 
Current expert position on the question of repeated basic semen examination is that one single (high 
quality) ejaculate examination should be sufficient to decide on the following actions of male fertility 
investigation (Barratt et al. 2017; WHO 2000). How ever, it is also recommended that semen analysis 
should be repeated if one or more abnormalities are  found (Barratt et al. 2017; WHO 2000).  
Going by the ICMART definition of UI which states an apparently normal testicular function and a 
normal ejaculate  (Zegers -Hochschild et al., 2017) , mild male factor i s excluded from the diagnosis of 
unexplained infertility.  
The GDG acknowledges some studies of unexplained UI have been heterogenous i n the inclusion of 
thresholds for various semen analysis parameters.  
Female  
Going by the  ICMART  definition of UI which states an apparently normal ovarian function, fallopian 
tubes, uterus, cervix and pelvis (Zegers -Hochschild et al., 2017) , presence of any female factors excludes 
the diagnosis of unexplained infertility.  
 
Conclusion  
The GDG defin es unexplained infertility as follows : infertility in couples with appa rently normal ovarian 
function, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix and pelvis, age ≤ 40 years and with adequate coital frequency; 
and apparently normal testicular function, genito -urinary anatomy and a normal ejaculate.   
As per  the ICMART definition of infertility, couples should have at least 12 months of regular, 
unprotected sexual intercourse before investigations are initiated . 
The GDG recommends routinely taking a m edical , reproductive and sexual  history from  both the male 
and female partner.  
The GDG considers a regular menstrual cycle to be  24 to 38 days, up to 8 days in duration and shortest 
to longest cycle variation of less than 7 to 9 days  (Munro et al., 2018) .  
The GDG recommends at least one basic semen examination , according to WHO criteria , performed  by 
a laboratory which subscribe s to an external quality control programme. If the result from first basic 
semen analysis is below  the lower 5th percentile reference limit as per WHO criteria ( 6th edition ), a 
second analysis should be performed after a 3 -month interval.  
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  15 
REFERENCES  
Agarwal A, Gupta S, Du Plessis S, Sharma R, Esteves SC, Cirenza C, Eliwa J, Al -Najjar W, Kumaresan D, 
Haroun N  et al.  Abstinence Time and Its Impact on Basic and Advanced Semen Parameters. Urology  
2016;94: 102- 110.  
Broer SL, Eijke mans MJ, Scheffer GJ, van Rooij IA, de Vet A, Themmen AP, Laven JS, de Jong FH, Te 
Velde ER, Fauser BC  et al.  Anti-mullerian hormone predicts menopause: a long -term follow- up study 
in normoovulatory women. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metaboli sm 2011;96: 2532 -2539.  
du Fossé NA, van der Hoorn MP, van Lith JMM, le Cessie S, Lashley E. Advanced paternal age is 
associated with an increased risk of spontaneous miscarriage: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
Human reproduction update  2020;26: 650- 669.  
Gaskins AJ, Sundaram R, Buck Louis GM, Chavarro JE. Predictors of Sexual Intercourse Frequency Among Couples Trying to Conceive. The journal of sexual medicine  2018;15: 519- 528.  
Johnson SL, Dunleavy J, Gemmell NJ, Nakagawa S. Consistent age -dependent  declines in human 
semen quality: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Ageing research reviews 2015;19: 22- 33. 
Laurentino S, Cremers JF, Horsthemke B, Tüttelmann F, Czeloth K, Zitzmann M, Pohl E, Rahmann S, Schröder C, Berres S  et al.  A germ cell -specifi c ageing pattern in otherwise healthy men. Aging cell  
2020;19: e13242.  
Munro MG, Critchley HOD, Fraser IS. The two FIGO systems for normal and abnormal uterine bleeding symptoms and classification of causes of abnormal uterine bleeding in the reproductive years: 2018 
revisions. International journal of gynaecology and obstetrics: the official organ of the International 
Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics  2018;143: 393- 408.  
Somigliana E, Paffoni A, Busnelli A, Filippi F, Pagliardini L, Vigano P, Vercellini P. Age -related infertility 
and unexplained infertility: an intricate clinical dilemma. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  
2016;31: 1390- 1396.  
WHO. Manual for the Standard ized Investigation and Diagnosis of the Infertile Male. In Rowe PJ, 
Comhaire FH, Hargreave TB and Mahmoud AMA (eds). 2000. WHO, Geneva.  
WHO. WHO laboratory manual for the examination and processing of human semen, sixth edition. 2021. WHO, Geneva.  
Wilcox A J, Weinberg CR, Baird DD. Timing of sexual intercourse in relation to ovulation. Effects on the 
probability of conception, survival of the pregnancy, and sex of the baby. The New England journal of 
medicine  1995;333: 1517 -1521.  
Zegers -Hochschild F, Adamson GD, Dyer S, Racowsky C, de Mouzon J, Sokol R, Rienzi L, Sunde A, 
Schmidt L, Cooke ID  et al.  The International Glossary on Infertility and Fertility Care, 2017. Human 
reproduction (Oxford, England)  2017;32: 1786- 1801.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  16 
II. Diagnosis  
 
II.1 Confirmation of ovulation  
PICO  QUESTION : WHICH IS THE RELIABILITY AND CONVENIENCE OF METHODS TO CONFIRM REGULAR 
OVULATION ? 
MENSTRUAL HISTORY  
Evidence  
No relevant papers were identified that compare menstrual history with other methods to 
predict/confirm ovulation.  
 
MENSTRUAL H ISTORY + ONE PROGESTERONE / ULTRASOUND / LUTEINIZING HORMONE URINARY MEASUREMENT  
Evidence  
In a cohort study, including 101 infertile women with regular menstrual cycles , the accuracy of urinary 
luteinizing h ormone ( LH) and serum progesterone tests for the prediction/confirmation of ovulation 
were determined with ultrasound monitoring as reference standard. The agreement between 
ultrasound and urinary LH test was 97%. Sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for  LH readings were 
100%, 25%, and 97%, respectively. The accuracy of progesterone measurement on day six with 
ultrasound as reference was 79%, sensitivity and specificity were 80% and 71%, respectively 
(Guermandi et al., 2001) . 
 
LUTEINIZING HORMONE (LH)  URINARY MEASUREMENT  
Evidence  
In a cohort study, including 101 infertile women with regular menstrual cycles , the accuracy of urinary 
LH tests was compared wit h ultrasound for the prediction/confirmation of ovulation. In 100/101 (97%) 
cycles, the LH test was in agreement with the ultrasound monitoring, resulting in a sensitivity of 100%, with a specificity of 25% and an accuracy of 97% (Guermandi et al., 2001) . 
A cohort study, including 32 spontaneously ovulating women,  investigated the agreement between 
quantitative (assay, plasma) and qualitative  (colour, urine)  LH tests.  A high correlation was found 
between both assays (r=0.688)  (Bischof et al., 1991) . 
A cohort study including 99 spontaneous cycles investigated the agreement between LH urinary test 
and ultrasound monitoring to predict/confirm ovulation. Positive test results, presumably reflecting the occurrence of a urinary LH surge above 50 IU/L, were observed in 97 (98%) spontaneous cycles (Martinez et al., 1991) . 
Another cohort study including 55 women with normal ovulatory menstrual cycles investigated the 
agreement between the LH urinary test and ultrasound monitoring to predict/confirm ovulation. In  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  17 
39/55 cases (70.91%), ovulation occurred within  24h after positivity  of the LH -test (Gregoriou et al., 
1990) . 
 
SERIAL B ASAL BODY TEMPERATURE  (BBT)  
Evidence  
In a cohort study, including 101 infertile women with regular menstrual cycles , the accuracy of basal 
body temperature (BBT) was compared with ultrasound for the prediction/confirmation of ovulation. 
In 67 /101  cycles, the BBT was in agreement with the ultr asound monitoring, resulting in a sensitivity of 
77%, with a specificity of 33% and an accuracy of 74% (Guermandi et al., 2001) . 
A cohort study including 99 spontaneous cycles investigated the agreement between the thermal nadir and LH test decolouration to predict/confirm ovulation. The BBT nadir correlated with the day of the 
positive test in 30% of spontaneous cycles (Martinez et al., 1991) . 
Another  cohort study including 55 women with normal ovulatory menstrual cycles investigated the 
agreement between the thermal nadir and LH test  decolouration to predict/confirm ovulation. In 20/55 
(36.36%) of the cases, the thermal nadir was noted on the day of decolouration, whereas in 22 (40%) 
and 13 (23.6%) patients the thermal nadir occurred on days - 1 and +1 and  on days -2 and days +2  of 
the LH surge, respectively (Gregoriou e t al., 1990) . 
 
CHANGES IN THE CHARACTERISTICS OF CERVICAL M UCUS  
Evidence  
No relevant papers were identified that compare changes in the characteristics of cervical mucus with 
other methods to predict/confirm ovulation.  
 
ULTRASOUND  
Evidence  
In the relevant papers identified for this PICO question, follicular growth and rupture monitoring by ultrasound was defined as the gold standard. No relevant papers were identified that investigated the accuracy of ultrasound to predict/confirm ovulation.  
 
OVERALL RECOMMENDATION  
Evidence  
In the four studies included, foll icular growth and rupture monitoring by ultrasound was performed and 
also defined as the gold standard for this evidence synthesis. In the studies evaluating urinary LH 
measurements, both the agreement (98 -100%) and accuracy (97%) with ultrasound monitoring were 
very high (Bischof et al., 1991, G regoriou et al., 1990, Guermandi et al., 2001, Martinez et al., 1991) . 
Mean while, BBT and luteal -phase serum progesterone measurements were shown to have estimated 
accuracies between 70% and 80%  (Gregoriou et al., 1990) . No studies of sufficient quality in this 
population could be retrieved to access the predictive value of self -reported  menstrual history or  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  18 
changes in cervical mucus to confirm regular ovulation. Moreover, convenience was not formally 
assessed in any of the studies included.  
Recommendation  
In women with regular menstrual cycles, tests for 
confirmation of ovulation are not routinely recommended . GPP  
 
In women with regular menstrual cycles, if confirmation of 
ovulation is warranted , tests such  as urinary LH 
measurements , ultrasound  monitoring or mid -luteal 
progesterone measurement can be used.  Conditional  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Pregnancy  would be the most straightforward way to determine if ovulation occurred. However, 
studies considering pregnancy as reference  were not available. Therefore, follicular rupture, evidenced 
by ultrasound was chosen as the reference test . All included studies presumed that included women 
had regular cycles  which is implicit in the context of unexplained infertility .  
In clinical practice, ovulation is seldomly confirmed during basic fertility work -up. If confirmation of 
ovul ation is warranted, a ll strategies presented a reasonable accuracy to confirm ovulation and may  
therefore  be used. BBT presented with a lower accuracy and was found to be less acceptable to 
patients. While one may postulate that self -administered testing s trategies may be deemed as more 
convenient for patients, this hypothesis is yet to be adequately tested in the infertile population. Regardless , it is also important to note that the documentation of an ovulation episode in one specific 
menstrual cycle is not a surrogate marker of regular ovulation.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.1). 
 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  19 
REFERENCES  
Bischof P, Bianchi PG, Campana A. Comparison of a rapid, quantitative and automated assay for 
urinary luteinizing hormone (LH), with an LH detection test, for the prediction of ovulation. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  1991;6: 515- 518.  
Gregoriou O, K assanos D, Vitoratos N, Papadias C, Zourlas PA. Clinical efficacy of LH -color: a new 
home ovulation test. International journal of gynaecology and obstetrics: the official organ of the 
International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics  1990;32: 141- 143. 
Guermandi E, Vegetti W, Bianchi MM, Uglietti A, Ragni G, Crosignani P. Reliability of ovulation tests in infertile women. Obstetrics and gynecology  2001;97: 92 -96. 
Martinez AR, Bernardus RE, Kucharska D, Schoemaker J. Urinary luteinizing hormone testing and prediction of ovulation in spontaneous, clomiphene citrate and human menopausal gonadotropin -
stimulated cycles. A clinical evaluation. Acta endocrinologica  1991;124: 357- 363.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  20 
II.2 Oocyte/corpus luteum quality  
PICO  QUESTION : WHAT IS THE RELIABILITY OF PARAMETERS DETECTING GOOD OOCYTE / CORPUS 
LUTEUM QUALITY ?  
MID-LUTEAL PHASE PROGESTERONE LEVELS  
Evidence  
A cohort study, including 138 cycles from 72 women with no physical cause for infertility investigated 
the associ ation between midluteal serum progesterone and conception and reported that the lowest 
progesterone threshold for conception cycles was 8.5  ng/ml (equals 27.03 nmol/L) (Hull et al., 1982) . 
Recommendation  
In women with regular menstrual cycles, it is suggested not 
to routinely measure midluteal serum progesterone levels.  Conditional  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
There was only one study , which  identified midluteal progesterone levels in natural conception and 
reported the lowest progesterone level to obtain pregnancy . There are no studies conclusively 
documenting a minimum midluteal serum progesterone level required for the occurrence of 
pregnancy. Even if the presence of a threshold of midluteal serum progest erone level below which 
pregnancy and live birth rates are decreased is assumed, there is no evidence showing an increase in live birth rates with exogenous progesterone administration in any form.  
On the other hand, recent data from studies on frozen embr yo transfer in a natural cycle and one study 
involving women with UI undergoing ovarian stimulation (OS) and intrauterine insemination ( IUI) 
suggest an association between luteal phase progesterone levels and probability of a pregnancy and 
live birth (Gaggiotti -Marre et al., 2020, Hansen et al., 2018) . Given the limited information on an 
association between luteal progesterone levels and spontaneous pregnancy this is an area that requires 
further research.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.2). 
 
ENDOMETRIAL BIOPSY  
Evidence  
In an RCT, 287 ovulatory female partners of infertile couples and 332 fertile controls were randomized to undergo histological examination of an endometrial biopsy in the midluteal or late luteal phase of 
the menstrual cycle . The prevalence of out of phase endometrial biopsy results were similar between 
fertile and infertile women in adjusted analyses. Receiver operat ing characteristics ( ROC ) curves 
showed less than 0.5 area under the curve ( AUC ) values for endometrial biopsy to differentiate fertile 
and infertile women (Coutifaris et al., 2019) .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  21 
In a cohort study, including 20 women with UI and 21 fertile controls, midluteal endometrial biopsies 
were performed. Women in the UI group showed similar en dometrial maturation as the fertile control 
group (Edi-Osagie et al., 2004) . 
Recommendation  
In women investigated for infertility, endometrial biopsy for 
histological examination is not recommended in  the 
absence of other indications.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification  
Two studies, one with a large sample size, show that endometrial dating does not discriminate  between  
fertile and infertile women. There is no justification for an invasive test in the context.  
This recommendation does not apply to women having an indication for endometria l biopsy, such as 
endometrial hyperplasia.  
The GDG is aware of other methods to assess the endometrium, however, these were not investigated.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.2). 
 
FERTILIZATION FAILURE  
Evidence  
No relevant papers could be identified investigating the reliability of fertilization failure to determine 
good oocyte or corpus luteum quality.  
 
EUPLOID EMBRYO RATE WITH PGT-A 
Evidence  
No relevant papers could be identified investigating the reliability  of euploid embryo rate (determined 
by PGT -A) to determine good oocyte or corpus luteum quality.  
 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  22 
REFERENCES  
Coutifaris C, Myers ER, Guzick DS, Diamond MP, Carson SA, Legro RS, McGovern PG, Schlaff WD, Carr 
BR, Steinkampf MP  et al.  Reprint of: histological dating of timed endometrial biopsy tissue is not 
related to fertility status. Fertility and sterility  2019;112: e116 -e124.  
Edi-Osagie EC, Seif MW, Aplin JD, Jones CJ, Wilson G, Lieberman BA. Characterizing the endometrium 
in unexplained and tubal factor infertility: a multiparametric investigation. Fertility and sterility  
2004;82: 1379- 1389.  
Gaggiotti -Marre S, Álvarez M, González- Foruria I, Parriego M, Garcia S, Martínez F, Barri PN, Polyzos 
NP, Coroleu B. Low p rogesterone levels on the day before natural cycle frozen embryo transfer are 
negatively associated with live birth rates. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2020;35: 1623-
1629.  
Hansen KR, Eisenberg E, Baker V, Hill MJ, Chen S, Talken S, Diamond MP, Legr o RS, Coutifaris C, Alvero 
R et al.  Midluteal Progesterone: A Marker of Treatment Outcomes in Couples With Unexplained 
Infertility. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism  2018;103: 2743- 2751.  
Hull MG, Savage PE, Bromham DR, Ismail AA, Morris AF. The value of a single serum progesterone measurement in the midluteal phase as a criterion of a potentially fertile cycle ("ovulation") derived form treated and untreated conception cycles. Fertility and sterility  1982;37: 355 -360.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  23 
II.3 Ovarian reserve  
PICO  QUESTION : SHOULD ONE OR MORE TESTS OF OVARIAN RESERVE BE INCLUDED IN THE DIAGNOSTIC 
WORK -UP?  
ANTI-MÜLLERIAN HORMONE (AMH ) 
Evidence  
In a cohort study, female partners of 148 couples with unexplained infertility ( UI) and females from 112 
couples with male factor infertility were prospectively compared. Women with serum FSH levels >10 
IU/L were excluded. While a multivariate analysis adj usted for age suggested lower anti -Müllerian 
hormone ( AMH ) levels being significantly associated with UI, antral follicle count ( AFC) was not found 
to be associated with UI (Yücel et al., 2018) . 
Women between 30 and 44 years of age, who were trying to conceive for less than three months or 
were about to start trying to conceive , were prospectively observed in a cohort study. Analyses a djusted 
for age, body mass index, race, current smoking status, and recent hormonal contraceptive use, showed that women with low AMH values (<0.7 ng/mL , n = 84) had a similar predicted probability of conceiving 
by six cycles of attempt (65% , 95% CI 50 -75% ) compared with women (n = 579) with normal values 
(62% , 95%  CI 57 -66%) or by 12 cycles of attempt (84%  (95%  CI 70 -91% ) vs. 75%  (95%  CI 70 -79% ), 
respectively). Likewise, women with high serum FSH values (>10 mIU/mL , n = 83) had similar predicted 
probability of conceiving after six  cycles of attempt (63% , 95%  CI 50 -73%) compared with women (n = 
654) with normal values (62% , 95%  CI 57 -66%) or after 12 cycles of attempt (82%  (95%  CI 70 -89% ) vs. 
75%  (95%  CI 70 -78% ), respectively). The study excluded women <30 years of age. Male partners not 
having provided a semen sample can be considered as a limitation if women with low ovarian reserve 
would be more likely to have partners with impaired semen. While all women were not enrolled in their 
first three cycles of attempt; findings were similar when less than 10% of women who entered after their third cycle of attempt were excluded  (Steiner et al., 2017) .  
In another cohort study, 102 women, aged 18 to 46 years, were prospectively followed for 12 cycles. 
Analyses adjusted for age showed no predictive value  of AMH, basal FSH or the AFC for time to ongoing 
pregnancy ( hazard ratio ( HR) 1.43, 95% CI 0.84 -2.46; HR 0.96, 95% CI 0.86 -1.06  and HR 1.03, 95% CI 
1.00- 1.07, respectively) (Depm ann et al., 2017) . 
Similar AMH levels and AFC were reported in 382 female partners of infertile couples and 350 women 
with no history of infertility. Moreover, the proportion of women with very low serum AMH levels (with 
two different cut -offs of serum AMH <5 pmol/L or AFC <7) was similar in two cohorts. The findings were 
similar when the analyses were restricted to women with UI . All analyses were adjusted for age and 
other relevant factors (Hvidman et al., 2016) . 
In a small  cohort study, 83 women with UI were prospectively followed for 6 cycles. Serum AMH and 
FSH levels, as well as AFC were similar between 14 women who achieved a spontaneous pregnancy during the observation period and 69 women who did not. AUC values for AMH, FSH and AFC for 
prediction of a spontaneous pregnancy were 0.39 (95% CI 0.25 -0.52), 0.42 ( 95% CI 0.25 -0.58) and 0.42 
(95% CI 0.26 -0.57), respectively. Moreover, pregnancy and live birth rates were similar between women 
with AMH levels <0.75 ng/mL and above  (Casadei et al., 2013) .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  24 
In a small cohort study , cycle day 2 AMH levels were compared between 42 women with UI and 29 
women with male factor infertility. Median s erum AMH levels were similar between UI and male factor 
groups ( 19.3 pmol/L (range 1.3 -60.8 pmol/L; equals 2.7 ng/ml, range 0.18 -8.5) vs. 21.1  pmol/L (range 
5.3-60.8, equals 2.95 ng/ml, range 0.74 -8.5 respectively) ). AMH alone was a poor predictor of live birth 
in five years  (Murto et al., 2013) . 
In a cohort study, 186 couples who attempted pregnancy for six menstrual cycles were prospectively 
observed. Women were between 20 and 35 years old. Compared with women in medium serum AMH 
levels (quintiles 2 – 4 of the study population), women with low AMH lev els (lowest quintile) had similar 
fecundability (HR 0.81 , 95% CI 0.44- 1.40) , while women with high AMH (in quintile 5) had lower 
fecundability (HR 0.62 , 95% CI 0.39 -0.99). Analyses were adjusted for woman ’s age, BMI, smoking, 
diseases affecting fecundabili ty, and oligozoospermia. When women with irregular cycles were 
excluded the high AMH group still had lower fecundability rate (FR, i.e. , monthly probability of 
conceiving) (FR 0.48 , 95% CI 0.27 –0.85) (Hagen et al., 2012) . 
In a cross -sectional study, AMH, FSH and AFC were compared between 227 women with strictly defined 
UI and 226 control women. Women were aged between 25 and 40 years and required to have a serum 
FSH level <12 IU/L  on cycle day 3 within the previous year. Analyses adjusted for age, race, BMI, smoking 
status and recruitment site showed similar AMH levels and AFC in the two groups. It should be noted 
that inclusion of women with FSH >12 IU/L during the previous year, might have yielded different results 
(Greenwood et al., 2017) . 
In a retrospective study including 325 couples who presented for assessment of infertility and did not 
have an absolute indication for IVF/ICSI (e.g., bilateral tubal blockage), serum AMH level was not a 
significant predictor of natural conception in a Cox regression analysis adjusted for female age, type of 
infertility (primary or secondary), duration of infertility, and percentage of motile sperm (Nguy en et al. 
2022). However, the addition of AMH level into the Hunault model was found the improve the accuracy 
of the model to some extent  (Hunault et al., 2004, Nguyen et al., 2022) . 
 
ANTRAL FOLLICLE COUNT (AFC) 
Evidence  
A cohort study, including 83 women with UI undergoing six  months of expectant management, reported 
a spontaneous pregnancy rate of 17% (14/83). Antral follicle count ( AFC) was not predictive of 
spontaneous pregnancy with an AUC of 0.418 ± 0.08 (95% CI 0.26 -0.57) (Casadei et al., 2013) . 
In another cohort study, 102 women, aged 18 to 46 years, were prospectively followed for 12 cycles. 
Analyses adjusted for age showed no predictive effect of AMH, basal FSH or the AFC for time to ongoing 
pregnancy (HR 1.43, 95% CI 0.84- 2.46; HR 0.96, 95% CI 0.86 -1.06 and HR 1.03, 95% CI 1.00 -1.07, 
respectively) (Depmann et al., 2017) . 
Similar AMH levels and AFC were reported in 382 female partners of infertile couples and 350 women 
with no history of infertility. Moreover, proportion of women with very low serum AMH levels (with 
two different cut -offs of serum AMH <5 pmol/L or AFC <7) was similar in two cohorts. The findings were 
similar when the analy ses were restricted to women with UI . All analyses were adjusted for age and 
other relevant factors (Hvidman et al., 2016) .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  25 
A cohort study compared cycle day 2 -4 AFC in 148 women with UI and 112 women with male factor 
infertility. Women with UI had lower AFC than the male factor group ( 9 (3- 16) vs. 10 (3- 23) respectively). 
Log regression with infertility as the dependent showed that AFC was not significantly  associated with 
UI, after adjusting for age  (Yücel et al., 2018) . 
Rosen et al.  compared 881 women with UI with 771 women with regular ovulatory cycles from a 
community study. Women aged between 25 and 40 years in the UI group had significantly lower AFC 
than similarly aged women in the community group, women between 40 and 45 years had similar AFC 
in both groups. Serum FSH levels were significantly higher in UI women who were 31 –35 years of age 
and show a tendency to be higher in UI women who were 25 –30 years of age. There were no differences 
in FSH concentrations between groups in women who were 36 –40 or 41– 45 years of age. However, the 
authors employed bivariate comparisons for 5 -year age brackets rather than using a multivariate model 
adjusting for significa ntly lower age in the community group (Rosen et al., 2011) . 
In a cross -sectional study, AMH, FSH and AFC were compared between 227 women with strictly defined 
UI and 226 control women. Women were aged between 25 and 40 years and required to have a serum 
FSH level <12 IU/L on cycle day 3 within the previous year. An alyses adjusted for age, race, BMI, smoking 
status and recruitment site showed similar AMH levels and AFC in the two groups. It should be noted 
that inclusion of women with FSH >12 IU/L during the previous year, might have yielded different results 
(Greenwood et al., 2017) . 
 
DAY 3 FSH  AND ESTRADIOL  
Evidence  
A cohort study, including 750 women without infertility, found no difference in cumulative probability 
of conception for women with FSH>10 IU/L (HR 1.22, 0.92 -1.62) after adjusting for confounding factors  
(Steiner et al., 2017) .  
A cohort study compared cycle day 2 -4 FSH in 148 women with UI and 112 women with male factor 
infertility. Women with UI had similar FSH compared to the male factor group (7.52 ( range 4.21 -9.88) 
IU/L vs. 6.96 ( range 5.1-9.37) IU/L respectively). Likewise , estradiol levels were similar in UI and male 
factor (51.5 ( range 27-86) pg/ml vs. 43.5 ( range 25-71) pg/ml)  (Yücel et al., 2018) . 
 
CLOMIPHENE CITRATE CHALLENGE TEST (CCCT)  
Evidence  
A cohort study including 236 women from the general ovulating infertility population found that 52% 
of women with UI (12/32) had an abnormal Clomiphene citrate challenge test ( CCCT ) as compared to  
17.4% for oligo/anovulation, 8.7% for male factor, 4.3% for  tubal factor, 4.3% for endometriosis, and 
0% for pelvic adhesions. Women with an abnormal CCCT were less likely to conceive as compared to women with a normal result (Scott et al., 1993) . 
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  26 
OVARIAN VOLUME , OVARIAN BLOOD FLOW , INHIBIN B 
Evidence  
A cohort study, including 750 women without infertility, found no association of inhibin B levels and  
cumulative probability of conception (HR 0.999, 0.997 -1.001, per 1 pg/ml increase in inhibin B level) 
after adjusting for confounding factors  (age, body m ass index, race, current smoking status, and recent 
hormonal contraceptive use)  (Steiner et al., 2017) .  
A cohort study compared c ycle day 2 -4 ovarian volume  in 148 women with UI and 112 women with 
male factor infertility. Women with UI had similar ovarian volume as compared to the male factor group 
(6.2 ml (range 3.2-10.96) vs. 6.06 ml (range 3.3-12.2) respectively). Likewise inhibi n B levels were similar 
in UI and male factor (119 pg/ml (range 40-145) vs . 120 pg/ml (range 52-150)) (Yücel et al., 2018) . 
In a small cohort study cycle day 2 -5 inhibin B levels were compared between 42 women with UI and 
29 women with male factor infertility. Median s erum inhibin B levels were similar between UI and male 
factor groups (37.1 ( range 7.0-95.4) vs. 47.5 ( range 13-138.4) pg/ml respectively). Inhibin B alone was 
a poor predictor of live birth in 5 years (Murto et al., 2013) . 
 
OVERALL RECOMMENDATION  
Recommendation  
In women with regular menstrual cycles, o varian reserve 
testing is not required to identify the aetiology of infertility 
or to predict the probability of spontaneous conception 
over 6 to 12 months.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification  
The term “ovarian reserve” often refers to the quantity of primordial follicles in a woman’s ovaries at a 
given time. Although the term has also been used in a broader sense to include quality of oocytes, it is 
difficult to assess oocyte quality during the diagnostic work up.  
The purpose of diagnostic work up is to identify any factor prev enting pregnancy or decreasing 
spontaneous fecundity and to inform management strategy.  
For the first aim, ovarian reserve would be relevant if regularly ovulating women in different categories 
of ovarian reserve, i.e., low, normal or high, have different conception rates when every other factor is 
similar, chronological age in particular. Since women cannot be randomized to different categories of 
ovarian reserve, this question can be answered by two different study designs: comparing conception 
rates betw een women with different ovarian reserve (prospective cohort study or cross -sectional 
study) or comparing ovarian reserve status between fertile women and women with UI (case -control 
study).  
Most of  the listed studies  consistently  show that ovarian reserve  status is not predictive of spontaneous 
conception over the subsequent 6 -12 months. As long as they maintain regular menstrual cycles, 
women with decreased ovarian reserve seem to have similar spontaneous pregnancy rate with women  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  27 
of similar age who have normal ovarian reserve. These observations effectively exclude decreased 
ovarian reserve per se as a reason for infertility. Thus, an  ovarian reserve test  (ORT) is not required from 
a diagnostic standpoint.  
ORT would be relevant for choice of management i f ovarian reserve status is a determinant of the 
probability of pregnancy with expectant management, OS -IUI or IVF . Studies reviewed above do not 
suggest that ovarian reserve status would determine the probability of a spontaneous pregnancy in 6 -
12 months,  so ORT may not be informative to predict the success of expectant management over such 
a period. While one retrospective study suggests improved accuracy of the Hunault model used to 
categorize couples based on their anticipated chance of spontaneous conception, it needs to be 
validated prospectively and for other settings where referral by primary care is not required before 
consulting a fertility specialist (Hunault et al., 2004, Nguyen et al., 2022) . While a retrospective study 
including 3019 women younger than 35 years old, who underwent IUI in a natural or stimulated cycle, 
reported similar cumulative live birt h rates up to seven IUI cycles between women with serum AMH 
levels less than 1 ng/ml and higher than 1 ng/ml  (Tiegs et al., 2020) , another retrospective study 
including 1861 gonadotropin stimulated IUI cycles without an age limit reported that women in the 
lower 25th percentile of the study population for serum AMH levels, or women with serum AMH level 
<0.7 ng/ml were significantly l ess likely to achieve a clinical pregnancy over six cycles as compared with 
women higher AMH levels (Vagios et al., 2021) . Another retrospective study including 195 couples also 
reported a positive correlation between serum AMH level and cumulative pregnancy rate over three 
OS-IUI c ycles (Bakas et al., 2015) . It should be noted that the study populations were not limited to UI 
in the latter two studies and a variety of OS protocols have been used. In addition to the limitations of 
retrospective design, these features introduce some heterogeneity and limit generalizability of findings 
to UI. It is uncertain whether ovarian reserve status determines the probability of pregnancy with OS -
IUI cycles, where the aim s hould be to limit the number of growing follicles to 2 – 3 to prevent multiple 
pregnancies. It may be inappropriate to exclude women from OS -IUI based on ovarian reserve status.  
On the other hand, ovarian response, hence ovarian reserve, is a major determi nant of cumulative 
probability of live birth per OS cycle in IVF. Women with decreased ovarian reserve will have lower pregnancy/live birth rate per cycle  with IVF (because of a low number of oocytes/stimulation)  compared 
to women with similar characteristics but higher ovarian reserve. Thus, diverting women with low 
ovarian reserve directly or rapidly to IVF is questionable.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.3). 
 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  28 
REFERENCES  
Bakas P, Boutas I, Creatsa M, Vlahos N, Gregoriou O, Creatsas G, Hassiakos D. Can anti -Mullerian 
hormone (AMH) predict the outcome of intrauterine insemination with controlled ovarian 
stimula tion? Gynecological endocrinology : the official journal of the International Society of 
Gynecological Endocrinology  2015;31: 765 -768.  
Casadei L, Manicuti C, Puca F, Madrigale A, Emidi E, Piccione E. Can anti -Müllerian hormone be 
predictive of spontaneous onset of pregnancy in women with unexplained infertility? Journal of 
obstetrics and gynaecology : the journal of the Institute of Obste trics and Gynaecology  2013;33: 857 -
861.  
Depmann M, Broer SL, Eijkemans MJC, van Rooij IAJ, Scheffer GJ, Heimensem J, Mol BW, Broekmans 
FJM. Anti -Müllerian hormone does not predict time to pregnancy: results of a prospective cohort 
study. Gynecological endo crinology : the official journal of the International Society of Gynecological 
Endocrinology  2017;33: 644 -648.  
Greenwood EA, Cedars MI, Santoro N, Eisenberg E, Kao CN, Haisenleder DJ, Diamond MP, Huddleston 
HG. Antimüllerian hormone levels and antral folli cle counts are not reduced compared with 
community controls in patients with rigorously defined unexplained infertility. Fertility and sterility  
2017;108: 1070- 1077.  
Hagen CP, Vestergaard S, Juul A, Skakkebæk NE, Andersson AM, Main KM, Hjøllund NH, Ernst E, 
Bonde JP, Anderson RA et al.  Low concentration of circulating antimüllerian hormone is not predictive 
of reduced fecundability in young healthy women: a prospective cohort study. Fertility and sterility  
2012;98: 1602- 1608.e1602.  
Hunault CC, Habbem a JD, Eijkemans MJ, Collins JA, Evers JL, te Velde ER. Two new prediction rules for 
spontaneous pregnancy leading to live birth among subfertile couples, based on the synthesis of three previous models. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2004;19: 2019 -2026. 
Hvidman HW, Bentzen JG, Thuesen LL, Lauritsen MP, Forman JL, Loft A, Pinborg A, Nyboe Andersen A. 
Infertile women below the age of 40 have similar anti -Müllerian hormone levels and antral follicle 
count compared with women of the same age with no histo ry of infertility. Human reproduction 
(Oxford, England)  2016;31: 1034- 1045.  
Murto T, Bjuresten K, Landgren BM, Stavreus -Evers A. Predictive value of hormonal parameters for 
live birth in women with unexplained infertility and male infertility. Reproductive  biology and 
endocrinology : RB&E  2013;11: 61.  
Nguyen DK, O'Leary S, Gadalla MA, Roberts B, Alvino H, Tremellen KP, Mol BW. The predictive value of anti-Müllerian hormone for natural conception leading to live birth in subfertile couples. Reproductive 
biom edicine online 2022;44: 557 -564.  
Rosen MP, Johnstone E, Addauan -Andersen C, Cedars MI. A lower antral follicle count is associated 
with infertility. Fertility and sterility  2011;95: 1950- 1954, 1954.e1951.  
Scott RT, Leonardi MR, Hofmann GE, Illions EH, Neal  GS, Navot D. A prospective evaluation of 
clomiphene citrate challenge test screening of the general infertility population. Obstetrics and gynecology  1993;82: 539 -544.  
Steiner AZ, Pritchard D, Stanczyk FZ, Kesner JS, Meadows JW, Herring AH, Baird DD. Asso ciation 
Between Biomarkers of Ovarian Reserve and Infertility Among Older Women of Reproductive Age. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association 2017;318: 1367 -1376.  
Tiegs AW, Sun L, Scott RT, Jr., Goodman LR. Comparison of pregnancy outcomes fo llowing 
intrauterine insemination in young women with decreased versus normal ovarian reserve. Fertility 
and sterility  2020;113: 788 -796.e784.  
Vagios S, Hsu JY, Sacha CR, Dimitriadis I, Christou G, James KE, Bormann CL, Souter I. Pretreatment 
antimüllerian  hormone levels and outcomes of ovarian stimulation with gonadotropins/intrauterine 
insemination cycles. Fertility and sterility  2021;116: 422- 430.  
Yücel B, Kelekci S, Demirel E. Decline in ovarian reserve may be an undiagnosed reason for unexplained infer tility: a cohort study. Archives of medical science : AMS  2018;14: 527 -531.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  29 
II.4 Tubal factor   
PICO  QUESTION : WHAT IS THE ACCURACY OF COMMONLY USED TESTS OF TUBAL PATENCY ?  
HYSTERO SALPINGO -CONTRAST -SONOGRAPHY (HYCOSY/HYFOSY) VS. LAPAROSCOPY AND CHROMOPERTUBATION 
TEST 
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis including 1977 patients with subfertility in 21 studies 
investigated the sensitivity and specificity of hystero salpingo -contrast -sonography (HyCoSy /HyFoSy ) in 
the diagnosis of tubal pathology using laparoscopy with chromopertubation as the reference standard 
(Alcázar et al., 2020) . For 2D -HyCoSy the pooled sensitivity  and specificity  were 0.86 (95% CI 0.80 –0.91) 
and 0.94 (95% CI 0.90 –0.96), respectively. The likelihood ratio ( LR) for detecting tubal occlusion with  
2D-HyCoSy were 0.14 (95% CI 0.08 –0.23) for LR+ and 0.14 (95% CI 0.1 –0.2) for LR -, respectively. High 
heterogeneity was found for sensitivity (p<0.001) and for specificity (p<0.001). For 3D/4D -HyCoSy the 
pooled sensitivity  and specificity  were 0.95 (95% CI 0.89 –0.98) and 0.89 (95% CI 0.82 –0.94), 
respect ively. The LR for detecting tubal occlusion with 3D/4D -HyCoSy were 0.09 (95% CI 0.05 –0.16)  for 
LR+, and 0.06 (95% CI 0.03 –0.13)  for LR -, respectively. Both sonography methods had almost identical 
areas under the curve (0.96 for 2D -HyCoSy and 0.97 for 3D/4D -HyCoSy) (Alcázar et al., 2020) . 
Another systematic review and meta -analysis including 1553 patients in 23 studies investigated the 
sensitivity and specificity of 3D - and 4D- HyCoSy for tu bal patency using laparoscopy as the gold 
standard. The pooled estimates of sensitivity and specificity were 0.92 (95% CI 0.90 –0.94) and 0.92 
(95% CI 0.89 –0.93), respectively. The area under the ROC curve was 0.97 (95% CI 0.95 –0.98) (Wang and 
Qian, 2016) . 
Table 1 includes all other studies included as for evidence on the comparison between HyCoSy and 
laparoscopy and chromopertubation that were not included in the meta -analyses. True and false 
positive and true and false negative data were extracted from the included publications , followed by 
calculations on sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and likelihood ratios by the GDG. The 
unadjusted pooled accuracy of HyCoSy showed a sensitivity of 0.8 7 (95% CI 0.7 4–1.00 ) and a specificity 
of 0.83 (95% CI 0.7 7–0.90) (Table 1). 
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  30 
Table 1: Accuracy of HyCoSy compared to gold standard laparoscopy and chromopertubation for tubal patency testing. True and false positive and true and false negative data were  extracted 
from the included publications followed by calculations on sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and likelihood ratios by the GDG.  PPV: positive predictive value, NPV: negative predictive value, 
LR: likelihood ratio.  
Reference  Method  No of 
patients  Clinical background  True 
positive  False 
positive  True 
negative  False 
negative  Sensitivity  Specificity  PPV NPV  LR+ LR- 
(Chen et al., 2019)  4D-HyCoSy  
contrast medium  34 Not specified  23 4 32 3 0.88 0.89 0.85 0.91 7.96 0.13 
(Cimen et al., 1999)  HyCoSy  
contrast medium  47 No patients included with a 
suspicion of acute or 
chronic PID  9 3 22 2 0.82 0.88 0.75 0.92 6.82 0.21 
(Liang et al., 2019)  3D-HyCoSy  
contrast medium  83 Not specified  86 8 58 10 0.90 0.88 0.91 0.85 7.39 0.12 
(Malek- Mellouli e t al., 
2013)  HyCoSy  
saline  40 No vaginal, cervical, or pelvic infection  21 8 44 7 0.75 0.85 0.72 0.86 4.88 0.30 
(Radić et al., 2005)  saline  
37 No patients with any signs of pelvic infection  47 30 58 0 1.00 0.66 0.61 1.00 2.93 0.00 
contrast medium  47 20 68 0 1.00 0.77 0.70 1.00 4.40 0.00 
(Rezk and Shawky, 
2015)  HyCoSy  
saline  104 56.7% of patients with 
history of pelvic surgery 15 4 75 10 0.60 0.95 0.79 0.88 11.85 0.42 
(Shahid et al., 2005)  HyCoSy  
contrast medium  15 History suggest ive of 
ovulatory factors (PCO), pelvic inflammatory disease 
and endometriosis was 
noted.  7 0 7 1 0.88 1.00 1.00 0.88 N/A 0.13 
19 5 0 2 12 0.29 1.00 1.00 0.14 N/A 0.71 
(Zhou et al., 2012)  3D-HyCoSy 
contrast medium  75 No acute or subacute 
inflammation of the  
reproductive system  72 10 63 5 0.94 0.86 0.88 0.93 6.83 0.08  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  31 
HYSTEROSALPINGOGRAPHY (HSG)  VS. LAPAROSCOPY AND CHROMOPERTUBATION TEST  
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis including seven  studies with 4521 women  investigated the 
sensitivity and specificity of hysterosalpingography (HSG) in the diagnosis of tubal pathology using 
laparoscopy with chromopertubation as the reference standard  (Broeze et al., 2011) . The sensitivity of 
HSG for any tubal pathology ranged between 46% and 100% and specificity between 73% and 100% 
across the studi es. The unadjusted pooled accuracy of HSG showed a sensitivity of 0.70 (95% CI 0.66 –
0.74) and a specificity of 0.78 (95% CI 0.75 –0.80). After imputation of missing laparoscopy results  (for 
2632 women) , these rates were 0.53 (95% CI 0.50 –0.57) and 0.87 (95%  CI 0.86 –0.88) for sensitivity and 
specificity, respectively. In women with a low- risk clinical history (no previous pelvic inflammatory 
disease (PID ) and with negative chlamydia antibody testing result), the sensitivity of HSG for detecting 
unilateral tub al pathology was 38% versus 61% in women with a high -risk history (previous PID and with 
negative chlamydia antibody testing result). For bilateral tubal pathology, sensitivity ranged between 0% and 100% and specificity ranged between 87% and 97% across th e individual studies. The pooled 
estimates for sensitivity and specificity were 0.66 (95% CI 0.55 –0.75) and 0.91 (95% CI 0.89 –0.93), 
respectively. After imputation of laparoscopy results, these rates were 0.46 (95% CI 0.41 –0.51) and 0.95 
(95% CI 0.94– 0.95)  (Broeze et al., 2011) . 
Table 2 includes 1 8 studies from the evidence review by the GDG that were not included in the 
systematic review and meta -analysis  by Broeze et al.  Only studies were included that had data available 
to calculate test performance by the GDG. True and false positive and true and false negative data were extracted from the included publications followed by calculations on sensitivity, specificity, predictive 
values a nd likelihood ratios. To support the systematic review by Broeze et al.  showing high sensitivity 
and specificity for HSG, the pooled sensitivity and specificity of these additional 1 8 studies were 0.8 6 
(95% CI 0.78 –0.94 ) and 0. 79 (95% CI 0. 72–0.86), respec tively. 
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  32 
Tabl e 2: Accuracy of HSG compared to gold standard laparoscopy and chromopertubation for tubal patency testing. True and false positive and true and false negative data were extracted from 
the included publications followed by calculations on sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and likelihood ratios by th e GDG. PPV: positive predictive value, NPV: negative p redictive value, LR: 
likelihood ratio.  
Reference   No of 
patients  Clinical background  True 
positive  False 
positive  True 
negative  False 
negative  Sensitivity  Specificity  PPV NPV  LR+ LR- 
(Adelusi et al., 1995)   104 Not specified  42 21 33 8 0.84 0.61 0.67 0.80 2.16 0.26 
(Agrawal and Fayyaz, 
2019)   103 No active genitourinary 
infection  38 31 34 0 1.00 0.52 0.55 1.00 2.10 0.00 
(Berker et al., 2015)  Bilateral  
264 Not specified  25 9 175 1 0.96 0.95 0.74 0.99 19.66 0.04 
Unilateral  13 30 175 2 0.87 0.85 0.30 0.99 5.92 0.16 
(Chang et al., 1987)   1267 Not specified  944 95 171 57 0.94 0.64 0.91 0.75 2.64 0.09 
(Dabekausen et al., 
1994)   34 Not specified  7 5 17 5 0.58 0.77 0.58 0.77 2.57 0.54 
(Foroozanfard and 
Sadat, 2013)  All 
62 No prior pelvic surgery, no 
history of pelvic infection  9 10 35 8 0.53 0.78 0.47 0.81 2.38 0.61 
Bilateral  6 3 35 1 0.86 0.92 0.67 0.97 10.86 0.16 
(Gündüz et al., 2021)   208 No chronic disease or 
history of abdominal 
surgery  61 47 86 14 0.81 0.65 0.56 0.86 2.30 0.29 
(Hamed et al., 2009)   88 No pelvic infections or 
organic lesions  36 16 54 8 0.82 0.77 0.69 0.87 3.58 0.24 
(Hiroi et al., 2007)  Bilateral  
314 Patients without 
background factor  18 15 192 12 0.60 0.93 0.55 0.94 8.28 0.43 
Unilateral  15 11 192 39 0.28 0.95 0.58 0.83 5.13 0.76 
(Ismajovich et al., 
1986)   215 Not specified  53 34 88 40 0.57 0.72 0.61 0.69 2.04 0.60 
(Keltz et al., 2006)   210 9.04% of patients 
reported a prior history of 
Chlamydia infection or PID  40 3 19 11 0.78 0.86 0.93 0.63 5.75 0.25 
(Loy et al., 1989)   77 Not specified  16 16 41 4 0.80 0.72 0.50 0.91 2.85 0.28 
(Ngowa et al., 2015)  Bilateral  
208 Not specified  25 3 27 24 0.51 0.90 0.89 0.53 5.10 0.54 
Distal  59 26 19 9 0.87 0.42 0.69 0.68 1.50 0.31  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  33 
Reference   No of 
patients  Clinical background  True 
positive  False 
positive  True 
negative  False 
negative  Sensitivity  Specificity  PPV NPV  LR+ LR- 
(Rezk and Shawky, 
2015)   104 56.7% of patients with 
history of pelvic surgery 11 3 75 15 0.42 0.96 0.79 0.83 11.00 0.60 
(Rice et al., 1986)   143 Not specified  58 11 62 12 0.83 0.85 0.84 0.84 5.50 0.20 
(Tan et al., 2021)   644 20.97% (n = 181) of 
patients had a history of 
previous pelvic surgery.  477 3 143 21 0.96 0.98 0.99 0.87 46.61 0.04 
(Tshabu -Aguemon et 
al., 2014)   96 patients investigated for 
tubal infertility  45 11 20 20 0.69 0.65 0.80 0.50 1.95 0.48 
(Tvarijonaviciene and 
Nadisauskiene, 2008)   149 No previous laparoscopic 
or abdominal tubal 
surgery related to 
infertility.  48 47 43 11 0.81 0.48 0.51 0.80 1.56 0.39  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  34 
Recommendation  
Hystero salpingo -contrast -sonography  (HyCoS y) and 
hysterosalpingography ( HSG) are valid test s for tubal 
patency  compared to laparoscopy and chromopertubation . Strong  ⊕⊕⊕ 
 
HSG and HyCoSy are comparable in diagnostic capacity, 
thus selection of the technique depends on  the preference 
of the clinician and the patient.  GPP  
 
Justification  
High risk for tubal occlusion includes past chlamydia infection, PID, peritonitis, known endometriosis 
and/or pelvic surgery including salpingectomy  for ectopic pregnancy. As for the evidence, not all studies 
described whether the test was done in low/high -risk population. In most of the cases the population 
was selected to be of low -risk, and this has to be taken into consideration in the recommendation 
formulated  by the GDG. The mechanical tubal flushing has been considered as “treatment” and has 
been evaluated for evidence in section III.3 mechanical -surgical procedures.   
HyCoSy  
The current evidence for HyCoSy compared to laparoscopy and chromopertubation, consisting of two 
systematic reviews and meta -analyses including 44 cohort studies and eight additional cohort studies 
not included in the meta -analysis, showed that Hy CoSy is a valid test for tubal patency. Even though 
there was high variation in data, there was overall high specificity and sensitivity for HyCoSy. All 
sonography types (2/3/4D) performed well.   
The GDG cannot formulate a recommendation on the use of cont rast medium , foam  or saline  due to 
too little studies.  It has to be noted that the evidence synthesis included studies including contrast 
medias that are off -label use and some are no longer at the market. A recent  systematic review and  
meta -analysis investigated the frequency of severe pain perception during HyCoSy with different 
contrast agents (contrast media, saline or foam) and found similar occur rence of mild, moderate and 
severe pain for all types of contrast during the procedure  (Boned -López et al., 2021) . 
HSG  
The current evidence, consisting of a sys tematic review and meta -analysis including seven  cohort 
studies and 14 additional cohort studies not included in the meta -analysis, showed that HSG is a valid 
test for tubal patency and less costly and harmful than laparoscopy.  The risk for HSG (oil or wat er-based 
contrast media) has been evaluated to be low in a recent study by Roest et al . including 3289 HSG cases; 
overall complication risk was 5.1% for oil -based HSG and 1.8% for water based HSG (Roest et al., 2020) . 
The same study also reported i ntravasation in 4.8% of cases for oil -based contract and 1.3% for the 
water -based (Roest et al., 2020) . Procedure -related PID was rare (0.3% for oil -based contracts and 0.4% 
for water-based) and no pulmonary embolism or deaths  were reported. Clinical history increases the 
accuracy of HSG testing although as a limitation , HSG has very limited possibility to detect abdominal 
adhesions compared to laparosc opy.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  35 
HyCoSy (using saline or foam) is less harmful than laparoscopy or HSG, given that the women going 
through H yCoSy can be assessed immediately after ultrasound , allowing the evaluation of the fallopian 
tubes and uterine cavity in one test. Furthermore , there is no need for general anaesthesia or exposure 
to radiation  with the use of HyCoSy/HyFoSy . 
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.4). 
 
CHLAMYDIA ANTIBODY TESTING VS . LAPAROSCOPY AND CHROMOPERTUBATION TEST  
Antibodies against Chlamyida Trachomatis (CT), can be maintained in sera for at least 10 years after 
infection (Horner et al., 20 13, Horner et al., 2016)  and are the only available means for determining 
prior CT infection.  
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis including 2729 patie nts with subfertility in 23 studies 
investigated the sensitivity and specificity of Chlamydia antibody titr es in the diagnosis of tubal 
pathology using laparoscopy with chromopertubation as the reference standard  (Mol et al., 1997) . The 
sensitivity of Chlamydia antibody testing (CAT) for tubal pathology varied between 0.21 and 0.90, with 
the specificity varying between 0.29 and 1 . There was  substantial heterogeneity between studies  also 
with regards to the method used for verifying tubal pathology . The discriminative capacity of CAT was 
significantly different between studies using microimmunofluorescence (MIF) or immunofluorescence 
(IF) and ELISA or immunoperoxidase (IP)  with MIF/ IF and ELISA performing equally and IP showing the 
lowest performance  in the estimated summary ROC curve (Mol et al., 1997) . 
The 13 studies that were not included in the systematic review and  meta -analysis  by Mol et  al. (Table 
3), showed similar results, pooled sensitivity was quite low 0. 61 (95% CI 0.54- 0.67) , but specificity  was 
as high as 0.8 3 (95% CI 0.78 -0.88) . This also reflected the positive and negative predictive value for the 
antibody testing  (pooled PPV 0.58 and NPV 0.8 5). Combining medical history or transvaginal ultrasound 
(TVUS ) with CAT increased the test performance (Akande et al., 2003, Coppus et al., 2007, Logan et al., 
2003) . Moreover, quantitative titer threshold could also reveal severity of damage (Akande et al., 2003) . 
Recommendation  
Chlamydia antibody testing for tubal patency could be 
considered a non -invasive test to differentiate between 
patients at low and at high risk for tubal occlusion . Conditional  ⊕ 
 
In patients at high -risk for tubal abnormality , visual 
demonstration  of tubal patency  is necessary.  GPP  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  36 
Justification  
The current evidence, consisting of a systematic review and meta -analysis including 23 cohort studies, 
and an additional 13 cohort studies that were published after the systematic review , showed CAT could 
be considered a non- invasive test to differentiate between patients at low and at high risk for tubal 
occlusion . However,  although the techniques were not compared head- to-head,  the sensitivity versus 
laparoscopy is lower compared to HSG and HyCoSy. The specificity seems to be good across different 
tests. It has to be noted that the validity of the test var ies according to the assay used. This was 
investigated in a cohort study that reported a discrepancy in 21% of patients between MIF and ELISA 
assays for IgG (Gijsen et al., 2002) . Moreover, CAT does not allow evaluation of the degree of occlusion  
or occlusions due to other infections than CT .  
The reviewed data suggests a role (although limited) for CAT in clinical practice. Given the low false 
negative rate in testing, a  negative result combined with low- risk medical history could be considered 
specific for tubal patency. Given the somewhat low PPV for the CAT, both a p ositive test as well as a 
negative test combined with a high -risk medical history should be confirmed with visual  methods like 
HyCoSy, HSG or laparoscopy depending on the assessments needed. To highlight the role for medical 
histo ry, Hubacher et al.  reported tubal pathology (confirmed by laparoscopy) in 84.3% of patients with 
a high -risk med ical history  (based on a logistic regression model using past pelvic inflammatory disease 
symptoms, previous history of a lower genital tract i nfection, previous vaginal discharge, and antibodies 
to Chlamydia trachomatis)  (Hubacher et al., 2004) . Since the systematic review by Mol et al. , newer 
antibodies and more specific CAT have emerged with improved performance of these tests, however, 
limitations especially with sensitivity still remain (Horner et al., 2021) . 
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.4). 
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  37 
Table 3: Accuracy of Chlamydia antibody testing compared to gold standard laparoscopy and dye for tubal patency testing. IF: immunoflu orescence, MIF: microimmunofluorescence. True and 
false positive and true and false negative data were e xtracted from the included publications followed by calculations on sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and likelihoo d ratios by the GDG.  
PPV: positive predictive value, NPV: negative predictive value, LR: likelihood ratio.  
Reference  Method  No of 
patients  Clinical background  True 
positive  False 
positive  True 
negative  False 
negative  Sensitivity  Specificity  PPV NPV  LR+ LR- 
(Babay and Al -
Meshari, 1993)  Iodine stain  75 History of urinary tract infection, 
history of PID, history of previous 
pelvic surgery was recorded  33 16 21 5 0.87 0.57 0.67 0.81 2.01 0.23 
(Akande, et al., 2003)  IF 434 Not specified  358 192 380 76 0.82 0.66 0.65 0.83 2.46 0.26 
(Sönmez et al., 2008)  IF 152 No patients with history of pelvic 
surgery, endometriosis, tuberculosis  18 18 62 27 0.40 0.78 0.50 0.70 1.78 0.77 
(Veenemans and van 
der Linden, 2002)  IF 277 Women with only one tube or 
tuboperitoneal abnormality not 
caused by CT  28 50 60 7 0.80 0.55 0.36 0.90 1.76 0.37 
(den Hartog et al., 
2004)  MIF 313 No previous  pelvic surgery  32 20 234 27 0.54 0.92 0.62 0.90 6.89 0.50 
(den Hartog et al., 
2005)  MIF IgG  
313 No previous pelvic surgery  32 20 234 27 0.54 0.92 0.62 0.90 6.89 0.50 
EIA IgA  21 21 233 38 0.36 0.92 0.50 0.86 4.31 0.70 
(Ng et al., 2001)  MIF 110 No history of any pelvic surgery  17 11 68 14 0.55 0.86 0.61 0.83 3.94 0.52 
(Logan, et al., 2003)  EIA 207 No previous laparoscopy or tubal surgery  23 17 127 40 0.37 0.88 0.58 0.76 3.09 0.72 
(Rantsi et al., 2019 ) EIA TroA IgG  
116 No prior pelvic surgery  17 11 40 11 0.61 0.78 0.61 0.78 2.81 0.50 
EIA HtrA IgG  16 11 40 12 0.57 0.78 0.59 0.77 2.65 0.55 
ELISA MOMP IgG  15 17 34 13 0.54 0.67 0.47 0.72 1.61 0.70 
(Coppus, et al., 2007)  ELISA  207 No previous tubal testing or surgery  23 17 127 40 0.37 0.88 0.58 0.76 3.09 0.72 
(Singh et al., 2016)  ELISA  200 Not specified  further  10 0 150 40 0.20 1.00 1.00 0.79 N/A 0.80 
(Tanikawa et al., 
1996)  ELISA  131 No previous pelvic surgery  24 27 60 20 0.55 0.69 0.47 0.75 1.76 0.66 
(van Dooremalen et al., 2020)  ELISA  
890 Not specified  further  44 75 710 61 0.42 0.90 0.37 0.92 4.39 0.64  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  38 
REFERENCES  
Adelusi B, al -Nuaim L, Makanjuola D, Khashoggi T, Chowdhury N, Kangave D. Accuracy of 
hysterosalpingography and laparoscopic hydrotubation in diagnosis of tubal patency. Fertility and 
sterility  1995;63: 1016- 1020.  
Agrawal N, Fayyaz S. Can hysterolaparoscop ic mediated chromopertubation obviate the need for 
hysterosalpingography for proximal tubal blockage?: An experience at a single tertiary care center. 
Journal of gynecology obstetrics and human reproduction 2019;48: 241 -245.  
Akande VA, Hunt LP, Cahill DJ, Caul EO, Ford WC, Jenkins JM. Tubal damage in infertile women: 
prediction using chlamydia serology. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2003;18: 1841- 1847.  
Alcázar JL, Martinez A, Duarte M, Welly A, Marín A, Calle A, Garrido R, Pascual MA, Guerriero S. Two -
dimensional hysterosalpingo -contrast- sonography compared to three/four -dimensional 
hysterosalpingo -contrast -sonography for the assessment of tubal occlusion in women with 
infertility/subfertility: a systematic review with meta -analysis. Human fertility ( Cambridge, England)  
2020: 1- 13. 
Babay ZA, Al -Meshari A. The role of Chlamydia trachomatis infection in female infertility. Annals of 
Saudi medicine  1993;13: 423- 428.  
Berker B, Şükür YE, Aytaç R, Atabekoğlu CS, Sönmezer M, Özmen B. Infertility work -up: To w hat 
degree does laparoscopy change the management strategy based on hysterosalpingography findings? 
The journal of obstetrics and gynaecology research  2015;41: 1785 -1790.  
Boned -López J, Alcázar JL, Errasti T, Ruiz- Zambrana A, Rodriguez I, Pascual MA, Guerriero S. Severe 
pain during hysterosalpingo -contrast sonography (HyCoSy): a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
Archives of gynecology and obstetrics  2021;304: 1389 -1398.  
Broeze KA, Opmeer BC, Van Geloven N, Coppus SF, Collins JA, Den Hartog JE, Van der Linden PJ, Marianowski P, Ng EH, Van der Steeg JW  et al.  Are patient characteristics associated with the accuracy 
of hysterosalpingography in diagnosing tubal pathology? An individual patient data meta -analysis. 
Human reproduction update  2011;17: 293- 300.  
Chang YS, Lee JY, Moon SY, Kim JG. Diagnostic laparoscopy in gynecologic disorders. Asia-Oceania 
journal of obstetrics and gynaecology  1987;13: 29- 34. 
Chen S, Du X, Chen Q, Chen S. Combined Real -Time Three- Dimensional Hysterosalpingo -Contrast 
Sonography with B Mode Hysterosalpingo -Contrast Sonography in the Evaluation of Fallopian Tube 
Patency in Patients Undergoing Infertility Investigations. BioMed research international  2019;2019: 
9408141.  
Cimen G, Trak B, Elpek G, Simsek T, Erman O. The efficiency of hysterosalpingo -contrastsonography 
(HyCoSy) in the evaluation of tubal patency. Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology : the journal of the 
Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecol ogy 1999;19: 516- 518.  
Coppus SF, Opmeer BC, Logan S, van der Veen F, Bhattacharya S, Mol BW. The predictive value of 
medical history taking and Chlamydia IgG ELISA antibody testing (CAT) in the selection of subfertile women for diagnostic laparoscopy: a cl inical prediction model approach. Human reproduction 
(Oxford, England)  2007;22: 1353- 1358.  
Dabekausen YA, Evers JL, Land JA, Stals FS. Chlamydia trachomatis antibody testing is more accurate than hysterosalpingography in predicting tubal factor infertility . Fertility and sterility  1994;61: 833-
837.  
den Hartog JE, Land JA, Stassen FR, Kessels AG, Bruggeman CA. Serological markers of persistent C. trachomatis infections in women with tubal factor subfertility. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  
2005;20: 986- 990.  
den Hartog JE, Land JA, Stassen FR, Slobbe -van Drunen ME, Kessels AG, Bruggeman CA. The role of 
chlamydia genus -specific and species -specific IgG antibody testing in predicting tubal disease in 
subfertile women. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2004;19: 1380- 1384.  
Foroozanfard F, Sadat Z. Diagnostic value of hysterosalpingography and laparoscopy for tubal patency in infertile women. Nursing and midwifery studies 2013;2: 188- 192.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  39 
Gijsen AP, Land JA, Goossens VJ, Slobbe ME, Bruggeman CA. Chlamydia a ntibody testing in screening 
for tubal factor subfertility: the significance of IgG antibody decline over time. Human reproduction 
(Oxford, England)  2002;17: 699- 703.  
Gündüz R, Ağaçayak E, Okutucu G, Karuserci Ö K, Peker N, Çetinçakmak MG, Gül T. 
Hysterosa lpingography: a potential alternative to laparoscopy in the evaluation of tubal obstruction in 
infertile patients? African health sciences  2021;21: 373- 378.  
Hamed HO, Shahin AY, Elsamman AM. Hysterosalpingo -contrast sonography versus radiographic 
hysterosa lpingography in the evaluation of tubal patency. International journal of gynaecology and 
obstetrics: the official organ of the International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics  2009;105: 
215-217.  
Hiroi H, Fujiwara T, Nakazawa M, Osuga Y, Momoeda M, K ugu K, Yano T, Tsutsumi O, Taketani Y. High 
incidence of tubal dysfunction is determined by laparoscopy in cases with positive Chlamydia 
trachomatis antibody despite negative finding in prior hysterosalpingography. Reproductive medicine 
and biology  2007;6:  39-43. 
Horner PJ, Anyalechi GE, Geisler WM. What Can Serology Tell Us About the Burden of Infertility in 
Women Caused by Chlamydia? The Journal of infectious diseases 2021;224: S80- s85. 
Horner PJ, Wills GS, Reynolds R, Johnson AM, Muir DA, Winston A, Broa dbent AJ, Parker D, McClure 
MO. Effect of time since exposure to Chlamydia trachomatis on chlamydia antibody detection in women: a cross -sectional study. Sexually transmitted infections  2013;89: 398 -403.  
Horner PJ, Wills GS, Righarts A, Vieira S, Kounali D , Samuel D, Winston A, Muir D, Dickson NP, McClure 
MO. Chlamydia trachomatis Pgp3 Antibody Persists and Correlates with Self -Reported Infection and 
Behavioural Risks in a Blinded Cohort Study. PloS one  2016;11: e0151497.  
Hubacher D, Grimes D, Lara -Ricalde R, de la Jara J, Garcia -Luna A. The limited clinical usefulness of 
taking a history in the evaluation of women with tubal factor infertility. Fertility and sterility  2004;81: 
6-10. 
Ismajovich B, Wexler S, Golan A, Langer L, David MP. The accuracy of hyster osalpingography versus 
laparoscopy in evaluation of infertile women. International journal of gynaecology and obstetrics: the 
official organ of the International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics  1986;24: 9- 12. 
Keltz MD, Gera PS, Moustakis M. Chlamy dia serology screening in infertility patients. Fertility and 
sterility  2006;85: 752- 754.  
Liang N, Wu QQ, Li JH, Gao FY, Sun FL, Guo CX. Causes of misdiagnosis in assessing tubal patency by 
transvaginal real -time three -dimensional hysterosalpingo -contrast sonography. Revista da Associacao 
Medica Brasileira (1992)  2019;65: 1055- 1060.  
Logan S, Gazvani R, McKenzie H, Templeton A, Bhattacharya S. Can history, ultrasound, or ELISA 
chlamydial antibodies, alone or in combination, predict tubal factor infertility in subfertile women? 
Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2003;18: 2350- 2356.  
Loy RA, Weinstein FG, Seibel MM. Hysterosalpingography in perspective: the predictive value of oil -
soluble versus water -soluble contrast media. Fertility and sterility  1989;51: 170- 172.  
Malek -Mellouli M, Gharbi H, Reziga H. The value of sonohysterography in the diagnosis of tubal 
patency among infertile patients. La Tunisie medicale  2013;91: 387 -390.  
Mol BW, Dijkman B, Wertheim P, Lijmer J, van der Veen F, Bossuyt PM. The accuracy of serum 
chlamydial antibodies in the diagnosis of tubal pathology: a meta -analysis. Fertility and sterility  
1997;67: 1031- 1037.  
Ng EH, Tang OS, Ho PC. Measurement of serum CA -125 concentrations does not improve the value of 
Chlamydia trachomatis antibody in predicting tubal pathology at laparoscopy. Human reproduction 
(Oxford, Engla nd) 2001;16: 775- 779.  
Ngowa JD, Kasia JM, Georges NT, Nkongo V, Sone C, Fongang E. Comparison of hysterosalpingograms 
with laparoscopy in the diagnostic of tubal factor of female infertility at the Yaoundé General Hospital, Cameroon. The Pan African medica l journal  2015;22: 264.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  40 
Radić V, Canić T, Valetić J, Duić Z. Advantages and disadvantages of hysterosonosalpingography in the 
assessment of the reproductive status of uterine cavity and fallopian tubes. European journal of radiology  2005;53: 268 -273.  
Rants i T, Land JA, Joki -Korpela P, Ouburg S, Hokynar K, Paavonen J, Tiitinen A, Puolakkainen M. 
Predictive Values of Serum Chlamydia trachomatis TroA and HtrA IgG Antibodies as Markers of Persistent Infection in the Detection of Pelvic Adhesions and Tubal Occlu sion. Microorganisms  2019;7.  
Rezk M, Shawky M. The safety and acceptability of saline infusion sonography versus hysterosalpingography for evaluation of tubal patency in infertile women. Middle east fertility society 
journal  2015;20: 108- 113.  
Rice JP, Lond on SN, Olive DL. Reevaluation of hysterosalpingography in infertility investigation. 
Obstetrics and gynecology  1986;67: 718- 721.  
Roest I, van Welie N, Mijatovic V, Dreyer K, Bongers M, Koks C, Mol BW. Complications after hysterosalpingography with oil - or water -based contrast: results of a nationwide survey. Human 
reproduction open 2020;2020: hoz045.  
Shahid N, Ahluwalia A, Briggs S, Gupta S. An audit of patients investigated by Hysterosalpingo -
Contrast- Sonography (HyCoSy) for infertility. Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology : the journal of the 
Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecology  2005;25: 275- 278. 
Singh S, Bhandari S, Agarwal P, Chittawar P, Thakur R. Chlamydia antibody testing helps in identifying females with possible tubal factor infertility. International journal of reproductive biomedicine  
2016;14: 187- 192.  
Sönmez S, Sönmez E, Yasar L, Aydin F, Coskun A, Süt N. Can screening Chlamydia trachomatis by 
serological tests predict tubal damage in infertile patients? The new microbiologica  2008;31: 75- 79. 
Tan J, Deng M, Xia M, Lai M, Pan W, Li Y. Comparison of Hysterosalpingography With Laparoscopy i n 
the Diagnosis of Tubal Factor of Female Infertility. Frontiers in medicine 2021;8: 720401.  
Tanikawa M, Harada T, Katagiri C, Onohara Y, Yoshida S, Terakawa N. Chlamydia trachomatis antibody titres by enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay are useful in predic ting severity of adnexal adhesion. 
Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  1996;11: 2418- 2421.  
Tshabu- Aguemon C, Ogoudjobi M, Obossou A, King V, Takpara I, Alihonou E. 
HYSTEROSALPINGOGRAPHY AND LAPAROSCOPY IN EVALUATING FALLOPIAN TUBES IN THE MANAGEMENT OF INFERTILITY IN COTONOU, BENIN REPUBLIC. Journal of the West African College of Surgeons 2014;4: 66- 75. 
Tvarijonaviciene E, Nadisauskiene RJ. The value of hysterosalpingography in the diagnosis of tubal pathology among infertile patients. Medicina (Kaunas, Li thuania)  2008;44: 439 -448.  
van Dooremalen WTM, Verweij SP, den Hartog JE, Kebbi -Beghdadi C, Ouburg S, Greub G, Morré SA, 
Ammerdorffer A. Screening of Chlamydia trachomatis and Waddlia chondrophila Antibodies in Women with Tubal Factor Infertility. Microorg anisms  2020;8.  
Veenemans LM, van der Linden PJ. The value of Chlamydia trachomatis antibody testing in predicting tubal factor infertility. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2002;17: 695 -698.  
Wang Y, Qian L. Three - or four -dimensional hysterosalpingo co ntrast sonography for diagnosing tubal 
patency in infertile females: a systematic review with meta -analysis. The British journal of radiology  
2016;89: 20151013.  
Zhou L, Zhang X, Chen X, Liao L, Pan R, Zhou N, Di N. Value of three -dimensional hysterosalping o-
contrast sonography with SonoVue in the assessment of tubal patency. Ultrasound in obstetrics & 
gynecology : the official journal of the International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology  2012;40: 93- 98. 
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  41 
II.5 Uterine factor  
PICO  QUESTION : WHICH DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES SHOULD BE PERFORMED TO CONFIRM A NORMAL 
UTERINE STRUCTURE /ANATOMY , UTERINE WALL /MYOMETRIUM ?  
3D ULTRASOUND VS. 2D ULTRASOUND  
Evidence  
In a prospective cohort study, 117 women were examined with 2D and 3D ultrasound (US) to detect 
the most common congenital uterine anomalies. In the study, distinction was also made between an 
initial 2D -US and expert 2D -US. In the overall diagnosis of ute rine anomalies, 3D -US was found to be a 
significantly  better technique than both initial and expert 2D -US. Accuracy of 3D -US was 97.1% versus 
51.4% for initial 2D -US and 82.9% for expert 2D -US, c ompared with combined hysteroscopy and 
laparoscopy (Ludwin et al., 2013) . 
In a prospective cohort study, 108 women with suspected congenital Mullerian abnormalities were 
evaluated with 2D - and 3D -US. Compared to 2D -US, the sensitivity and specificity of real -time 3D -US 
were significantly higher in both the follicular phase (3D -US sensitivity 94.7%  and specificity 75% vs. 
30.2% and 78.1% , respectively ) and the luteal phase (3D- US sens itivity 100%  and specificity 93.7% vs. 
42.1% and 81.2% , respectively ). In the follicular phase, PPV for 3D -US was 90% vs. 76.6% for 2D -US and 
NPV 85.7% vs. 32%. In the luteal phase, PPV for 3D -US was 97.4% vs. 84.2% for 2D -US and NPV 100% 
vs. 37.1% (Caliskan et al., 2010) . 
In a prospective cohort study, 2D - and 3D -US were compared for the assessment of uterine anatomy 
and detection of congenital anomalies in 61  women  with a history of recurrent miscarriage or infertility 
and who had previously been investigated by HSG . In 95.1% good quality images were obtained by 3D -
US. In comparison with 2D -US, 3D -US had 98% specificity (vs. 88% for 2D -US), 100% sensitivity (vs. 94%), 
100% PPV (vs. 97%) and 94% NPV (vs. 75%) (Jurkovic et al., 1995) . 
Recommendation  
Ultrasound, preferably 3D, is recommended  to exclude 
uterine anomalies in women with unexplained infertility . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Current evidence comparing 2D-  to 3D -US is limited. Despite  2D-US is shown to be  a valid diagnostic 
tool to exclude uterine anomalies, 3D -US showed superior results. Furthermore, c omparing 2D-  and 
3D-US, cost  per scan  are the same, and the test is not more painful or more invasive  for patients. The 
GDG acknowledges that 3D -US may not be available in every cl inic.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6  and Annex 7  (question II.5.1 ). 
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  42 
MRI 
Evidence  
No relevant studies were identified investigating the use of MRI compared to 2D -ultrasound to confirm 
a normal uterine structure and anatomy in women with UI. 
Recommendation  
MRI is not recommended as a first -line test to confirm a 
normal uterine structure and anatomy in women with 
unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
We have found no evidence on the usefulness of MRI as a first -line test in confirming a normal uterine 
structure. Furthermore, MRI is expensive  and time -consuming  and should therefore be considered  as 
a second -line diagnostic tool for the diagnosis of specific conditions .  
 
PICO  QUESTION : WHICH ADDITIONAL DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES SHOULD BE PERFORMED TO 
CONFIRM AN ANATOMICALLY NORMAL UTERINE CAVITY ?  
Evidence  
A RC T including  678 asymptomatic subfertil e women with normal 2D -US and no previous hysteroscopy 
were assessed for uterine pathologies in an office hysteroscopy prior to their first IVF treatment. The 
study reported 11% of women with normal 2D- US having  abnormal  findings on hysteroscopy; 6% had 
polyps (only 1 case with polyp >1cm), 2% intrauterine adhesions, 2% septa , 1% myomas . The authors 
concluded that the second -line hysteroscopy findings were few. Moreover, given the cost for routine 
hysteroscopy v ersus  for example HyCoSy that is also widely available, they did not recommend routine 
hysteroscopy as a second -line assessment  (Fatemi et al., 2010) .  
A retrospective study investigated 1726 infertile women with normal uterine cavity o n 2D -US with 
subsequent o ffice hysteroscopy for uterine abnormalities . 15.1% of all women had intrauterine lesions; 
6% polyps, 5.7% adhesions, 1.5% isthmocele, 0.5 % unicornuate uteri, 0.5% endometritis, 0.2% myoma, 
and 0.1% septum. History of abnormal uterine bleeding or previous dilatation and curettage were 
indicative for uterine abnormality in hysteroscopy  (Yang et al., 2019) . 
A prospective cohort study evaluated the usefulness of hysteroscopy in 2017 infertile women who had 
been previously investigated to have normal uterine cavity o n US or HSG. 31.8% of women had 
intrauterine lesions o n hysteroscopy : 12.9%, septum, 12%, polyps, 5.5% submucosal myoma, and 1.4% 
adhesions  (Bakas et al., 2014) .  
A prospective cohort of 100 women with UI  (confirmed ovulation , patent tubes, normal semen analysis) 
were assessed for uterine abnormalities. After confirming assessment of the uterine cavity with 2D 
transvaginal US, 93% of women went through hysteroscopy. 86% of the women had some abnormality 
detected in the cervix,  endometrium, or uterine wall. The most common finding was an endometrial 
polyp (31%) or hyperplasia (15%). The NPV for 2D -US for endometrial polyp was 0.84, for submucosal  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  43 
myoma 0.97, whereas PPV for these were as good as 1.0. compared to hysteroscopy. 2D -US was able 
to detect the thick endometrial lining in cases with polyp or hyperplasia  (Makled et al., 2014) . 
A retrospective cohort study investigated in 294 women the value of routine HyCoSy  with saline as 
contrast agent after normal 2 D-US finding  compared to targeted HyCoSy  with saline . The study group 
consisted of 124 women with normal US finding whereas the control group consisted of 170 women 
with reported uterine abnormality in 2D -US. 10.4% of women with normal US finding showed a uterine 
abnormality in HyCoSy . However, only 23% of these were confirmed in hysteroscopy and none of these 
were confirmed by patholog y. As for targeted investigations, 67.7% of abnormal HyCoSy findings were 
confirmed in hysteroscopy and of these 83.3% were  further confirmed by patholog y (Almog et al., 
2011) .  
Recommendation  
If ultrasound assessment of the uterine cavity is normal, no 
further evaluation  is needed.  Strong  ⊕ 
Justification  
Even though there were some additional uterine findings in subsequent hysteroscopy or HyCoSy  
procedures in women with normal ultrasonography finding s, most of the diagnosis were polyps or a 
septum that likely will not have major effect on pregnancy outcomes especially if they present without 
any symptoms. The reproductive outcomes were, indeed, described in the Cochrane review that was 
not able to show any benefit for routine hysteroscopy  (Kamath et al., 2019) . None of the studies 
introduced 3D as one option and given that some of the papers were already quite old, the 
ultrasonography technology may not represent the latest 2D/3D performance. Moreover, as a practical 
point, given the evidence on the good performance, availability and cost profile of H yCoSy compared 
to hysteroscop y, these methods should be prioritized in cases where further assessment for uterine 
cavity is needed.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7  (question II.5.2 ) 
 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  44 
REFERENCES  
Almog B, Shalom -Paz E, Shehata F, Ata B, Levin D, Holzer H, Tan SL. Saline instillation 
sonohysterography test after normal baseline transvaginal sonography results in infertility patients. Is 
it justified? Gynecological endocrinology : the official journal of the International Society of Gynecological Endocrinology  2011;27: 286 -289.  
Bakas P, Hassiakos D, Grigoriadis C, Vlahos N, Liapis A, Gregoriou O. Role of hysteroscopy prior to 
assisted reproduction techniques. J Minim Invasive Gynecol  2014;21: 233 -237.  
Caliskan E, Ozkan S, Cakiroglu Y, Sarisoy HT, Corakci A, Ozeren S. Diagnostic accuracy of real -time 3D 
sonography in the diagnosis of congenital Mullerian anomalies in high -risk patients with respect to the 
phase of the menstrual cycle. Journal of clinical ultrasound : JCU  2010;38: 123- 127.  
Fatemi HM, Kasius JC, Timmermans A, van Disseldorp J, Fauser BC, Devroey P, Broekmans FJ. 
Prevalence of unsuspected uterine cavity abnormalities diagnosed by office hysteroscopy prior to in vitro fertilization. Human re production (Oxford, England)  2010;25: 1959 -1965.  
Jurkovic D, Geipel A, Gruboeck K, Jauniaux E, Natucci M, Campbell S. Three -dimensional ultrasound 
for the assessment of uterine anatomy and detection of congenital anomalies: a comparison with hysterosalping ography and two -dimensional sonography. Ultrasound in obstetrics & gynecology : the 
official journal of the International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology  1995;5: 233-
237.  
Kamath MS, Bosteels J, D'Hooghe TM, Seshadri S, Weyers S, Mol BWJ, Broekmans FJ, Sunkara SK. 
Screening hysteroscopy in subfertile women and women undergoing assisted reproduction. The 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews  2019;4: Cd012856.  
Ludwin A, Pityński K, Ludwin I, Banas T, Knafel A. Two - and three -dimensional ul trasonography and 
sonohysterography versus hysteroscopy with laparoscopy in the differential diagnosis of septate, bicornuate, and arcuate uteri. J Minim Invasive Gynecol  2013;20: 90- 99. 
Makled AK, Farghali MM, Shenouda DS. Role of hysteroscopy and endomet rial biopsy in women with 
unexplained infertility. Archives of gynecology and obstetrics  2014;289: 187- 192.  
Yang JH, Chen MJ, Yang PK. Factors increasing the detection rate of intrauterine lesions on hysteroscopy in infertile women with sonographically nor mal uterine cavities. Journal of the Formosan 
Medical Association = Taiwan yi zhi  2019;118: 488- 493.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  45 
II.6 Laparoscopy  
PICO  QUESTION : SHOULD WOMEN UNDERGO A LAPAROSCOPY BEFORE BEING DIAGNOSED WITH  UI?   
Evidence  
In a retrospective cohort study of patients with a normal HSG or suspected unilateral pathology on HSG 
and in whom both HSG and laparoscopy were performed, the diagnostic benefit of laparoscopy was 
assessed. Among 63 patients who were assigned to ovulation  induction and IUI, 60 patients were found 
to have laparoscopic findings that did not necessitate any change in the original treatment plan. In three 
patients (4.8%), abnormalities discovered at laparoscopy were of such an extent that a change in the 
origi nal treatment plan and referral to IVF was needed. The conclusion of the authors was that 
laparoscopy may be omitted in women with normal HSG or suspected unilateral tubal pathology on 
HSG, since it was not shown to change the original plan indicated by HS G in 95% of the patients (Lavy 
et al., 2004) . 
Another study evaluated the accuracy of diagnostic laparoscopy prior to IUI and included 495 women 
with a normal HSG. In 124 women (25%), the laparoscopy changed the initial treatment plan of IUI. Of 
these 21 (4%) had severe abnorma lities that resulted in a change to in vitro fertilisation or open surgery. 
The remaining 103 (21%) patients had fertility enhancing surgical interventions. However, because it is unclear if treating the abnormalities such as minimal and mild endometriosis  or milder adhesions 
increases success of subsequent IUI, the authors recommended a randomised trial  (Tanahatoe et al., 
2003 ).  
The same group  later published a randomized controlled trial including 154 women with UI. In this RCT, 
77 women were assigned to have a diagnostic laparos copy performed with ablation or resection of 
stage I/II endometriosis lesions or adhesiolysis if needed before IUI and 77 women were assigned to 
have six cycles of IUI followed by diagnostic laparoscopy in case of no pregnancy. The overall pregnancy 
rate was not significantly different between groups: 44% (34/77) after immediate laparoscopy and 49% 
(38/77) after immediate IUI (OR 1.2, 95% CI 0.7 -2.3), of w hich 12 vs. 16 spontaneous and 22 vs. 22 IUI 
pregnancies. There were no complications as a result of laparoscopy (Tanahatoe et al., 2005) .  
Recommendation  
Routine  diagnostic  laparoscopy is not recommended for 
the diagnosis of unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Although different tests exist to reliably detect  tubal patency, laparoscopy is the only method for 
directly visualising the pelvic anatomy and diagnos ing peritoneal factors such as minimal or mild 
endometriosis or subtle tubal abnormalities. The presence of subtle tubal abnormalities was reported to be present in 103 of 208 patients (54.3%) with infertility and consisted of anatomical lesions such as 
tubal diverticula, Morgagni hydatids, accessory fallopian tubes, tubal phimosis, agglutination and 
sacculation  (Guan and Watrelot, 2019) . However , it is unknown to what extent these abnormalities 
contribute to infertility and there are no randomised trials that address the effectiveness of correction 
of these subtle lesions . The trial by Tanahatoe et al (2005) was small but showed no benefit of a  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  46 
diagno stic laparoscopy  before treatment of UI  in women with proven patent tubes on HSG  (Tanahatoe 
et al., 2005) .  
One might argue that some patients would like to have a diagnostic laparoscopy to exclude all pelvic 
pathology, even though there is limited or no clinical benefit . Considering the fact that a diagnostic 
laparoscopy is not risk -free and requires a dedicated theatre team, general anaesthesia and operating 
time, time off work for the patient, costs are higher than the benefits. A formal cost -effectiveness 
analysis  has n ot been performed.   
Routine laparoscopy is not recommended in infertile women at low risk for tubal pathology but should be reserved for women with an abnormal HSG or those at risk for tubo -peritoneal disease due to a 
history of PID, previous ectopic  pregn ancy  or clinically suspected or known endometriosis.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
Guan J, Watrelot A. Fallopian tube subtle pathology. Best practice & research Clinical obstetrics & 
gynaecology  2019;59: 25- 40. 
Lavy Y, Lev -Sagie A, Holtzer H, Revel A, Hurwitz A. Should laparoscopy be a mandatory component of 
the infertility evaluation in infertile women with normal hysterosalpingogram or suspected unilateral distal tubal pathology? European journal of obstetrics,  gynecology, and reproductive biology  
2004;114: 64- 68. 
Tanahatoe S, Hompes PG, Lambalk CB. Accuracy of diagnostic laparoscopy in the infertility work -up 
before intrauterine insemination. Fertility and sterility  2003;79: 361- 366.  
Tanahatoe SJ, Lambalk CB, Hompes PG. The role of laparoscopy in intrauterine insemination: a prospective randomized reallocation study. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2005;20: 3225 -
3230.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  47 
II.7 Cervical / vaginal factor  
PICO  QUESTION : WHAT IS THE NEED FOR FEMALE LOWER GENITAL TRACT INVESTIGATIONS ?  
POST-COITAL TEST  (PCT)  
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis , including 4007 women  from 11 studies, reported that the 
predictive values of normal and abnormal post- coital test (PCT) were 0.37 -0.92 and 0.58- 0.85 
respectively. Sensitivity ranged between  0.10  and 0.90 and specificity ranged between 0.30  and 0.97. 
Likelihood ratios for normal and abnormal PC T were 0.77 and 1.85 respectively  (Oei et al., 1995) . 
In a randomised controlled trial, 444 women were randomised to undergo a PCT or not. Fertility 
treatment s were given more often in the intervention group compared to the control group (54% vs. 
41%). However, cumulative pregnancy rates at 24 months were similar with and without PCT (49% (42 -
55%) vs. 48% (42- 55%) (Oei et al., 1998) . 
In a retrospective cohort study, including 2476 patients with UI, the long -term overall pregnancy rates 
after a positive or a negative PCT  were compared . The spontaneous and overall (OI, IUI, IVF) pregnancy 
rates were 37.7%  and 77.5%, respectively, after a  positive PCT which was significantly higher  compared 
to 26.9 % and 68.8% after a negative test (Hessel et al., 2014) . 
A retrospective study, including 2 00 couples  who underwent a PCT as part of their routine fertility work -
up, investigated the predictive value of normal and abnormal P CTs on pregnancy rates. The predictive 
values of normal and abnormal PCTs were 0.54 and 0.58 overall and 0.74 and 0.47 if only untreated 
women were considered. Sensitivity and specificity were, respectively, 0.47 and 0.65 for all women and 
0.54 and 0.68 fo r untreated women only. Likelihood ratios for normal and abnormal PCTs were 0.83 
and 1.32 overall and 0.67 and 1.72 in untreated women  (Oei et al., 1996) . 
In a retrospective re- analysis of 207 couples originally studied between 1982 and 1983, it was found 
that in couples with less than 3 years of infertility and positive PCT, 68%  conceived within 2 years 
compared with 17% of those with negative result. After  3 years of infertility , corresponding rates were 
14% and 11% (Glazener et al., 2000) . 
Recommendation  
The post -coital test is not recommended in couples with 
unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification  
The meta -analysis showed that PCT has poor discriminating capacity. Cumulative pregnancy rates seem 
to be similar after a positive or a negative test. Importantly , it is an invasive test for the patient  and 
does not change further management . Therefore, PCT is not recommended in infert ility investigations.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.7).  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  48 
VAGINAL MICROBIOTA TESTING  
Evidence  
In a case -control study, gut and vaginal microbiota were compared between women with UI (n=10) and 
fertile controls (n=11). Firmicutes accounted for the vast majority of the vaginal bacteria, with higher 
relative abundance in UI than controls (69.7 vs . 53). Fusobacteria  (18% vs.0.14) and Bacteriodetes  (4.1% 
vs. 0.92) were relatively more abundant in the controls than in the UI group. Within the genus of 
Lactobacillus, L. jensenii  and L. vaginalis  were only detected in the UI group (Patel et al., 2022) . 
Another case -control study compared vaginal and endometrial microbiota between women with UI 
(n=26) and fertile controls (n=26). In the vaginal s amples, the lactobacilli -impaired microbiota 
proportion was significantly higher in women with UI compared to fertile women (76.9% vs . 26.9%). 
Similarly, the Mycoplasma hominis flora increment or pathogenic microorganism growth rate was 
significantly higher in women with UI compared to fertile women (34.6% vs . 7.7%). The amount of 
lactobacilli  per total bacterial mass mean proportion in the vaginal samples  was significantly lowe r in 
women with UI compared to fertile women  (38.2% vs . 76.3% ) (Sezer et al., 2022) . 
In a prospective cohort study, including 25 couples with UI,  the association between vaginal microbiota 
and pregnancy outcome after IUI w as investigated. Five out of 23 women achieved a clinical pregnancy, 
and this was associated with a more evident Lactobacillus spp  domination, comparable to that observed 
in controls. Furthermore, a significantly  lower Shannon index was found in pregnant women compared 
to non -pregnant women (0.8 ± 0.9 vs. 1.5 ± 1.1) (Amato et al., 2020) . 
In a prospective cohort study, including 47 (25 unexplained and 22 explained infertility) couples 
undergoing ART , the difference in vaginal microbiota between unexplained and explained infertility was 
investigated. There were no significant differences in alpha or beta diversity metrics between explaine d 
and unexplained infertility couples. In comparison with the unexplained group, there was a decrease in 
lactobacilli in the vaginal lavage of women with explained infertility (Campisciano et al., 2020) . 
In a case -control study, the microbiome of 96 cervical -vaginal samples (27 infertile women and 69 
fertile controls) was compared. Compared to controls, the idiopathic infertility group showed the 
highest biodiversity of species (Simpson’s reciprocal indexes, 1.5 ±0.5 vs. 2.43 ±1.19)  (Campisciano et al., 
2017) .  
In a case -control study, the incidence of bacterial etiological factors causing inflammation of the 
upper and lower reproductive tract in wom en treated for inferti lity with no clinical parameters of 
acute inflammation of the vagina and/or the cervix was assessed. Normal bacterial vaginal flora was 
confirmed in 80 women (79%) treated for infertility and 51 women (85%) from the control group. 
Bacterial vaginosis  was c onfirmed (based on pH, Nugent score and quantitative culture results) in 7 
women (7%) treated for infertility, and none from the control group (Tomusiak et al., 2013) . 
Recommendation  
Vaginal microbiota testing could be considered in couples 
with une xplained infertility  only in a research setting .  Research 
only   
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  49 
Justification  
It is very difficult to compare studies investigating the role of vaginal microbiota, due to the different 
detection methods used (wet mount microscopy, modified Spiegel criteria, Nugent scores, qPCR assays 
for common bacteria in bacterial vaginosis). Additionally, the vaginal swabs were taken at different time 
points of the menstrual cycle in different studies ( before and during ovarian stimulation, at oocyte 
retrieval or at embryo transfer). The lactobacillus dominance is also defined differently between papers. 
There is currently insufficient evidence of a role of abnormal vaginal microbio ta in UI. Furthermore, 
there is currently no evidence suggesting that corre cting abnormal vaginal microbiota improves fertility 
outcomes.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.7). 
 
 
REFERENCES  
Amato V, Papaleo E, Pasciuta R, Viganò P, Ferrarese R, Clementi N, Sanchez AM, Quaranta L, Burioni R, 
Ambrosi A  et al.  Differential Composition of Vaginal Microbiome, but Not of Seminal Microbiome, Is 
Associated With Successful Intrauterine Insemination in Couples With Idiopa thic Infertility: A 
Prospective Observational Study. Open forum infectious diseases 2020;7: ofz525.  
Campisciano G, Florian F, D'Eustacchio A, Stanković D, Ricci G, De Seta F, Comar M. Subclinical 
alteration of the cervical -vaginal microbiome in women with idiopathic infertility. Journal of cellular 
physiology  2017;232: 1681 -1688.  
Campisciano G, Iebba V, Zito G, Luppi S, Martinelli M, Fischer L, De Seta F, Basile G, Ricci G, Comar M. 
Lactobacillus iners and gasseri, Prevotella bivia and HPV Belong to the Mic robiological Signature 
Negatively Affecting Human Reproduction. Microorganisms  2020;9.  
Glazener CM, Ford WC, Hull MG. The prognostic power of the post -coital test for natural conception 
depends on duration of infertility. Human reproduction (Oxford, Englan d) 2000;15: 1953 -1957.  
Hessel M, Brandes M, de Bruin JP, Bots RS, Kremer JA, Nelen WL, Hamilton CJ. Long -term ongoing 
pregnancy rate and mode of conception after a positive and negative post- coital test. Acta obstetricia 
et gynecologica Scandinavica 2014;93: 913- 920.  
Oei SG, Bloemenkamp KW, Helmerhorst FM, Naaktgeboren N, Keirse MJ. Evaluation of the postcoital test for assessment of 'cervical factor' infertility. European journal of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology  1996;64: 217- 220.  
Oei SG,  Helmerhorst FM, Bloemenkamp KW, Hollants FA, Meerpoel DE, Keirse MJ. Effectiveness of the 
postcoital test: randomised controlled trial. BMJ (Clinical research ed)  1998;317: 502- 505.  
Oei SG, Helmerhorst FM, Keirse MJ. When is the post -coital test normal? A  critical appraisal. Human 
reproduction (Oxford, England)  1995;10: 1711- 1714.  
Patel N, Patel N, Pal S, Nathani N, Pandit R, Patel M, Patel N, Joshi C, Parekh B. Distinct gut and vaginal microbiota profile in women with recurrent implantation failure and un explained infertility. BMC 
Womens Health  2022;22: 113.  
Sezer O, Soyer Çalışkan C, Celik S, Kilic SS, Kuruoglu T, Unluguzel Ustun G, Yurtcu N. Assessment of vaginal and endometrial microbiota by real -time PCR in women with unexplained infertility. The 
journ al of obstetrics and gynaecology research 2022;48: 129- 139.  
Tomusiak A, Heczko PB, Janeczko J, Adamski P, Pilarczyk -Zurek M, Strus M. Bacterial infections of the 
lower genital tract in fertile and infertile women from the southeastern Poland. Ginekologia polska 
2013;84: 352- 358.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  50 
II.8 Male genito -urinary anatomy  
PICO  QUESTION : SHOULD MEN UNDERGO ADDITIONAL DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES TO CONFIRM 
NORMAL GENITO -URINARY ANATOMY BEFORE BEING DIAGNOSED  WITH  UI?   
Evidence  
Mean testicular volume ( TV) was positively associated with sperm concentration (r=0.315, p<0.0001 
unadjusted, r=0.274 p<0.0001 after adjustment for confounding factors) and total sperm count 
(r=0.219, p=0.001 unadjusted, r=0.278 p<0.0001 after adjustment for confounding factors). Subjects 
with testicular inhomogeneity (defined as a n echotexture score, ranging from 0 (regular pattern) to 5 
(tumour suspected)) showed a lower sperm vitality compared with the rest of the sample, while those 
with any parenchymal calcification had lower sp erm concentration and total count. Intratesticular 
artery peak systolic velocity  was positively associated with sperm normal morphology (r=0.226, p=0.017 
unadjusted, adjusted r=0.240 p<0.008). Epididymal mean head size was positively associated with 
normal  sperm morphology (r=0.385, p<0.0001, adjusted r=0.233, p=0.002) and vas deferens mean size 
was positively associated with progressive motility (r=0.214, p=0.004, adjusted r=0.235, p=0.001). 
Subjects with  a Mixed antiglobulin reaction (MAR) test ≥ 1% showe d a higher prevalence of epididymal 
tail echotexture inhomogeneity (OR 5.75, 95% CI 1.35 -24.1), and a higher mean size of vas deferens 
and of epididymal body and tail, as compared with the rest of the sample (Lotti et al., 2021) . 
Recommen dation  
Testicular imaging is  not recommended  when semen 
analysis according to WHO criteria  is normal . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
There is no additional benefit on performing scrotal colour Doppler ultrasound ( CDUS ) on male partners 
with normal semen parameters and having undergone physical examination. CDUS may aid physical 
examination in assessment of ultrasound patterns of testicular anatomy and structure. It can thus be 
helpful to identify scrotal abnormalities a nd to assist in better understanding the pathophysiology of 
sperm abnormalities and male infertility. Though CDUS shows some association with semen 
parameters , it would not be beneficial to replace gold standard WHO semen analysis for CDUS.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.8). 
 
 
REFERENCES  
Lotti F, Frizza F, Balercia G, Barbonetti A, Behre HM, Calogero AE, Cremers JF, Francavilla F, Isidori AM, 
Kliesch S  et al.  The European Academy of Andrology (EAA) ultrasound study on healthy, fertile men: 
Scrotal ultrasound reference ranges and associations with clinical, seminal, and biochemical characteristics. Andrology  2021;9: 55 9-576.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  51 
II.9 Male additional tests  
PICO  QUESTION : IS THERE ADDED VALUE OF ADDITIONAL TESTS IN THE MALE WITH NORMAL WHO  
SEMEN ANALYSIS ?  
 
The GDG acknowledges that presently unexplained infertility (UI) is a diagnosis by exclusion. The GDG 
supports the urgent need to develop robust standardised methods for establishing etiological diagnosis 
in the male partner (Barratt et al., 2017, Björndahl, 2022) . In some patients underlying sperm 
dysfunction may not be detected during a routine semen assessment of the ejaculate, which may 
appear to be normal regarding basic semen parameters (WHO, 2021) . GDG considers that some 
adverse reproductive outcomes that have be en identified during medical and reproductive history 
examination may indicate the use of further tests procedures specified in the WHO 6th ed chapters 3 
and 4 to assess sperm function. However, these tests have a research status only or are not regarded 
for routine use in clinical practice until sound evidence is developed (WHO, 2021) . 
ANTI-SPERM ANTIBODIES  (ASA)  
Evidence  
A case -control study  investigated the effect of anti -sperm antibodies (ASA) in 1060 normozoospermic 
infertile men with  female partners with no abnormalities found after full investigation and 107 
normozoospermic fertile men (control group ). Significantly more ASA was found in the infertile group 
compared to the controls ( Mixed antiglobulin reaction ( MAR ) ≥50% in 15.6% (16 6/1060))  vs. 1.9% 
(2/107)  and the mean ASA titre was higher. The relative infertility risk for MAR  ≥50% was 8.38, which 
increases starting from MAR -IgG >25%. Also, in ASA- positive men, acrosome reaction was decreased, 
DNA fragmentation increased and higher  reactive oxygen species (ROS) were found (Bozhedomov et 
al., 2015) .  
In a coh ort study, including 84 men with positive MAR test, the occurrence of natural pregnancies and 
the effectiveness of IUI were analysed in connection with the degree of sperm autoimmunisation. In 
men with 100% MAR test, natural live birth rate was 2/44 (4.5%) , 14/38 (36.8%) after IUI and 7/15 
(46.7%) after ICSI. In males with moderate (50 -99%) MAR test, the natural live birth rate was 12/40 
(30%), 7/26 (26.9%) after IUI and 5/6 (83.3%) after ICSI. Multiple regression analysis showed that the 
percentage of MAR test positivity was an independent predictor of natural live birth rate ( β  −0.06 ( 95% 
CI −0.10  to −0.02 )) (Barbonetti et al., 2020) . 
In a small case -control  study pregnancy rates were compared in IVF couples with ASA positive males 
and couples without ASA. Pregnancy rates were not significantly different between couples with ASA 
positive males (11% (1/9)) and couples without ASA (44% (4/9)) (Vazquez -Levin et al., 1997) . 
In a cohort study, men with anti -sperm antibodies (MAR  assay) undergoing ICSI or conventional IVF 
were compared to a n ICSI  control group with male infertility without anti -sperm antibodies.  Clinical 
pregnancy rates were 46% with ICSI (13/28), 30% (11/37)  with conventional IVF and 30% (6/20) in the 
control group. Five miscarriages occurred in the ICSI group, compared to three  in the IVF and none in 
the control group (Lähteenmäki et al., 1995) . 
In a cohort study , pregnancy rates were compared between females with ASA  and males with ASA  on 
their sperm. O verall pregnancy  rate in females with ASA was 9/15 and 7/16  in males with ASA .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  52 
Pregnancy rate in males with  high % ASA (≥50%) was 38% and in low % ASA (<50%) was 50%  (Pagidas 
et al., 1994) . 
In a cohort study , IVF  pregnancy rates were compared between  couples with ASA positive males and 
couples without ASA. Pregnancy rate/embryo transfer was not significantly different between ASA 
positive (46.1%) and ASA negative couples (33.3%) (Rajah et al., 1993) . 
In a cohort study couples were divided into three categories according to their sperm MAR test results, 
and fertilisation and pregnancy rate (per embryo transfer) were compared in those groups (weakly 
positive, >0 and <40%; positive, >40 and <90% ; strongly positive, >90%). Pregnan cy rate as per MAR 
category were not significantly different: 43% versus 45% versus 33%  (Lähteenmäki, 1993) . 
In a cohort study, couples with UI  were divided into couples with >50% sperm antibody bound and 
couples with <50% sperm antibody bound. There was a significant higher pregnancy rate found in coup les with <50% sperm antibody bound, 66.7% (6/9) compared to 15.3% (4/26) in couples with >50% 
sperm antibody bound (Ayvaliotis et al., 1985) . 
Recommendation  
Testing for anti -sperm antibodies in the semen is not 
recommended when semen analysis according to WHO 
criteria  is normal . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
There is insufficient evidence to suggest the benefit of anti -sperm antibodies tests in couples with UI. 
The quality of data is very low (old and underpowered studies, some with old methodologies, methods 
not following standard procedures, not sufficient or lacking inclusion criteria , most of them analysing 
couples undergoing MAR ). Cut -off values are inconsistent and differ between studies, thresholds are 
not validated . Furthermore, c urrently there are no evidence -based reference values for antibody -
bound spermatozoa in the MAR test of semen from fertile men  (WHO, 2021) . In some of the available 
studies  male partners had different degrees of abnormal semen parameters , including impaired 
motility which can influence the validi ty of ASA tests (tests should be performed on motile 
spermatozoa).  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.9). 
 
DNA  FRAGMENTATION TEST  
It is important to emphasize that sperm DNA fragmentation ( SDF) assays cannot be used 
interchangeably as they have often been in literature. Each SDF assay currently used in clinical practice 
is based on specific technical methodology which defines its capacity to measure different structural 
aspects of sperm DNA damage (WHO, 2021) .   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  53 
Evidence  
In a prospective cohort study including couples undergoing their first ICSI cycles for UI, the effect of 
sperm DNA fragmentation (SDF ; by acridine orange test) on reproductive outcomes was investigated. 
Cumulative live birth rate was significantly higher in the low versus high SDF group (60.8% (59/97) vs. 
41.7% (20/48)). Subgroup analysis by fresh or frozen embryo transfer showed that live birth was 
significantly different between groups with fresh embryo transfer ( ET), but no difference was found 
with frozen ET  (Repalle et al., 2022) . 
In a prospective cohort study, including couples undergoing their first  IVF with  ICSI cycle,  the influence 
of SDF (by sperm chromatin dispersion test)  on reproductive outcomes was investigated. A significantly 
higher miscarriage rate (17.8% vs. 39.9%) was observed in cycles with SDF above the cut- off (30%), 
however, there was no difference in clinical pregnancy rate (32.4% vs. 30.3%) (Borges et al., 2019) . 
In a retrospective cohort study , including couples with UI and poor IUI outcome, couples were assigned 
to either IVF or ICSI, based on the results of their SDF testing  (sperm chromatin structure assay ( SCSA ) 
or TUNEL) . Thirty -one couples with normal sperm DNA fragmentation underwent IVF, resulting in a 
clinical pregnancy rate of 12.7%. The remainin g 343 couples underwent ICSI, resulting in a cumulative 
pregnancy rate of 18.7%  (O'Neill et al., 2018) .  
Recommendation  
Testing for sperm DNA fragmentation is not recommended 
when semen analysis according to WHO criteria  is normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Data from meta -analyses in recent years indicate that SDF may adversely affect reproductive success 
in natural and assisted conception  (Osman et al., 2015, Simon et al., 2017, Sugihara et al., 2020, Tan et 
al., 2019) . Some evidence suggests increased sperm DNA damage in infertile men compared to fertile 
men (Evenson et al., 1999, Spanò et al., 2000) , and similar degree of SDF in ejaculates from infertile  
men with abnormal semen parameters and infertile men with semen parameters in the reference range 
(Saleh et al., 2002) . 
Several meta -analyses have shown that different SDF assays have different predictive accuracy for 
pregnancy and each assay had a different predictive value for IVF and ICSI  (Cissen et al., 2016, Zhao et 
al., 2014) . Furthermore, each test has different clinical thresholds validated by the laboratories 
performing the test. The methodology and  the cut -offs are not standardized worldwide, nor is there a 
consensus on which test is preferred. Differences in cut-offs between available studies might falsely re -
categorize patients into those at risk of adverse reproductive outcome. Clinical relevance  for 
performing SDF test in couples with UI is questionable since available data on reproductive outcomes 
(pregnancy rate, live birth rate, miscarriage) is predominantly based on couples undergoing IVF/ICSI . 
The quality and heterogeneity ( including  parental age  and previous MAR treatments) of the available 
data from three cohort studies does not allow conclusive recommendation on the benefit of performing 
SDF testing in males from couples with UI who have normal semen parameters. Published studies so 
far have not directly tested the effect of SDF  testing on the clinical management of infertile couples 
(i.e., that the fertility outcomes of those who had testing are different from those who did not), which  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  54 
does not support a recommendation for  its routine use in the initial evaluation of the male. Upcoming 
evidence might show benefit of specific tests, when validated .  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.9). 
 
SPERM CHROMATIN CONDENSATION TEST  
Evidence  
No studies were identified to answer this PICO question.  
Recommendation  
Sperm chromatin condensation test is  not recommended  
when semen analysis according to WHO criteria  is normal . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Abnormal sperm chromatin structure may cause sperm DNA damage, such as double or single DNA 
strand breaks, because of poor chromatin condensation (i.e., defects in histone replacement by 
protamines) (WHO, 2021) . Abnormal sperm chromatin remodelling has been detected in infertile men 
(Zhang et al., 2006) . Depending on the assay used for DNA fragmentation, some studies have shown an 
association between abnormal sperm histone retention and/or protamination ano malies and sperm 
DNA fragmentation in infertile men with abnormal semen analysis  (Simon et al., 2014, Tavalaee et al., 
2009, Torregrosa et al., 2006) .  
Current ly, we found no  published evidence to suggest the clinical significance of routine sperm 
chromatin condensation testing  in men with UI. Published studies either did not assess men with UI, 
assessed the test in appropriately in  relation to clinical outcomes , or the sperm chromatin condensation 
test was evaluated together or in association with other methods for sperm quality.  Furthermore , 
published studies so  far have not directly tested the effect of sperm chromatin condensation testing on 
the clinical management of infertile couples (i.e., that the fertility outcomes of those who had testing 
are different from those who did not) which does not support a reco mmendation for its routine use in 
the initial evaluation of the male. Instead, sperm chromatin condensation is usually assessed in studies 
that investigate its associations with aneuploidy and other methods to evaluate sperm chromatin 
integrity (i.e., SDF ). Thus, there is not enough strong evidence to suggest that assessing sperm 
chromatin structure integrity solely by sperm chromatin condensation test can be reliably predictive of 
reproductive outcomes  or how it can be used to guide clinical decision makin g (Barratt et al., 2010) . 
 
SPERM ANEUPLOIDY SCREENING  
Evidence  
No studies were identified to answer this PICO question.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  55 
Recommendation  
Sperm aneuploidy screening is not recommended  when  
semen analysis according to WHO criteria  is normal . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
At least 15% of human male factor infertility can be attributed to  genetic factors that underlie the major 
categories of male infertility  – spermatogenic quantitative defects , ductal obstruction or dysfunction , 
hypothalamic –pituitary axis disturbances , and spermatogenic qualitative defects (reviewed in (Krausz 
and Riera -Escamilla, 2018) ). Azoospermia is the aetiological category with the highest frequency of 
known genetic factors (25%) contributing to male infertility (Krausz and Riera -Escamilla, 2018) , but the 
number of identified genes linked with other seminal phenotypes and male infertility aetiological 
categories is cons tantly expanding (Houston et al., 2021, Riera -Escamilla et al., 2022) . The risk of men 
being carriers of genetic anomalies  progressively decreases with increasing sperm output (Krausz, 
2011) .  
The incidence of sperm aneuploidy is rare in fertile men (WHO, 2021) . Abnormal levels of aneuploid 
sperm are most commonly observed in men with spermatogenic failure, oligozoospermia or oligoasthenozoospermia, and among normozoospermic men who are partners in couples with 
recurrent pregnancy loss  (Ramasamy et al., 2015, WHO, 2021) . Thus, based on current state -of-the-art 
knowledge about prevalence and male infertility aetiologies underlined by chromosomal abnormalities, 
aneuploid y is not indicated for routine testing in men with normal semen parameters.  
 
HORMONAL TESTING  
Evidence  
No studies were identified to answer this PICO question.  
Recommendation  
Serum h ormonal testing is not recommended  when  semen 
analysis according to WHO criteria is normal . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Semen analysis as performed according to WHO Laboratory Manual for the Examination and Processing 
of Human Semen standards (WHO, 2021)  is used to assess male reproductive function and genital tract 
patency. In this context, semen analysis is the  cornerstone in the evaluation of the reproductive 
hormon al status for men. In cases of abnormal sperm parameters (oligozoospermia and azoospermia), 
potential hypogonadism is ruled out by reproductive hormone (testosterone and gonadotropins) 
testing which provide a functional readout of the hypothalamic -pituitary -testicular axis. Thus, the 
hormonal profile will be helpful in following extended examination to accurately diagnose underlying 
pathological conditions associated with abnormal semen parameters.  However, no evidence was found  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  56 
supporting endocrine te sting as a first line of investigation for males with UI and results from a basic 
semen examination in the reference range according to the WHO criteria.  
Currently, endocrine testing is not recommended as a primary first line of investigation for males with 
UI and results from a basic semen examination in the reference range according to the WHO criteria 
(Minhas et al., 2021, Schlegel et al., 2021, WHO, 2000) . However, given the essential role of FSH for the 
initiation and maintenance of full spermatogenesis, increasing research emphasis has been given to single nucleotide polymorphisms in F SH beta (FSHB) and FSH receptor (FSHR) genes and their effects 
on male infertility  (Ferlin et al., 2011, Grigorova et al., 2011, Schubert et al., 2019, Schubert et al., 2022, 
Tamburino et al., 2017a, Tamburino et al., 2017b, Tüttelmann et al., 2012) .  
 
HUMAN PAPILLOMA VIRUS (HPV)  
Evidence  
No studies were identified to answer this PICO question.  
Recommendation  
HPV testing of semen  is not recommended when  
conventional semen analysis according to WHO criteria  is 
normal.  Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
There are over 200 HPV subtypes and most people will test positive for a HPV type at some point during life. Furthermore, HPV is a transient infection which most often clears spontaneously, but it is unknown 
how fast infectious HPV is cleared in males and females  (Depuydt et al., 2019, Giuliano et al., 2011) . 
There is some evidence showing reduced pregnancy rates in donor IUI cycles and autologous IUI  cycles 
with moderate male factor infertility in HPV positive semen versus HPV negative (Depuydt et al., 2018, 
Depuydt, et al., 2019) . Conflicting data on association between semen HPV presence and alteration of 
sperm parameters (Luttmer et al., 2016) , as well as the effects of semen HPV infection on reproductive 
outcomes makes it impossible to recommend routine screening  of HPV in a diagnostic setting in assisted 
reproduction. Therefore, HPV testing could be discussed with couples scheduled for  an IUI cycle only in 
research settings.  Further information on the management of HPV in couples undergoing MAR  can be 
found in the ESHRE guideline “Medically assisted reproduction in patients with a viral infection or 
disease” (Eshre Guideline Group on Viral infection/disease, 2021) .  
 
MICROBIOLOGY TE ST 
Evidence  
No studies were identified to answer this PICO question.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  57 
Recommendation  
Microbiology test ing of semen  is not recommended when 
semen analysis according to WHO criteria  is normal . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Excessive numbers of leukocytes in the ejaculate (leukocytospermia, pyospermia) may be associated 
with infection and poor sperm quality (WHO, 2021) . However, i n the case of a normal physical 
examination and in the absence of  symptoms associated with genitourinary tract infection, medical and 
repr oductive history do not give indications for signs of infection , further microbiological culture of the 
semen is not usually warranted.  
Tests for discriminating specific leukocyte types from round immature germ cells are not part of the 
routine semen anal ysis according to the latest, sixth edition of the WHO Laboratory Manual for the 
Examination and Processing of Human Semen. These techniques are included in the ‘extended 
examination’ section of the manual. However, the clinical value of these specific tes ts is not clear and 
there are currently no evidence -based reference values for these tests in semen of fertile men  (WHO, 
2021) . 
 
 
REFERENCES  
Ayvaliotis B, Bronson R, Rosenfeld D, Cooper G. Conception rates in couples where autoimmunity to 
sperm is detected. Fertility and sterility  1985;43: 739 -742.  
Barbonetti A, Castellini C, D'Andrea S, Minaldi E, Totaro M, Francavilla S, Francavilla F. Relationship between natural and intrauterine insemination -assisted live births and the degree of sperm 
autoimmunisation. Human repro duction (Oxford, England)  2020;35: 1288- 1295.  
Barratt CL, Aitken RJ, Björndahl L, Carrell DT, de Boer P, Kvist U, Lewis SE, Perreault SD, Perry MJ, Ramos L  et al.  Sperm DNA: organization, protection and vulnerability: from basic science to clinical 
applica tions --a position report. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2010;25: 824 -838.  
Barratt CLR, Björndahl L, De Jonge CJ, Lamb DJ, Osorio Martini F, McLachlan R, Oates RD, van der Poel S, St John B, Sigman M  et al.  The diagnosis of male infertility: an analy sis of the evidence to support 
the development of global WHO guidance -challenges and future research opportunities. Human 
reproduction update  2017;23: 660- 680.  
Björndahl L. A paradigmatic shift in the care of male factor infertility: how can the recommenda tions 
for basic semen examination in the sixth edition of the WHO manual and the ISO 23162:2021 standard help? Reproductive biomedicine online  2022;45: 731- 736.  
Borges E, Jr., Zanetti BF, Setti AS, Braga D, Provenza RR, Iaconelli A, Jr. Sperm DNA fragmentation is correlated with poor embryo development, lower implantation rate, and higher miscarriage rate in 
reproductive cycles of non -male factor infertility. Fertility and sterility  2019;112: 483- 490.  
Bozhedomov VA, Nikolaeva MA, Ushakova IV, Lipatova NA, Bozhedomova GE, Sukhikh GT. Functional 
deficit of sperm and fertility impairment in men with antisperm antibodies. Journal of reproductive 
immunology  2015;112: 95- 101.  
Cissen M, Wely MV, Scholten I, Mansell S, Bruin JP, Mol BW, Braat D, Repping S, Hamer G. Measuring 
Sperm DNA Fragmentation and Clinical Outcomes of Medically Assisted Reproduction: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. PloS one  2016;11: e0165125.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  58 
Depuydt CE, Donders G, Verstraete L, Vanden Broeck D, Beert J, Salembier G, Bosmans E, Dhont TN, 
Van Der Auwera I, Vandenborne K  et al.  Time has come to include Human Papillomavirus (HPV) 
testing in sperm donor banks. Facts, views & vision in ObGyn  2018;10: 201-205.  
Depuydt CE, Donders GGG, Verstraete L, Vanden Broeck D, Beert JFA, Salembier G, Bosmans E, 
Ombelet W. Infectious human papillomavirus virions in semen reduce clinical pregnancy rates in 
women undergoing intrauterine insemination. Fertility and sterility  2019;111: 1135- 1144.  
Eshre Guideline Group on Viral infection/disease, Mocanu E, Drakeley A, Kupka MS, Lara -Molina EE, 
Le Clef N, Ombelet W, Patrat C, Pennings G, Semprini AE  et al.  ESHRE guideline: medically assisted 
reproduction in patients with a  viral infection/disease†. Human reproduction open  2021;2021: 
hoab037.  
Evenson DP, Jost LK, Marshall D, Zinaman MJ, Clegg E, Purvis K, de Angelis P, Claussen OP. Utility of 
the sperm chromatin structure assay as a diagnostic and prognostic tool in the huma n fertility clinic. 
Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  1999;14: 1039- 1049.  
Ferlin A, Vinanzi C, Selice R, Garolla A, Frigo AC, Foresta C. Toward a pharmacogenetic approach to 
male infertility: polymorphism of follicle -stimulating hormone beta -subunit pro moter. Fertility and 
sterility  2011;96: 1344- 1349.e1342.  
Giuliano AR, Lee JH, Fulp W, Villa LL, Lazcano E, Papenfuss MR, Abrahamsen M, Salmeron J, Anic GM, 
Rollison DE  et al.  Incidence and clearance of genital human papillomavirus infection in men (HIM): a  
cohort study. Lancet  2011;377: 932- 940.  
Grigorova M, Punab M, Zilaitienė B, Erenpreiss J, Ausmees K, Matuleviĉius V, Tsarev I, Jørgensen N, Laan M. Genetically determined dosage of follicle -stimulating hormone (FSH) affects male 
reproductive parameters. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism  2011;96: E1534- 1541.  
Houston BJ, Riera -Escamilla A, Wyrwoll MJ, Salas -Huetos A, Xavier MJ, Nagirnaja L, Friedrich C, Conrad 
DF, Aston KI, Krausz C  et al.  A systematic review of the validated monogenic cau ses of human male 
infertility: 2020 update and a discussion of emerging gene -disease relationships. Human reproduction 
update  2021;28: 15- 29. 
Krausz C. Male infertility: pathogenesis and clinical diagnosis. Best practice & research Clinical 
endocrinology &  metabolism  2011;25: 271 -285.  
Krausz C, Riera -Escamilla A. Genetics of male infertility. Nature reviews Urology  2018;15: 369- 384.  
Lähteenmäki A. In -vitro fertilization in the presence of antisperm antibodies detected by the mixed 
antiglobulin reaction (MAR ) and the tray agglutination test (TAT). Human reproduction (Oxford, 
England)  1993;8: 84- 88. 
Lähteenmäki A, Reima I, Hovatta O. Treatment of severe male immunological infertility by 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  1995;10: 2824- 2828.  
Luttmer R, Dijkstra MG, Snijders PJ, Hompes PG, Pronk DT, Hubeek I, Berkhof J, Heideman DA, Meijer CJ. Presence of human papillomavirus in semen in relation to semen quality. Human reproduction 
(Oxford, England)  2016;31: 280- 286.  
Minhas S,  Bettocchi C, Boeri L, Capogrosso P, Carvalho J, Cilesiz NC, Cocci A, Corona G, Dimitropoulos 
K, Gül M  et al.  European Association of Urology Guidelines on Male Sexual and Reproductive Health: 
2021 Update on Male Infertility. European urology  2021;80: 603 -620.  
O'Neill CL, Parrella A, Keating D, Cheung S, Rosenwaks Z, Palermo GD. A treatment algorithm for 
couples with unexplained infertility based on sperm chromatin assessment. Journal of assisted 
reproduction and genetics 2018;35: 1911- 1917.  
Osman A, Alsoma it H, Seshadri S, El -Toukhy T, Khalaf Y. The effect of sperm DNA fragmentation on live 
birth rate after IVF or ICSI: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Reproductive biomedicine online  
2015;30: 120- 127.  
Pagidas K, Hemmings R, Falcone T, Miron P. The eff ect of antisperm autoantibodies in male or female 
partners undergoing in vitro fertilization -embryo transfer. Fertility and sterility  1994;62: 363- 369.  
Rajah SV, Parslow JM, Howell RJ, Hendry WF. The effects on in -vitro fertilization of autoantibodies to 
spermatozoa in subfertile men. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  1993;8: 1079 -1082.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  59 
Ramasamy R, Scovell JM, Kovac JR, Cook PJ, Lamb DJ, Lipshultz LI. Fluorescence in situ hybridization 
detects increased sperm aneuploidy in men with recurrent pregnancy lo ss. Fertility and sterility  
2015;103: 906- 909.e901.  
Repalle D, Saritha KV, Bhandari S. Sperm DNA fragmentation negatively influences the cumulative live 
birth rate in the intracytoplasmic sperm injection cycles of couples with unexplained infertility. Clin ical 
and experimental reproductive medicine  2022;49: 185 -195.  
Riera -Escamilla A, Vockel M, Nagirnaja L, Xavier MJ, Carbonell A, Moreno -Mendoza D, Pybus M, 
Farnetani G, Rosta V, Cioppi F et al.  Large -scale analyses of the X chromosome in 2,354 infertile men  
discover recurrently affected genes associated with spermatogenic failure. American journal of 
human genetics  2022;109: 1458- 1471.  
Saleh RA, Agarwal A, Nelson DR, Nada EA, El -Tonsy MH, Alvarez JG, Thomas AJ, Jr., Sharma RK. 
Increased sperm nuclear DNA damage in normozoospermic infertile men: a prospective study. Fertility and sterility  2002;78: 313- 318.  
Schlegel PN, Sigman M, Collura B, De Jonge CJ, Eisenberg ML, Lamb DJ, Mulhall JP, Niederberger C, 
Sandlow JI, Sokol RZ  et al.  Diagnosis and Treatment of Infertility in Men: AUA/ASRM Guideline PART II. 
The Journal of urology  2021;205: 44 -51. 
Schubert M, Pérez Lanuza L, Gromoll J. Pharmacogenetics of FSH Action in the Male. Frontiers in 
endocrinology  2019;10: 47.  
Schubert M, Pérez  Lanuza L, Wöste M, Dugas M, Carmona FD, Palomino -Morales RJ, Rassam Y, 
Heilmann -Heimbach S, Tüttelmann F, Kliesch S  et al.  A GWAS in Idiopathic/Unexplained Infertile Men 
Detects a Genomic Region Determining Follicle -Stimulating Hormone Levels. The Journal  of clinical 
endocrinology and metabolism  2022;107: 2350 -2361.  
Simon L, Liu L, Murphy K, Ge S, Hotaling J, Aston KI, Emery B, Carrell DT. Comparative analysis of three sperm DNA damage assays and sperm nuclear protein content in couples undergoing assisted 
reproduction treatment. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2014;29: 904 -917.  
Simon L, Zini A, Dyachenko A, Ciampi A, Carrell DT. A systematic review and meta -analysis to 
determine the effect of sperm DNA damage on in vitro fertilization and intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection outcome. Asian journal of andrology  2017;19: 80- 90. 
Spanò M, Bonde JP, Hjøllund HI, Kolstad HA, Cordelli E, Leter G. Sperm chromatin damage impairs 
human fertility. The Danish First Pregnancy Planner Study Team. Fertility and sterility  2000;73: 43- 50. 
Sugihara A, Van Avermaete F, Roelant E, Punjab i U, De Neubourg D. The role of sperm DNA 
fragmentation testing in predicting intra -uterine insemination outcome: A systematic review and 
meta -analysis. European journal of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology  2020;244: 8- 15. 
Tamburino L, La Vi gnera S, Tomaselli V, Condorelli RA, Cannarella R, Mongioì LM, Calogero AE. The -
29G/A FSH receptor gene polymorphism is associated with higher FSH and LH levels in normozoospermic men. Journal of assisted reproduction and genetics  2017a;34: 1289 -1294.  
Tam burino L, La Vignera S, Tomaselli V, Condorelli RA, Mongioì LM, Calogero AE. Impact of the FSHB 
gene -211G/T polymorphism on male gonadal function. Journal of assisted reproduction and genetics  
2017b;34: 671 -676.  
Tan J, Taskin O, Albert A, Bedaiwy MA. Asso ciation between sperm DNA fragmentation and idiopathic 
recurrent pregnancy loss: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Reproductive biomedicine online  
2019;38: 951- 960.  
Tavalaee M, Razavi S, Nasr -Esfahani MH. Influence of sperm chromatin anomalies on assi sted 
reproductive technology outcome. Fertility and sterility  2009;91: 1119- 1126.  
Torregrosa N, Domínguez -Fandos D, Camejo MI, Shirley CR, Meistrich ML, Ballescà JL, Oliva R. 
Protamine 2 precursors, protamine 1/protamine 2 ratio, DNA integrity and other sp erm parameters in 
infertile patients. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2006;21: 2084 -2089.  
Tüttelmann F, Laan M, Grigorova M, Punab M, Sõber S, Gromoll J. Combined effects of the variants FSHB -211G>T and FSHR 2039A>G on male reproductive parameters. The Journal of clinical 
endocrinology and metabolism  2012;97: 3639- 3647.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  60 
Vazquez -Levin MH, Notrica JA, Polak de Fried E. Male immunologic infertility: sperm performance on 
in vitro fertilization. Fertility and sterility  1997;68: 675- 681.  
WHO. Manual for the  Standardized Investigation and Diagnosis of the Infertile Male. In Rowe PJ, 
Comhaire FH, Hargreave TB and Mahmoud AMA (eds). 2000. WHO, Geneva.  
WHO. WHO laboratory manual for the examination and processing of human semen, sixth edition. 
2021. WHO, Geneva.  
Zhang X, San Gabriel M, Zini A. Sperm nuclear histone to protamine ratio in fertile and infertile men: evidence of heterogeneous subpopulations of spermatozoa in the ejaculate. Journal of andrology  
2006;27: 414- 420.  
Zhao J, Zhang Q, Wang Y, Li Y. Whether sperm deoxyribonucleic acid fragmentation has an effect 
on pregnancy and miscarriage after in  vitro fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis. Fertility and sterility  2014;102: 998- 1005.e1008.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  61 
II.10 Additional tests  for systemic conditions  
PICO  QUESTION : SHOULD THERE BE ADDITIONAL EVALUATIONS OF POSSIBLE SYSTEMIC CAUSE OF UI 
IN THE COUPLE ?  
AUTO-IMMUNITY  
Evidence  
Anti-sperm antibodies  (ASA) in serum  
A study, including 42 couples with unexplained infertility ( UI), investigated the presence of serum anti-
sperm antibodies (ASA) and their association with UI. The prevalence of ASA was 14.3% (6/42) among 
all couples, 9.5% (4/42) among males and 4.8% (2/42) among females. Of the 42 couples, 22 couples 
were managed with IVF -ICSI, and it was found that no r elation between ASA status and the 
successfulness of IVF -ICSI exists (Y asin et al., 2016) . 
In a study, including 30 men and 24 women with UI, presence of ASA was compared to f ertile controls 
(45 men and women) and their association with UI was investigated. With the indirect 
immunofluorescence technique 22/54 patients tested positive for ASA and 3/45 controls. With ELISA, 
20/54 patients tested positive and 4/45 controls. This s uggested  a strong correlation between UI and 
ASA (Monem and Moalla, 2003) . 
A study including 44 couples where the only detectable cause of infertility was the presence of ASA in 
the female, looked at pregnancy rates after IVF in these couples. After IVF, f ertilisation rates were 
slightly lower in couples where the only detectable cause of infert ility was the presence of ASA in the 
female  than in patients with other infertility aetiologies but was successful in 45% without the need for 
ICSI (Mardesic et al., 2000) . 
In a study, including 698 couples with UI, prevalence of ASA was investigated, and their impact on 
pregnancy rates. In the study 16.5 % of the men and  21.6% of the women had serum ASA. The overall 
incidence of immobilising antibodies was 5.6% for men and 6.4% for women. In men, the pregnancy 
rate dropped significantly from 42.7% to 7.1% at high agglutinin titers  >1:16. In women at high titers 
≥1:16 the incidence of pregnancy was only 4.0%, compared with 46.2% in the negative group (Menge 
et al., 1982) . 
Female c oeliac disease  
In a systematic review and meta -analysis, the risk of coeliac disease in UI was investigated in 586 
patients and 5088 controls without risk factors, from 7 case -control studies. The OR for coeliac disease  
was 5.06 (95% CI 2.13 –11.35) in patients with UI  (Tersigni et al., 2014) . 
A small cohort stu dy in 65 couples with UI also investigated the role of coeliac disease in UI. Overall, 
7.9% of patients tested positive for antigliadin , anti -endomysial or tissue transaminase antibodies . In 
these cases, an intestinal  biopsy was performed, however, only on e male and one female tested 
positive for coeliac disease (Karaca et al., 2015) . 
Thyroid antibodies  
In a prospective cohort  study, 69 patients with UI were screened for anti -thyroid antibodies and their 
effect on IVF outcome. Patients were divided in 3 groups, group 1 consisted of infertile patients without 
thyroid pathology (n=31), group 2 consisted of infertile patients with normal thyroid function and anti - 
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  62 
thyroid antibodies (n=23), and group 3 consisted of infertile patients euthyroid by medical therapy  and 
anti-thyroid antibodies  (n=15). Clinical pregnancy rate was significantly lower in thyroid antibody 
positive groups (groups 2 and 3) compared to controls (30.4% vs. 13.3% vs. 41.9% respectively) (Kilic et 
al., 2008) . 
A small cross -sectional study, including 14 women with UI , reported no cases of subclinical 
hypothyroidism and 3/14 (21.4%) women with thyroid antibodies, which was not significantly different from findings in the control group (Abalovich et al., 2007) . 
In another  cross -sectional study including 73 patients with UI and 100 controls (randomly selected, 
parous women) thyroid dysfunction and auto -immunity in infertility  was investigated . The percentage 
of patients with positive thyroid peroxidase -antibodies  (>100 kU/L ) was 7% in UI patients, which was 
not significantly  different from controls (8%)  (Poppe et al., 2002) . 
Other auto -immune tests  
A number of publications were identified examining other auto -immune tests, such as anti -endometrial 
antibodies (Palacio et al., 1997) , anti -ovarian antibodies (Luborsky et al., 2000) , zona pellucida 
antibodies (Hovav et al., 1994)  or combinations of several auto -immune tests (Aoki et al., 1995, Bellver 
et al., 2008, Kovács et al., 2012, Luborsky et al., 1999, Radojci ć et al., 2004, Witkin et al., 1984) . 
However, data was too sparse to draw conclusions.  
Recommendation  
Testing for anti -sperm antibodies in serum of either males 
or females with unexplained infertility is not recommended.  Strong  ⊕ 
 
Testing for coeliac disease in women with unexplained 
infertility can be considered . Conditional  ⊕⊕ 
 
Testing for thyroid antibody  and other autoimmune 
conditions (apart from coeliac disease) in women with 
unexplained infertility is not recommended .  Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Current evidence indicates that the benefit of testing for ASA is low . However, the studies are relatively 
small and, apart from  one, somewhat dated. Patients value explanations for UI  but uncertainty about 
the evidence, no clear treatment shown to be effective and potential risks of treatment limit value of treatment. There is no clear benefit of ASA testing for health equity and the current evidence  shows  no 
feasibility of treatment in case of a positive  test.  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  63 
The benefits of testing for coeliac disease may be considerable depending on the test used. If blood 
testing for antibodies, the patients would value investigation at small cost with an easy intervention , 
i.e., a dietary change.  
Testing for thyroid antibodies and other autoimmune diseases appears to have little benefit , but may 
reassure the patient that a full investigation has been implemented. Costs would be relatively small but 
in the absence of treatment , efficacy would be of little value.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7  (question II.10 ). 
 
THYROID HORMONES  
Evidence  
In a case -control study, the role of altered thyroid hormones in UI  was investigated in 44 women with 
UI and 44 fertile controls. Both thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and T4 were found to be slightly 
higher in women with UI than controls (1.49 ±0.76 vs. 1.12 ±0.54 mIU/L and 10.48 ±1.89 vs. 9.18±1.53 
(µg/dl) (Rehman et al., 2020) . 
In a cross -sectional study, the association between thyroid hormones and UI was investigated in 187 
women with UI and compared with 52 women with male infertility. Median TSH levels were significantly higher in the UI group compared to the male factor infertil ity group (1.95 (IQR 1.54 -2.61 vs. 1.66 (IQR 
1.25- 2.17) mIU/L. Also, more women with UI had levels >2.5mIU/L (26.9 vs. 13.5%). Thyroid peroxidase 
antibodies (TPO) were significantly lower in UI women compared to male factor infertility (13.3 (IQR 10.2 -18) vs. 90.4 (IQR 18.4 -2994.3) IU/mL) (Orouji Jokar et al., 2018) . 
In a case -control study, the prevalence of thyroid hormone and thyroid antibody abnormalities were 
investigated in 25 women with UI and 45 normal controls. The fT4 levels were significantly higher in the 
UI group compared to controls (1.14 ±0.13 vs. 0.88 ±0.11 pmol/L), and the fT3 was significantly lower 
(3.48 ±0.46 vs. 4.7 ±2.52 pmol/L). No difference in thyroid autoimmune antibodies (TAI) was found 
between groups (Duran et al., 2013) . 
In a cross -sectional analysis of a prospective cohort study, the role of thyroid hormone and thyroid 
antibody abnormalities in UI were investigated in 95 women with UI and compared to women with 
male factor infertility. There were no differences  in the thyroid hormones but in the UI group, 86% were 
TAI negative and 14% positive, which was not significantly different from controls (Unuane et al., 2013) .  
Recommendation  
TSH measurement is considered good practice in pre -
conception care.  GPP  
 
No additional thyroid evaluation in women  is 
recommended if TSH is within the normal range.  Strong  ⊕  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  64 
Justification  
According to Endocrine Society guidelines (De Groot et al., 2012) , TSH should be measured in pre -
conception care.  
The results of th e studies were heterogenous but there is little evidence that additional thyroid testing 
is required despite widely available testing and cheap intervention with thyroid preparations. Additional 
measurement of thyroid antibodies does not appear to help fur ther diagnosis of UI despite patient 
acceptance of simple thyroid replacement.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.10).  
 
THROMBOPHILIA  
Evidence  
A small cross -sectional study , including 31 patients with UI and 32 controls, investigated the role of 
thrombophilia (anthrombin III deficiency, protein C and/or S deficiency, FVL, FII mutation, MTHFR 
C677T mutation, hyperhomocystinemia, Lupus anticoagulant) in UI . No significant differences were 
detected between UI and controls for any of the isolated or combined thrombophilia markers (Bellver 
et al., 2008) .  
In a  large case -control  study , 594 women with UI were screened for common prothrombotic 
polymorphisms (Factor V Leiden  (FVL) , prothrombin G20210A and activated protein C resistance  
(APCR) ), and/or antiphospholipid antibodies (anticardiolipin IgG, beta 2 glycoprotein I antibodies, Lupus 
anticoagulant). APCR  and/or F VL were significantly more prevalent in UI women vs. fertile women with 
previous spontaneous pregnancy (7.9% vs. 3.8%, OR 2.18,  95% CI 1.28 -3.72). The prevalence of 
prothrombin G20210A or antiphospholipid  antibodies was not different between the study group and 
fertile women (prothrombin 3.1% vs. 4.2%, OR 0.73, 95% CI 0.39- 1.37; lupus/anticardiolipin 3.3% vs. 
4.7%, OR 0.70, 95% CI  0.38- 1.28) . The presence of thrombophilia  was not significantly associated with 
lower fertility success rate. Rather, women who had APCR and /or factor V Leiden or had antiphospholipid antibodies had significantly higher live birth rates in comparison to women who were 
tested negative  (Steinvil et al., 2012) .  
In a case -control study, the frequency and SNP -SNP interactions between FVL G1691A, prothrombin 
G20210A mutation, and C677T MTHFR and PAI -1 4G/5G gene polym orphisms was evaluated in 105 
women with UI and 120 fertile controls. Significant differences were found between UI women and 
controls only in the frequency of the MTHFR C677T CC  genotype  (19.1% vs . 40.8% ), CT genotype  (60%  
vs. 45.8% ), and TT genotype  (20.9% vs . 13.3% ). Interaction of MTHFR plus FVL was associated with UI  
(Milenkovic et al., 2020) .  
In a case -control study, 230 women with UI and 240 fertil e women were screened for the presence of 
congenital inherited thrombophilia ( FVL mutation, prothrombin gene G20210A polymorphism, and 
deficiencies in protein S and C and AT). A significant higher prevalence of thrombophilia was found in 
women with UI comp ared to controls (13% vs. 7.1%). A significantly higher prevalence of prothrombin 
gene mutation was found in the UI group compared to controls (5.7% vs. 2.1%, OR 2.82, 95% CI 1.02 - 
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  65 
8.03). The presence of FVL and anticoagulant protein deficiencies was not si gnificantly higher (4.8% vs. 
3.8% and 2.6% vs. 1.2%) (Fatini et al., 2012) . 
In a case-control study including 100 women with UI and 200 apparently healthy women without 
infertility and with previous term pregnancies , screening was performed  for mutation s of the FVL, 
G20210A in prothrombin, and of MTHFR C677 T.  There was no significant d ifference between UI and 
control groups for any of the thrombophilia: MTHFR OR 1.28 (95% CI 0.68 -2.4), Factor V Leiden OR 1.0 
(95% CI 0.36- 2.75), prothrombin OR 0.85 (95% CI 0.22- 3.37) (Casadei et al., 2010) . 
In a case -control study, the frequency of inherited thrombophilia ’s (FVL G1691A , FVL H1299R (R2), 
factor II prothrombin G20210A, factor XIII V34L, b -fibrinogen -455G>A, PAI -1 4G/5G, HPA1 a/b (L33P), 
MTHFR C677T, and MTHFR A1298C) was investigated among 92 women with UI and 60 fertile control 
women. MTHFR C677T was the only gene to sh ow a significant difference between women with UI 
(22%) and controls  (0%) (Coulam and Jeyendran, 2009) . 
In a case -control study , 36 women with UI and 62 healthy, fertile controls were screened for the 
presence of thrombophilic mutations (FVL G1691A, MTHFR C677T, and FII G20210A). Significantly  more 
mutations in FVL were found in the UI group compared to controls (30.6% vs. 0%), however, no 
significant differences were found in MTHFR or FII mutations (50% vs. 38.7% and 2.8% vs. 3.2%) (Behjati 
et al., 2006) . 
In a case -control study, 115 women with UI and 107 fertile women were screened for the PAI -1 4G -
675 allele. A significant difference in allele frequency was found between UI and fertile controls. Of 
the UI group 22.6 % (26/115) was 5G/5G compared to 39.3% (42/107) of controls, and 77.4% 
(89/115) was either 4G/5G or 4G/4G compared to 60.7% (64/107) of controls  (Kydonopoulou et al., 
2017) .  
Recommendation  
Testing for thrombophilia in women  with unexplained 
infertililty  is not recommended . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
All included studies are small and the results are heterogenous , the evidence is therefore considered 
of very low quality . Furthermore, c omprehensive testing for thrombophilia can be expensive , given 
the multiple alleged effects. While patien ts may value thorough exclusion of thrombophilia, the cost i s 
large compared to the  potential  benefit. Comprehensive testing may not be available globally, is 
expensive and affects accessibility. In the absence of any proof of effective treatment, investig ation is 
of low value to a desired outcome . 
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7  (question II.10 ). 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  66 
OXIDATIVE STRESS  
Evidence  
Male  
In a prospective cohort study the role of oxidative stress  (DNA fragmentation, reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), malondialdehyde (MDA), protein carbonyl group (PC), nitrotyrosine (NT), total thiol group (SH) 
levels and ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP))  in 28 males with UI was investigated and compared 
to 14 fertile sperm donors.  A significantly higher percentage of DNA fragmentation and ROS formation 
was found in the UI group compared to controls (72% vs. 4.2%; and 56% vs. 4.7% respectively).  
Furthermor e, seminal plasma MDA, PC, and NT levels were significantly elevated in UI versus control 
group (8.6 vs. 5.2  nmol/ml , 0.78 vs. 0.46 nmol/mg protein  and 234 vs. 148 nmol/L  respectively)  (Aktan 
et al., 2013) . 
In a prospective cohort study, the effects of DNA damage and oxidative stress (ROS, total antioxidant 
capacity (TAC) , SCSA DNA damage ) in semen were investigated in 23 males with UI and 16 fertile 
controls. No significant differences were found in isolated ROS or TAC between the UI group and 
controls. However, the ROS -TAC score was significantly lower in UI vs. control groups (47 (IQR 25th and 
75th percentile 45 -51) vs. 53 (IQR 50 -58)). Also, the DN A fragmentation index (DFI) was significantly 
higher in the UI group compared to controls (23% ( IQR 15-32) vs. 15% ( IQR 11-21)). ROS negatively 
correlated with fertilisation (r= -0.59) and embryo quality (r= -0.89); DFI negatively correlated with 
fertilisati on (r= -0.70) and embryo quality (r= -0.70) (Saleh et al., 2003) . 
In a case -control study, oxidative stress markers (ROS and lipid peroxid ation, mitochondrial membrane 
potential, DFI, antioxidant capacity) were investigated in 23 men with UI and 34 fertile controls. Only 
ROS was significantly increased in UI males compared to fertile controls (121.2 ±29.9 vs. 71.7 ±8.7) 
(Mayorga -Torres et al., 2017) . 
In a case -control study, oxidative DNA damage to sperm cells was investigated in 30 males with UI and 
22 fertile males. When comparing UI males with controls, seminal MDA (9.68 ±2.87 µM vs. 6.63 ±2.99  
µM); serum MDA (12.55 ±3.17  µM vs. 7.7 ±2.37 µM ), serum nitric oxide  (NO; 19.26 ±7.81 µM  vs. 
11.18 ±5.61 µM ), serum 8 -OhdG/106dG (1.55 ±0.61  vs. 1.03 ±1.03 ) and leukocyte 8 -OhdG/106dG 
(1.25 ±0.37  vs. 0.77 ±0.27 ) were significantly higher in UI males (Taken et al.,  2016) . 
In a case -control study, ROS in semen were compared between 43 men with UI and 17 fertile controls. 
ROS was significantly higher in UI males compared to controls, both in neat and washed semen (0.79 
(IQR 0.41- 2.01) vs. 0.03 (IQR 0.014 -0.11) 104 RLU/min/20 million sperms and 2.35 (IQR 0.91 -23.1) vs. 
0.24 (IQR 0.12- 0.38) 104 RLU/min/20 million sperms)  (Venkatesh et al., 2011) . 
In a case -control study, lipid peroxidation (2 -thiobarbituric acid -reactive substances (TBARS) as 
substitute for MDA, arachidonic acid (AA), do cosahexaenoic acid (DHA)) in semen was evaluated in 12 
males with UI and 17 controls. TBARS and AA levels in blood plasma were found to be significantly 
higher in the UI males group compared to controls  (Oborna et al., 2010) . 
In a case -control study, ROS in semen were compared between 54 men with UI and 51 fertile sperm 
donors.  Significant higher ROS levels were found in semen of UI patients compared to controls (0.35 ± 
0.67 vs. 0.01 ± 0.02 x106 cpm/20x106 sperm)  (Desai et al., 2009) . 
In a case -control study, DNA damage and oxidative stress ( total antioxidant status ( TAS), total oxidant 
status (TOS) and oxidative stress index (OSI) ) measured by Comet  assay in semen of 30 males with UI  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  67 
and 20 fertile donors was investigated. No significant differences were found between UI and control 
males for TAO, TOS, OSI  or sperm DNA damage (Verit et al., 2006) . 
In a case -control study, metabolomic analysis was performed on the urine of 71 UI and 47 fertile males 
The study was able to distinguish significant differences between the two groups with respect to  a 
number of purported biomarkers  (Zhang et al., 2014) . 
Female  
In a prospective cohort study, oxidative stress markers were evaluated in the serum and follicular fluid of 31 women with UI and compared to 40 women with male factor infertility. Serum Fas, follicular fluid 
MDA and follicular fluid TAC levels were found to be significantly lower in women with UI compared to 
controls (sFAS 2.85 ±0.44 vs. 2.90 ±1.01 pg/ml; fMDA 3.19±0.21 vs. 3.47±0.30 μM and fTAC 0.88±0.16 
vs. 1.31±0.63 mmol/L respectively). Seru m and follicular fluid superoxide dismutase ( SOD ) levels were 
found to be significantly higher in women with UI compared to controls (3.59±0.45 vs. 3.47±0.68 U/mL 
and 4.66±1.64 vs. 3.14±0.91 U/mL) (Pekel et al., 2015) . 
In a case -control study, including 20 women with UI and 20 controls undergoing ICSI for male -factor 
infertility, the association between oxidant status (TOS, TAS, and OSI) and infertility and outcomes  after 
ICSI was investigated . TOS and OSI in follicular fluid of the UI patients were statistically higher than the 
control group (10.14 ±6.69 vs. 6.54±3.52 µmol H2O2 Eq/L and 0.94±0.5 vs. 0.62±0.33 arbitrary units, 
respectively ). The systemic TOS and OSI w ere also significantly increased in the UI group compared to 
the control group (9.63 ±6.16 vs. 5.51±4.27 µmol H2O2 Eq/L and 0.82±0.5 vs. 0.47±0.35 arbitrary units , 
respectively). No significant difference in implantation, clinical PR or LBR  (Şentürk et al., 2021) . 
In a case -control study, including 145 infertile women with different infertility diagnosis and 35 controls, 
the association between follicular fluid metabolites and infertility  was investigated . The concentrations 
of 27 metabolites in follicular fluid were  found to be significantly different between infertile females 
and controls. The pattern of alterations in the aforementioned metabolites was different according to 
different infertility diagnoses  (Lazzarino et al., 2021) . 
In a case -control study, oxidative stress (MDA , serum nitrite and FRAP) was evaluated in 13 women with 
UI and compared to 25 fertile controls.  Serum nitrite was lower in UI compared to controls ( 3.0± 0.43 
vs. 5.0 ±0.5 2 µmol/L ). Serum MDA levels were significantly higher in UI compared to controls ( 3.28±0.10 
vs. 2.82 ±0.15 nmol/L)  (Veena et al., 2008) . 
Couple  
In a case -control study, the role of superoxide dismutase  (SOD)  2 and nitric oxide synthase (NOS) 
polymorphisms in UI was evaluated. Sixty -nine  fertile patients (34 men and 35 women) and 110 infertile 
patients with UI (52 men and 58 women) were enrolled. Comparing fertile and infertile groups, a significant difference was noted only for the eNOS gene. Homozygosity for the 894G -eNOS allele was 
associated with a significant increased risk of infertility (OR 1.91 , 95% CI 1.04 -3.54). For males with UI, 
the Ala -MnSOD allele was found in 59% of UI males vs. 41% of controls, and associated with infertility 
(OR 2.94, 95% CI 1.14- 7.60) (Faure et al., 2014) .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  68 
Recommendation  
Measurement of oxidative stress in semen of males with 
unexplained infertility should only be considered in the 
context of research.  Research 
only   
 
Measurement of oxidative stress in women  with 
unexplained infertility is not recommended.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification  
The included studies point towards an increase in ROS in males with UI. However, studies described 
have used many different methods, some of which are not readily available , limiting access and equity. 
The evidence for male testing is low and would benefit from further research. Patients would value a 
simple blood test i f treatment was available and effective. In the absence of this, testing of oxidative 
stress should be stan dardised across research studies and treatment benefits compared with the work 
and expense s involved in testing. In females, there is good evidence that testing is not valuable, at least 
for serum , while follicular fluid is difficult to obtain before ferti lity treatment. Again, there is no evidence 
of any treatment being effective thereby limiting investigation and the cost of testing.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.1 0). 
 
GENETIC /GENOMIC TESTS  
Evidence  
In a retrospective cohort study, 4345 (2261 male and 2084 female) individuals with reproductive 
disorders (11% of patients with UI) underwent karyotype testing. Abnormalities were found in 3% of 
patients with UI, compared with 2.2% for ART failure and 1.6% for recurrent miscarriage. No statistical 
analysis was performed (Ertosun et al., 2022) . 
In a prospective cohort  study, g enetic polymorphisms in the FSHB gene were evaluated in 36 females  
with UI and 169 healthy women without known fertility problems . Carriers of the FSHB -211 T -allele had 
significantly higher serum FSH and LH concentrations, and this allele was enriched among infertility patients, and even nearly doubled in women with UI (23.6% vs . 12.4%) . Frequency of TT homozyg osity  
was increased threefold  (5.6% vs . 1.8%)  (Rull et al., 2018) . 
In a prospective cohort study , 98 couples with UI were screened for genetic polymorphisms in the PPAR 
gamma gene. No relationship was found between pregnancy rate and the studie d polymorphisms 
(Sahmani et al., 2011) . 
In a prospective cohort study, 19 women with UI were screened for genetic polymorphisms of CIAS1, 
an inflammasome component. Frequency was not significantly different between groups, 18.4% in 
unexplained vs. 17% in male infertility (Witkin et al., 2010) .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  69 
In a case -control study, s perm miRNA expression levels were evaluated in 8 males with UI and 10 fertile 
controls. Overall, 115 miRNAs were found to be ubiquitous in all normospermic infertile indiv iduals, 
while 59 miRNAs were not detected. In addition, 57 miRNAs were found to be differentially expressed; 
of which 20 are regulated by a host promoter and  3 of these comprised genes involved  in fertility  (Salas -
Huetos et al., 2016) . 
In a case -control study, 28 normozoospermic men with female partners with UI were screened for 
chromosomal polymorphisms. C hromosomal polymorphisms were found in 9 /28 normozoospermic 
men  (Suganya et al., 2015) . 
In a case -control study, 206 males with UI and 230 healthy controls were screened for genetic 
polymorphisms of MTHFR. No significant differences in allele frequ encies between males with UI and 
controls were found (Vani et al., 2012) . 
In a study, including 1206 normovulatory subfertile women,  the association between chromosome 
abnormalities  and infertility  was investigated. The cause of infertility was not associate d with the 
prevalence of chromosome abnormalities  in the patients analysed. However, a significantly higher 
prevalence of chromosome abnormalities  was observed in women with secondary infertility (1.25%) 
compared to those with primary infertility (0.25%)  (Papanikolaou et al., 2005) .  
A study including 50 couples with UI investigated the association between chromosome abnormalities 
and infe rtility. Significantly  more mic ronucleated cells were found in infertile couples compared to 
controls (14.66 ±5.21 vs. 10.60±2.57)  (Trková et al., 2000) . 
Recommendation  
Genetic or genomic tests are currently not recommended 
in couples with unexplained infertility.   Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Many test s are described in literature , but there is little evidence of a specific benefit in UI, as opposed 
to the general infertility population. Genetic testing is expensive, and there is currently no association 
between specific genes and UI . While background rates of chromosomal analysis vary between studies, 
there is little evidence of an incre ase in UI in either men or women. Patients would value knowing their 
karyotype is normal , but a routine karyotype may not be sufficient to exclude genetic contributions to 
infertility. Selection of specific genes contributing to UI has not shown any benefi t and the cost is large  
relative to the benefit. Assessment of any abnormality will need advice from a genetic specialist and 
expensive intervention via IVF and PGT -A, depend ing on the particular genetic condition.  
Further information  
Details of the litera ture study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.10).   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  70 
VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY  
Evidence  
In a study including 58 men with UI and 50 age - and BMI -matched fertile men, vitamin D levels were  
compared between groups. Compared with the fertile group, male patients in couples with UI had 
significantly lower vitamin  D levels (27.00 ng/mL ( 12.63- 39.30 ) vs.23.66 ng/mL (7.50- 55.00)) (Güngör 
et al., 2022) . 
A retrospective cohort study, including women undergoing their first IVF cycle , investigated the 
association between vitamin D and live birth rates. The cumulative live birth rate  in the vitamin D -
deficient group was significantly lower compared to the non -deficient group (43.9%, 208/474 vs.  50.9%, 
325/639, OR 0.755, 95% CI 0.595 –0.959). The clinical/ongoing pregnancy rate, live birth rate and 
miscarriage rate in the fresh cycle did not show significant differences between the vitamin D deficient 
and non- deficient groups  (Ko et al., 2022) . 
In a sub- analysis of a randomized controlled trial, the association between vitamin D deficiency and UI 
was investigated  in 647 women . Overall, 25% of patients met the criteria for vitamin D deficiency. In 
patients with vitamin D deficiency the live birth rate was not significan tly different from those who were 
not vitamin D deficient (32 vs. 29%, OR 1.1, 95% CI 0.7 -1.7) (Butts et al., 2019) . 
In a retrospective cohort study, the influence of vitamin D levels on IVF outcomes was investigated in 
22 women with UI . Overall, 14/22 women had vitamin D levels >30 ng/ml,  4 had levels 20 -30 ng and 4 
had levels <20 ng/ml. There was n o specific effect on UI but vitamin D deficiency was associated with 
lower pregnancy rates in non -Hispanic white females but not in Asian females (Rudick et al., 2012) . 
In a case -control study, the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency was evaluated in 26 women with UI and 
compa red to 15  women with male factor  infertility. Vitamin D levels were not significantly different 
between women with UI and women with male factor infertility (23.3 ± 8.6 vs. 26.2 ± 9.2 ng/ml) (Lopes 
et al., 2017) . 
Recommendation  
Testing for vitamin D deficiency is not recommended  for 
diagnosis of unexplained infertility . Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
In the context of UI, no role of vitamin D has been found.  The evidence is  of relatively low quality, but 
generally against specific testing outside of other medical or environmental indications. Testing for an 
individual is relatively inexpensive and wid ely available with easy dietary remediation , but treatment 
efficacy is unproven.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.10).   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  71 
PROLACTIN  
Evidence  
In a cross -sectional  study, the association between prolactin and UI was investigated. 84 women with 
UI and 44 healthy fertile women were enrolled and ROC curves were calculated. Prolactin levels were 
significantly higher (2 -fold elevated) in serum of women with UI compared to controls. Using prolactin, 
MCP -1 and leptin in a predictive model , a significant receiver operating curve ( ROC of 0.89 ) was 
obtained for prediction of UI (Qu et al., 2020) . 
In a prospective cohort study, the role of prolactin in UI was investigated in 12 women with UI and 12 
fertile controls. Midcycle bioactive prolactin (34.2 ±8.3 vs. 19.2 ±3.4  ng/ml) but not immunoactive 
(26.9 ±4.3  vs. 22.1 ±2.6 ng/mL) were different in women with UI compared to controls (Subramanian et 
al., 1997) . 
In a cross -sectional study, the association between prolactin and UI was investigated in 187 women 
with UI and compared  with 52 women with male infertility. Prolactin levels were not significantly 
different in the UI group compared to the male factor infertility group (10.4 ng/mL (IQR 7.7 -13.4) vs. 11 
ng/mL (IQR 8.5 -13.7) (Orouji Jokar et al. , 2018) . 
In a case -control study, prolactin levels were no different in 13 women with UI compared to 25 fertile 
controls. Lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH) was also evaluated and were significantly higher in serum in UI 
compared to controls (83.40 ±4.81  vs. 67.9 ±3.53 U/L)  (Veena et al., 2008) . 
Recommendation  
Prolactin testing in women  is not recommended.  Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
The included studies are small and the quality of the data is very poor  and heterogenous.  In addition, 
current evidence is unable to show a  benefit to measuring prolactin levels  in asymptomatic women 
with UI . While the testing is cheap and wi dely available, the evidence is low and the cost benefit 
relationship poor.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II.10).  
 
BMI 
Evidence  
In an epidemiologic survey study, the association of dietary status and UI was evaluated in 198 women 
with UI and 59 pregnant controls.  There was a significant difference in caloric intake between women 
with UI and controls (2688.64 ±580.78 vs. 2115.44 ±326. 63 calories), with a lower intake of 
carbohydrates and vitamins and higher intake of fats  in women with UI. Of the women with UI 33% 
reported daily physical exercise compared to  69%  of controls  (Noventa et al., 2016) .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  72 
In an epidemiologic survey study, t he effect of body weight on the success rate of IVF in 1828 wome n 
with UI  was studied . A significantly higher live birth rate per cycle was found in women with normal 
weight (BMI ≥20–25 kg/m²) and slight overweight (BMI 25 –27 kg/m²) compared with women with a 
BMI ≥27 kg/m ². The unfavourable  effect of overweight was largest for women with  UI (Lintsen et al., 
2005) .  
In a study, the effect of BMI on estradiol , progesterone  and LH values in females who received IUI 
treatment was analysed  in women with UI . Estradiol  on the day of hCG was lower in overweight/obese 
(natural and stimulated cycles) where patient s were <35 years but not in over 35 years. In older women  
estradiol , progesterone  and LH were lower in woman with greater weight (Wang et al., 2020) .  
Recommendation  
BMI evaluation  in women  is considered good practice in 
pre-conception care.  GPP  
 
Justification  
Although there is little evidence of a specific association between BMI and UI specifically , reproductive 
outcomes are known to be impaired in men and women with low and high BMIs. The standard advice 
and medical investigation and interventions apply equal ly to patients with UI as to any other causes of 
infertility. Patients generally value advice about lifestyle and healthy alternatives to maximise fertility 
in the context of their social and cultural environment. While healthy lifestyle intervention may i mprove 
spontaneous conception, active weight loss treatment in assisted reproduction has not yet shown a 
benefit in getting pregnant.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question II. 10). 
 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  73 
REFERENCES  
Abalovich M, Mitelberg L, Allami C, Gutierrez S, Alcaraz G, Otero P, Levalle O. Subclinical 
hypothyroidism and thyroid autoimmunity in women with infertility. Gynecological endocrinology : the official journal of the International Society of Gynecological Endocrinology  2007;23: 279 -283.  
Aktan G, Doğru- Abbasoğlu S, Küçükgergin C, Kadıoğlu A, Ozdemirler -Erata G, Koçak -Toker N. Mystery 
of idiopathic male infertility: is oxidative stress an actual risk? Fertility and sterility  2013;99: 1211-
1215.  
Aoki K, Dudkie wicz AB, Matsuura E, Novotny M, Kaberlein G, Gleicher N. Clinical significance of beta 2 -
glycoprotein I -dependent anticardiolipin antibodies in the reproductive autoimmune failure 
syndrome: correlation with conventional antiphospholipid antibody detection systems. American 
journal of obstetrics and gynecology  1995;172: 926- 931.  
Behjati R, Modarressi MH, Jeddi -Tehrani M, Dokoohaki P, Ghasemi J, Zarnani AH, Aarabi M, 
Memariani T, Ghaffari M, Akhondi MA. Thrombophilic mutations in Iranian patients with inferti lity and 
recurrent spontaneous abortion. Annals of hematology  2006;85: 268- 271.  
Bellver J, Soares SR, Alvarez C, Muñoz E, Ramírez A, Rubio C, Serra V, Remohí J, Pellicer A. The role of thrombophilia and thyroid autoimmunity in unexplained infertility, impl antation failure and recurrent 
spontaneous abortion. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2008;23: 278 -284.  
Butts SF, Seifer DB, Koelper N, Senapati S, Sammel MD, Hoofnagle AN, Kelly A, Krawetz SA, Santoro N, Zhang H  et al.  Vitamin D Deficiency Is Associated With Poor Ovarian Stimulation Outcome in PCOS but 
Not Unexplained Infertility. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism  2019;104: 369- 378.  
Casadei L, Puca F, Privitera L, Zamaro V, Emidi E. Inherited thrombophilia in infertile women: implica tion in unexplained infertility. Fertility and sterility  2010;94: 755- 757.  
Coulam CB, Jeyendran RS. Thrombophilic gene polymorphisms are risk factors for unexplained infertility. Fertility and sterility  2009;91: 1516- 1517.  
De Groot L, Abalovich M, Alexande r EK, Amino N, Barbour L, Cobin RH, Eastman CJ, Lazarus JH, Luton 
D, Mandel SJ  et al.  Management of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy and postpartum: an 
Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism  
2012;97: 2543- 2565.  
Desai N, Sharma R, Makker K, Sabanegh E, Agarwal A. Physiologic and pathologic levels of reactive oxygen species in neat semen of infertile men. Fertility and sterility  2009;92: 1626 -1631.  
Duran B, Ozlü T, Koç O, Eşitken C, Topçuoğlu A.  Relationship of thyroid hormone levels and thyroid 
autoantibodies with early pregnancy loss and infertility. Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology : the journal of the Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecology  2013;33: 862- 864.  
Ertosun MG, Araci DG, Peker A , Uzuner SY, Toylu A, Ozekinci M, Usta MF, Clark OA. Investigation of 
the relationship between reproductive disorders and chromosomal abnormalities in a large -scale, 
single -center 10 -year retrospective study. Journal of gynecology obstetrics and human repr oduction  
2022;51: 102467.  
Fatini C, Conti L, Turillazzi V, Sticchi E, Romagnuolo I, Milanini MN, Cozzi C, Abbate R, Noci I. Unexplained infertility: association with inherited thrombophilia. Thrombosis research  2012;129: 
e185 -188.  
Faure C, Leveille P, Dupo nt C, Julia C, Chavatte -Palmer P, Sutton A, Levy R. Are superoxide dismutase 2 
and nitric oxide synthase polymorphisms associated with idiopathic infertility? Antioxidants & redox 
signaling  2014;21: 565 -569.  
Güngör K, Güngör ND, Başar MM, Cengiz F, Erşahin SS, Çil K. Relationship between serum vitamin D 
levels semen parameters and sperm DNA damage in men with unexplained infertility. European review for medical and pharmacological sciences  2022;26: 499 -505.  
Hovav Y, Almagor M, Benbenishti D, Margalioth EJ, Kafka I, Yaffe H. Immunity to zona pellucida in women with low response to ovarian stimulation, in unexplained infertility and after multiple IVF attempts. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  1994;9: 643- 645.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  74 
Karaca N, Yılmaz R, Aktun LH, Batmaz G, Karaca  Ç. Is there any relationship between unrecognized 
Celiac disease and unexplained infertile couples? The Turkish journal of gastroenterology : the official 
journal of Turkish Society of Gastroenterology  2015;26: 484 -486.  
Kilic S, Tasdemir N, Yilmaz N, Yuks el B, Gul A, Batioglu S. The effect of anti -thyroid antibodies on 
endometrial volume, embryo grade and IVF outcome. Gynecological endocrinology : the official 
journal of the International Society of Gynecological Endocrinology  2008;24: 649- 655.  
Ko JKY, Shi J, Li RHW, Yeung WSB, Ng EHY. 100 YEARS OF VITAMIN D: Effect of serum vitamin D level 
before ovarian stimulation on the cumulative live birth rate of women undergoing in vitro fertilization: a retrospective analysis. Endocrine connections  2022;11.  
Kovács M, Hartwig M, Aleksza M, Tihanyi M, Nagy T, Vajda G, Daru J, Gasztonyi B. Antiphospholipid 
antibodies in relation to sterility/infertility. Human immunology  2012;73: 726- 731.  
Kydonopoulou K, Delkos D, Rousso D, Ilonidis G, Mandala E. Association of plasmin ogen activator 
inhibitor -type 1 (PAI -1) -675 4G/5G polymorphism with unexplained female infertility. Hippokratia 
2017;21: 180- 185.  
Lazzarino G, Pallisco R, Bilotta G, Listorti I, Mangione R, Saab MW, Caruso G, Amorini AM, Brundo MV, Lazzarino G  et al.  Altered Follicular Fluid Metabolic Pattern Correlates with Female Infertility and 
Outcome Measures of In Vitro Fertilization. International journal of molecular sciences 2021;22.  
Lintsen AM, Pasker -de Jong PC, de Boer EJ, Burger CW, Jansen CA, Braat DD, van Leeuwen FE. Effects 
of subfertility cause, smoking and body weight on the success rate of IVF. Human reproduction 
(Oxford, England)  2005;20: 1867- 1875.  
Lopes VM, Lopes JR, Brasi leiro JP, Oliveira I, Lacerda RP, Andrade MR, Tierno NI, Souza RC, Motta LA. 
Highly prevalence of vitamin D deficiency among Brazilian women of reproductive age. Archives of 
endocrinology and metabolism  2017;61: 21- 27. 
Luborsky J, Llanes B, Davies S, Binor  Z, Radwanska E, Pong R. Ovarian autoimmunity: greater 
frequency of autoantibodies in premature menopause and unexplained infertility than in the general 
population. Clinical immunology (Orlando, Fla)  1999;90: 368- 374.  
Luborsky J, Llanes B, Roussev R, Coul am C. Ovarian antibodies, FSH and inhibin B: independent 
markers associated with unexplained infertility. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2000;15: 
1046- 1051.  
Mardesic T, Ulcova -Gallova Z, Huttelova R, Muller P, Voboril J, Mikova M, Hulvert J. The infl uence of 
different types of antibodies on in vitro fertilization results. American journal of reproductive 
immunology (New York, NY : 1989)  2000;43: 1- 5. 
Mayorga -Torres BJM, Camargo M, Cadavid Á P, du Plessis SS, Cardona Maya WD. Are oxidative stress 
marke rs associated with unexplained male infertility? Andrologia  2017;49.  
Menge AC, Medley NE, Mangione CM, Dietrich JW. The incidence and influence of antisperm antibodies in infertile human couples on sperm -cervical mucus interactions and subsequent fertility. 
Fertility and sterility  1982;38: 439- 446.  
Milenkovic J, Milojkovic M, Mitic D, Stoimenov TJ, Smelcerovic Z, Stojanovic D, Vujic S, Bojanic N. Interaction of thrombophilic SNPs in patients with unexplained infertility -multifactor dimensionality 
reduction (MDR) model analysis. Journal of assisted reproduction and genetics 2020;37: 1449 -1458.  
Monem FM, Moalla HA. Antisperm antibodies and unexplained infertility in Syria. An unsolved 
problem? Saudi medical journal  2003;24: 912- 913.  
Noventa M, Quaranta M, Vitagliano A, Cinthya V, Valentini R, Campagnaro T, Marci R, Paola RD, 
Alviggi C, Gangemi M  et al.  May Underdiagnosed Nutrition Imbalances Be Responsible for a Portion of 
So-Called Unexplained Infertility? From Diagnosis to Potential Treatment Options. Reproductive 
sciences (Thousand Oaks, Calif)  2016;23: 812 -822.  
Oborna I, Woj ewodka G, De Sanctis JB, Fingerova H, Svobodova M, Brezinova J, Hajduch M, Novotny J, 
Radova L, Radzioch D. Increased lipid peroxidation and abnormal fatty acid profiles in seminal and blood plasma of normozoospermic males from infertile couples. Human reproduction (Oxford, 
England)  2010;25: 308 -316.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  75 
Orouji Jokar T, Fourman LT, Lee H, Mentzinger K, Fazeli PK. Higher TSH Levels Within the Normal 
Range Are Associated With Unexplained Infertility. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism  2018;103: 632-639.  
Palacio JR, Iborra A, Gris JM, Andolz P, Martínez P. Anti -endometrial autoantibodies in women with a 
diagnosis of infertility. American journal of reproductive immunology (New York, NY : 1989)  1997;38: 
100-105.  
Papanikolaou EG, Vernaeve V, Kolibia nakis E, Assche EV, Bonduelle M, Liebaers I, Van Steirteghem A, 
Devroey P. Is chromosome analysis mandatory in the initial investigation of normovulatory women seeking infertility treatment? Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2005;20: 2899- 2903.  
Pekel A,  Gönenç A, Turhan N, Kafalı H. Changes of sFas and sFasL, oxidative stress markers in serum 
and follicular fluid of patients undergoing IVF. Journal of assisted reproduction and genetics 2015;32: 
233-241.  
Poppe K, Glinoer D, Van Steirteghem A, Tournaye H, Devroey P, Schiettecatte J, Velkeniers B. Thyroid 
dysfunction and autoimmunity in infertile women. Thyroid : official journal of the American Thyroid 
Association  2002;12: 997- 1001.  
Qu T, Yan M, Shen WJ, Li L, Zhu P, Li Z, Huang J, Han T, Hu W, Zhou R  et al . Predictive serum markers 
for unexplained infertility in child -bearing aged women. American journal of reproductive immunology 
(New York, NY : 1989)  2020;83: e13194.  
Radojcić L, Marjanović S, Vićovac L, Kataranovski M. Anticardiolipin antibodies in women with 
unexplained infertility. Physiological research  2004;53: 91- 96. 
Rehman R, Rajpar HI, Ashraf M, Iqbal NT, Lalani S, Alam F. Role of oxidative stress and altered thyroid hormones in unexplained infertility. J Pak Med Assoc  2020;70: 1345 -1349.  
Rudick B, Ingles S, Chung K, Stanczyk F, Paulson R, Bendikson K. Characterizing the influence of 
vitamin D levels on IVF outcomes. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2012;27: 3321- 3327.  
Rull K, Grigorova M, Ehrenberg A, Vaas P, Sekavin A, Nõmmemees D, Adler M, Han son E, Juhanson P, 
Laan M. FSHB - 211 G>T is a major genetic modulator of reproductive physiology and health in 
childbearing age women. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2018;33: 954 -966.  
Sahmani M, Sakhinia E, Farzadi L, Najafipour R, Darabi M, Mehdizad eh A, Shahnazi V, Shaaker M, 
Noori M. Two common polymorphisms in the peroxisome proliferator- activated receptor γ gene may 
improve fertilization in IVF. Reproductive biomedicine online  2011;23: 355 -360.  
Salas -Huetos A, Blanco J, Vidal F, Grossmann M, Pons  MC, Garrido N, Anton E. Spermatozoa from 
normozoospermic fertile and infertile individuals convey a distinct miRNA cargo. Andrology  2016;4: 
1028- 1036.  
Saleh RA, Agarwal A, Nada EA, El -Tonsy MH, Sharma RK, Meyer A, Nelson DR, Thomas AJ. Negative 
effects of  increased sperm DNA damage in relation to seminal oxidative stress in men with idiopathic 
and male factor infertility. Fertility and sterility  2003;79 Suppl 3: 1597- 1605.  
Şentürk R, Tola EN, Bozkurt M, Doğuç DK. The role of oxidant status on the etiopatho genesis of 
unexplained infertility and intracytoplasmic sperm injection -  embryo transfer success: a case -control 
study. Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology : the journal of the Institute of Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology  2021: 1- 7. 
Steinvil A, Raz R, Berlin er S, Steinberg DM, Zeltser D, Levran D, Shimron O, Sella T, Chodick G, Shalev V  
et al.  Association of common thrombophilias and antiphospholipid antibodies with success rate of in 
vitro fertilisation. Thrombosis and haemostasis  2012;108: 1192- 1197.  
Subram anian MG, Kowalczyk CL, Leach RE, Lawson DM, Blacker CM, Ginsburg KA, Randolph JF, Jr., 
Diamond MP, Moghissi KS. Midcycle increase of prolactin seen in normal women is absent in subjects with unexplained infertility. Fertility and sterility  1997;67: 644- 647. 
Suganya J, Kujur SB, Selvaraj K, Suruli MS, Haripriya G, Samuel CR. Chromosomal Abnormalities in Infertile Men from Southern India. Journal of clinical and diagnostic research : JCDR  2015;9: Gc05- 10. 
Taken K, Alp HH, Eryilmaz R, Donmez MI, Demir M, Gune s M, Aslan R, Sekeroglu MR. Oxidative DNA 
Damage to Sperm Cells and Peripheral Blood Leukocytes in Infertile Men. Medical science monitor : 
international medical journal of experimental and clinical research  2016;22: 4289- 4296.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  76 
Tersigni C, Castellani R, de  Waure C, Fattorossi A, De Spirito M, Gasbarrini A, Scambia G, Di Simone N. 
Celiac disease and reproductive disorders: meta -analysis of epidemiologic associations and potential 
pathogenic mechanisms. Human reproduction update  2014;20: 582- 593.  
Trková M, Ka pras J, Bobková K, Stanková J, Mejsnarová B. Increased micronuclei frequencies in 
couples with reproductive failure. Reproductive toxicology (Elmsford, NY) 2000;14: 331 -335.  
Unuane D, Velkeniers B, Anckaert E, Schiettecatte J, Tournaye H, Haentjens P, Poppe K. Thyroglobulin 
autoantibodies: is there any added value in the detection of thyroid autoimmunity in women consulting for fertility treatment? Thyroid : official journal of the American Thyroid Association 
2013;23: 1022- 1028.  
Vani GT, Mukesh N, Rama Dev i P, Usha Rani P, Reddy PP. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T 
polymorphism is not associated with male infertility in a South Indian population. Andrologia  2012;44 
Suppl 1: 252- 259.  
Veena BS, Upadhya S, Adiga SK, Pratap KN. Evaluation of oxidative stress, antioxidants and prolactin in 
infertile women. Indian journal of clinical biochemistry : IJCB  2008;23: 186- 190.  
Venkatesh S, Shamsi MB, Dudeja S, Kumar R, Dada R. Reactive oxygen species measurement in neat and washed semen: comparative analysis and its significance in male infertility assessment. Archives of gynecology and obstetrics 2011;283: 121- 126.  
Verit FF, Ve rit A, Kocyigit A, Ciftci H, Celik H, Koksal M. No increase in sperm DNA damage and seminal 
oxidative stress in patients with idiopathic infertility. Archives of gynecology and obstetrics 2006;274: 
339-344.  
Wang LT, Wang CX, Sun HL, Wang X, Li XF, Wang YL,  Li QC. Effect of BMI on blood value of patients on 
HCG day with IUI treatment. BMC Womens Health  2020;20: 105.  
Witkin SS, Bierhals K, Linhares I, Normand N, Dieterle S, Neuer A. Genetic polymorphism in an inflammasome component, cervical mycoplasma detection and female infertility in women 
undergoing in vitro fertilization. Journal of reproductive immunology  2010;84: 171- 175.  
Witkin SS, Bongiovanni AM, Berkeley A, Ledger WJ, Toth A. Detection and characterization of immune complexes in the circulation of i nfertile women. Fertility and sterility  1984;42: 384- 388.  
Yasin AL, Yasin AL, Basha WS. The Epidemiology of Anti -Sperm Antibodies Among Couples with 
Unexplained Infertility in North West Bank, Palestine. Journal of clinical and diagnostic research : JCDR  
2016;10: Qc01- 03. 
Zhang J, Mu X, Xia Y, Martin FL, Hang W, Liu L, Tian M, Huang Q, Shen H. Metabolomic analysis reveals a unique urinary pattern in normozoospermic infertile men. Journal of proteome research  2014;13: 
3088- 3099.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  77 
III. Treatment  
 
III.0 When to start treatment  
It is known that couples presenting with Unexplained Infertility (UI) can achieve spontaneous 
pregnancy. Models have been developed to predict the chance of spontaneous pregnancy, such as the 
Hunault model (Hunault et al., 2004) . Typically, such models use a validated set of prognostic factors 
shown to impact the chance of spontaneous pregnancy and consider the weight or importance of the prognostic facto rs. The most important prognostic factors are age, duration of infertility, previous 
treatment and previous pregnancy.  
It is however important to note that none of the currently available prediction models are fully evolved. 
The downside of the Hunault mo del for example, is that it has only been validated for the Canadian and 
the Dutch population, and more importantly, that because of the way it has been developed, it can only 
be used once: at the point of diagnosis, when couples first present with inferti lity.  
More evolved dynamic models which can be used more than once to provide updated estimates of chances of natural conception over 6 - 12 months have been developed (McLernon et al., 2019, van 
Eekelen et al., 2017) . Although these have undergone initial validation in Dutch and Scottish 
populations, none are  in common use as they have yet to be validated using data from other settings 
or implemented in clinical practice.  
As shown in the next two chapters, the perception that a treatment is either effective or not effective does not apply to UI. Namely, one RCT comparing ovarian stimulation and IUI to expectant management 
in good -prognosis patients found no difference in l ive birth rate (Steures et al., 2006) , while another 
RCT investigating the same treatment comparison in poor -prognosis patients reported a striking benefit 
of treatment (ovarian stimulation and IUI) over exp ectant management (Farquhar et al., 2018) . 
Therefore, young women with a short duration of infertility have a high progn ostic index and the added 
benefit of active treatment is small. However, with longer duration of infertility and older age, the 
prognostic index decreases and the benefit of active treatment increases.  
Prognostic models can help the decision- making on a treatment plan in couples with unexplained 
infertility, however, it is also important to take patient preferences into account when deciding on 
treatment options.  
 
REFERENCES  
Farquhar CM, Liu E, Armstrong S, Arroll N, Lensen S, Brown J. Intrauterine insemination with ovarian 
stimulation versus expectant management for unexplained infertility (TUI): a pragmatic, open -label, 
randomised, controlled, two -centre trial. Lancet  2018;3 91: 441 -450.  
Hunault CC, Habbema JD, Eijkemans MJ, Collins JA, Evers JL, te Velde ER. Two new prediction rules for 
spontaneous pregnancy leading to live birth among subfertile couples, based on the synthesis of three previous models. Human reproduction (Ox ford, England)  2004;19: 2019 -2026.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  78 
McLernon DJ, Lee AJ, Maheshwari A, van Eekelen R, van Geloven N, Putter H, Eijkemans MJ, van der 
Steeg JW, van der Veen F, Steyerberg EW  et al.  Predicting the chances of having a baby with or 
without treatment at different time points in couples with unexplained subfertility. Human 
reproduction (Oxford, England)  2019;34: 1126- 1138.  
Steures P, van der Steeg JW, Hompes PG, Habbema JD, Eijkemans MJ, Broekmans FJ, Verhoeve HR, Bossuyt PM, van der Veen F, Mol BW. Intrauterine insemination with controlled ovarian hyperstimulation versus expectant management for couples with unexplained subfertility and an intermediate prognosis: a randomised clinical tri al. Lancet  2006;368: 216- 221.  
van Eekelen R, Scholten I, Tjon -Kon-Fat RI, van der Steeg JW, Steures P, Hompes P, van Wely M, van 
der Veen F, Mol BW, Eijkemans MJ  et al.  Natural conception: repeated predictions over time. Human 
reproduction (Oxford, England ) 2017;32: 346- 353.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  79 
III.1 Expectant management  
PICO  QUESTION : WHAT IS THE VALUE OF EXPECTANT MANAGEMENT COMPARED TO ACTIVE 
TREATMENT FOR PATIENTS WITH UI?   
For this chapter, the GDG considered timed intercourse without hormonal stimulation part of expectant 
management and not as an active treatment, hence the comparison of timed intercourse without 
hormonal stimulation v ersus  expectant management is not included in the guideline.  
CLOMIPHENE CITRATE WITH TIMED INTERCOURS E (+/- OVULATION TRIGGER ) VS. EXPECTANT MANAGEMENT  
Evidence  
One RCT including 385 patients with unexplained infertility ( UI), compared six months of expectant 
management (n= 167) with clomiphene citrate  (CC) and timed intercourse (n=1 73). Cumulative birth 
rate was 1 6% (26/167) with expectant management compared to 1 3% (2 3/173) with active treatment. 
Compared with expectant management, the adjusted hazard ratio ( HR) for the time to a pregnancy 
leading to a liv e birth was 0.83 (99% CI 0.42- 1.63)  (Bhattacharya et al., 2008) . The cost-benefit study 
using this data by the same group  also found no cost -benefit of clomiphene citrate over  expectant 
management  (Wordsworth et al., 2011) .  
In a four -arm RCT, including 155 couples with UI, timed intercourse with CC for ovarian stimulatio n 
(OS) , with or without hCG for final oocyte maturation, was compared to timed intercourse and placebo, 
with or without hCG for final oocyte maturation. Pregnancy rates were significantly higher after timed 
intercourse with CC and hCG compared to placebo without hCG (7/37 (19%) vs. 0/36 (0%) (Fisch et al., 
1989) . 
 
LETROZOLE WITH TIMED INTERCOURSE (+/- OVULATION TRIGGER ) VS. EXPECTANT MANAGEMENT  
Evidence  
No relevant studies were identified comparing letrozole with timed intercourse (+/ - ovulation trigger) 
with expectant management in couples with UI .  
 
GONADOTROPINS WITH TIMED INTERCOURSE (+/- OVULATION TRIGGER ) VS. EXPECTANT MANAGEMENT  
Evidence  
No releva nt studies were identified comparing OS with gonadotropins and timed intercourse (+/ - 
ovulation trigger) with expectant management in couples with UI.  
 
INTRA -UTERINE INSEMINATION (IUI)  IN A NATURAL CYCLE VS. EXPECTANT MANAGEMENT  
Evidence  
One RCT compared IUI in a natural cycle with expectant management in couples with UI. Live birth rate 
was not significantly different between IUI and expectant management (38/165 (23%) vs. 26/167 (16%) 
(Bhattacharya et al., 2008) .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  80 
OVARIAN STIMULATION WITH IUI VS. EXPECTANT MANAGEMENT  
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis comp ared OS combined with IUI and expectant management in 
couples with UI.  The OR for c umulative  live birth rate  in couples with poor prognosis  was 4.48 (95% CI 
2.00-10.01, 1 RCT, 201  women ). The OR for live birth rate  in couples with moderate prognosis  was 0.82 
(95% CI 0.45- 1.49; 1 RCT, 253 women ). The OR for m ultiple pregnancy rate was 3.01 (95% CI 0.47 -19.28; 
2 RCTs, 454 women ) (Ayeleke et al., 2020) .  
 
IVF VS. EXPECTANT MANAGEMENT  
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis  compared IVF with expectant management. The OR for live birth 
with 1 cycle of IVF compared to three  months of expectant  management was 22.0 (95% CI 2.56- 189.38, 
51 women, 1 RCT) . The OR for clinical pregnancy with 1 cycle of IVF compared to  3-6 months of 
expectant  management was 3.24 (95% CI 1.07- 9.80, 2 RCTs, 86 women ). Although the evidence is of 
low quality and insufficient, IVF is presently associated with a higher live birth rate than expectant 
management  (Pandian et al., 2015) .  
In a retrospective cohort study, 635 couples with UI and female age ≥39 years  were included. Couples 
undergoing immediate IVF treatment (n= 359) were compared to couples waiting for about 1 year to 
start IVF treatment (n=276). No significant difference was found in live birth rate between immediate 
IVF treatment and waiting for abo ut a year (70/359 (19% , 11 natural conception and 59 after IVF) vs. 
57/276 (20.7%, 37 natural conception and 20 after IVF) (Carosso et al., 2022) . 
 
OVERALL RECOMMENDATION  
Recommendation  
IUI with ovarian stimulation is recommended as a first -line 
treatment for couples with unexplained infertility.  Strong  ⊕ 
 
The GDG advices to base the decision to start active 
treatment on prognosis in couples with unexplained 
infertility.  GPP  
 
Justification  
The first mentioned RCT (Bhattacharya et al., 2008)  is by far the largest and latest and shows no 
significant evidence that CC is either more efficient or cheaper than expectant treatment. Similar 
findings were reported for IUI in a natural cycle versus expectant management. Although only one RCT  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  81 
is available, it is of sufficient quality and size to suggest that the live birth rate following IUI in a natural 
cycle is not significantly superior to that following expectant management.  
The weight of evidence strongly suggests that IUI with OS is recommended in preference to expectant 
management, particularly for couples with poor prognosis. Although IUI involves obviously more 
invasive treatment, the difference in live birth rates between th ese two alternatives provides 
justification for its use. The latest (mainly European) studies suggest that only a low- dose regimen 
should be employed when using gonadotrophins  for OS , since it can greatly reduce the multiple 
pregnancy rate without signific antly reducing the live birth rate.  
For the comparison of IVF to expectant management, the evidence is scarce. The current evidence 
seems to point towards a higher efficacy for IVF than expectant management, leading to the conclusion 
that IVF is recommende d over expectant management. The GDG regards this is as indirect evidence for 
the effectiveness of IVF and regards it unlikely that direct evidence from trials comparing IVF vs. 
expectant management will emerge in the future due to several factors. These i nclude whether 
equipoise exists for such a trial is controversial, secondly the proper comparator of IVF is unclear, i.e., how many cycles of expectant management. Also, IVF comes with high physical and psychological 
burdens. In the absence of direct evide nce for effectiveness and or additional benefit of IVF in different 
patient profiles, the GDG opinion is that the decision to use IVF should be based on patient 
characteristics and preferences.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and eviden ce tables are available in Annex 6, Annex 7 and Annex 8 
(question III.1).  
 
REFERENCES  
Ayeleke RO, Asseler JD, Cohlen BJ, Veltman -Verhulst SM. Intra -uterine insemination for unexplained 
subfertility. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews  2020;3: Cd001838.  
Bhattacharya S, Harrild K, Mollison J, Wordsworth S, Tay C, Harrold A, McQueen D, Lyall H, Johnston L, 
Burrage J  et al.  Clomifene citrate  or unstimulated intrauterine insemination compared with expectant 
management for unexplained infertility: pragmatic randomised controlled trial. BMJ (Clinical research ed) 2008;337: a716.  
Carosso AR, van Eekelen R, Revelli A, Canosa S, Mercaldo N, Stura I , Cosma S, Scarafia C, Benedetto C, 
Gennarelli G. Expectant Management Before In vitro Fertilization in Women Aged 39 or Above and 
Unexplained Infertility Does Not Decrease Live Birth Rates Compared to Immediate Treatment. 
Reproductive sciences (Thousand O aks, Calif)  2022;29: 1232- 1240.  
Fisch P, Casper RF, Brown SE, Wrixon W, Collins JA, Reid RL, Simpson C. Unexplained infertility: evaluation of treatment with clomiphene citrate and human chorionic gonadotropin. Fertility and sterility  1989;51: 828- 833.  
Pandian Z, Gibreel A, Bhattacharya S. In vitro fertilisation for unexplained subfertility. The Cochrane 
database of systematic reviews  2015;2015: Cd003357.  
Wordsworth S, Buchanan J, Mollison J, Harrild K, Robertson L, Tay C, Harrold A, McQueen D, Lyall H, Johnston L  et al.  Clomifene citrate and intrauterine insemination as first- line treatments for 
unexplained infertility: are they cost- effective? Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2011;26: 369-
375.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  82 
III.2 Active treatment  
PICO  QUESTION : IF ACTIVE TREATMENT IS PURSUED , WHICH TYPE OF ACTIVE TREATMENT FOR UI?   
TIMED INTERCOURSE  
Clomiphene citrate and timed intercourse vs. letrozole and timed intercourse  
Evidence  
In a RCT, including 172 women with unexplained infertility  (UI), timed intercourse with CC for ovarian 
stimulation (OS) was compared to letrozole. Comparing CC to letrozole, no significant differences were 
noted in ongoing pregnancy rate (7/86 (8.1%) vs. 11/86 (12.7%))  or multiple pregnancy rate  (2/86 
(2.3%) vs. 0/86 (0%)) (Harira, 2018) . 
In another RCT, including 270 women with UI, timed intercourse with CC for OS was compared to 
letrozole. Clinical pregnancy rate was significantly higher in the letrozole group (23.07 vs . 10.68%). Also, 
multiple pregnancy rate was significantly higher in the CC group (21.42 vs . 3.33 %) (Ibrahim et al., 2012) . 
 
Gonadotropins and timed intercourse vs. clomiphene citrate or letrozole and timed 
intercourse  
Evidence  
No relevant studies  were identified  comparing timed intercourse with letrozole to OS and IUI in couples 
with UI.  
 
TIMED INTERCOURSE VS . IUI IN A NATURAL CYCLE  
Clomiphene citrate and timed intercourse vs. IUI in a natural cycle  
Evidence  
In a 3 -arm RCT, expectant management was  compared with CC and timed intercourse and  IUI in a 
natural cycle. Compared to CC with timed intercourse, treatment with IUI resulted in a higher live birth 
rate (13% (23/173) vs. 23% (38/165))  (Bhattacharya et al., 2008) . However, the RCT was not powered 
to compare the two active t reatment arm s to each other .  
 
Letrozole and timed intercourse vs. IUI in a natural cycle  
Evidence  
No relevant studies were identified comparing timed intercourse with letrozole to IUI in a natural cycle 
in couples with UI.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  83 
Gonadotropins and timed intercourse vs. IUI in a natural cycle  
Evidence  
No relevant studies  were identified  comparing timed intercourse with gonadotropins to IUI in a natural 
cycle in couples with UI .  
 
TIMED INTERCOURSE VS . OVARIAN STIMULATION AND IUI  
Clomiphene and timed intercourse vs. ovarian stimulation and IUI  
Evidence  
In a RCT, including 113 couples with UI, couples were randomi sed to either receive CC and timed 
intercourse or CC and IUI. Conception rates were not statistically different between timed intercourse 
and IUI (28/69 (41%) vs. 8/44 (18%)) (Agarwal and Mittal, 2004) . 
 
Letrozole and timed intercourse vs. ovarian stimulation and IUI  
Evidence  
No relevant studies were identified comparing timed intercourse with letrozole to OS and IUI in couples 
with UI.  
 
Gonadotropins and timed intercourse vs. ovarian stimulation and IUI  
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis, including two  RCTs, compared OS  with timed intercourse  to OS 
and IUI. It is uncertain whether OS  and IUI results in a higher live birth rate than OS with gonadotropins 
and timed intercourse ( OR 1.59, 95% CI 0.88- 2.88, 2 RCT, 208 women ). It is uncertain whether OS  and 
IUI results in a lower multiple pregnancy rate (OR 1.6 1, 95% CI 0. 44-5.89, 2 RCT, 208 women) than OS 
with gonadotropins and timed intercourse  (Ayeleke et al., 2020) . 
 
IUI IN A NA TURAL CYCLE  VS. OVARIAN STIMULATION AND IUI 
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis, including four RCTs, compared OS with IUI to IUI in a natural 
cycle. Live birth rate was higher with OS and IUI compared to IUI in a natural cycle ( OR 2.07, 95% CI 
1.22- 3.50, 4 RCT, 396 women ). It is uncertain whether OS and IUI result in a higher multiple pregnancy 
rate (OR 3.00 95% CI 0.11- 78.27, 1 RCT, 39 women) (Ayeleke et al., 2020) . 
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  84 
IUI VS. IVF 
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis compared IVF with IUI in a natural cycle. Live birth rate was 
higher with IVF compared to unstimulated IUI ( OR 2.47, 95% CI 1.19 -5.12, 2  RCT, 156 women ). There 
was no evidence of a difference in  multiple pregnancy rate  (OR 1.03, 95% CI 0.04 -27.29, 1 RCT, 44 
women ) (Pandian et al., 2015) . 
Another  systematic review and meta -analysis, including 8  RCTs with 1497 couples with UI , compared 
efficacy and safety of IVF and IUI with OS (Nandi et al., 2022) . Live birth rate was significantly higher 
after IVF compared to IUI with OS (RR 1.54 , 95% CI 1. 04-2.28, 7 RCT, 1 391 women ). No significant 
difference between groups was found for  multiple pregnancy rate (RR 0.83 , 95% CI 0.50 -1.38 , 6 RCT, 
507 women ) or OHSS (RR 1.77, 95% CI 0.49 -6.37, 3 RCT, 981 women ). In a sensitivity analysis including 
only studies with women without previous treatment, no significant difference in live birth rate was 
found in women <38 years  (RR 1.01 , 95% CI 0.88 -1.15, 3 RCT, 925 women ). However, in women ≥ 38 
years, live birth rate was sig nificantly higher after IVF treatment (RR  2.15 , 95% CI 1.16- 4.00 , 1 RCT, 154 
women ) (Goldman et al ., 2014, Nandi et al., 2022) . 
 
OVERALL RECOMMENDATION  
Recommendation  
IUI with ovarian stimulation is recommended as a first -line 
treatment for couples with unexplained infertility  Strong  ⊕ 
 
To avoid multiple pregnancies and OHSS, care is needed by 
using gonadotrophin treatment only in a low -dose regimen 
with adequate monitoring.  GPP  
 
IVF is probably not recommended over IUI  with ovarian 
stimulation  in couples with unexplained infertility.  Conditional  ⊕ 
 
It is expected that the decision to use IVF is individualized by 
patient characteristics such as age, duration of infertility, 
previous treatment and previous pregnancy.   GPP  
 
Justification  
There is a lack of high -quality RCTs on the topic. Clomiphene, letrozole, gonadotrophins and IUI on their 
own are not effective compared to expectant management or IUI in a natural cycle. On the other hand,  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  85 
IUI in combination with OS  is not inferior to IVF . Furthermore, the additional costs and risks of IVF need 
to be considered. Therefore, IUI in a stimulated cycle for three to six cycles is viewed as the first- line 
treatment in couples with unexplained infertility. This is taking into account low- dose gonadotropins 
for OS to avoid a high number of growing follicles, which can increase the risk of multiple pregnancies.  
The decision to use IVF is individualized by patient characteristics, such as age, duration of infertility , 
previous treatments and previou s pregnancy. Current evidence shows that in treatment -naïve patients, 
IVF is as effective as IUI with OS . However, as the invasiveness of the procedure and the costs are 
considerably lower with IUI, the GDG concluded that OS  and IUI is recommended as the f irst-line 
treatment.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 , Annex 7 and Annex 8 
(question III.2). 
 
PICO  QUESTION : WHAT IS THE VALUE OF IVF VERSUS ICSI?   
Evidence  
An RCT, including 60 couples with UI, compared IVF with ICSI. There were no differences in live birth 
rate between the IVF and ICSI groups ( 14/30 ( 46.7% ) vs. 15/30 ( 50% )) (Foong et al., 2006) .  
A subgroup analysis of a large RCT included 382 couples with UI, randomly assigned to IVF (n=183) and 
ICSI (n=199), found no significant difference in live birth rate between groups (35.5% (65/183) vs. 36.7% 
(73/199), RR 1.03 (95% CI 0.79 -1.35))  (Dang et al., 2021) . 
A subgroup analysis of an RCT included 100 couples with UI. There was no difference i n pregnancy rates 
between IVF and ICSI (32% vs. 38%, RR 0.83, 95% CI 0.48- 1.45)  (Bhattacharya et al., 2001) . 
Recommendation  
ICSI is not recommended over conventional IVF  in 
couples with unexplained infertility .  Strong  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Evidence from RCTs comparing IVF with ICSI in coupes with UI showed comparable live birth rates. 
Furthermore, there is substantial evidence from RCTs showing no difference in live birth rate between 
IVF and ICSI for non -male factor infertility (Bosch et al., 2020, Dang et al., 2021) . Given this overriding 
evidence, and the additional resources and costs associated, ICSI is not routinely recommended for UI. 
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 , Annex 7 and Annex 8 
(question III.2). 
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  86 
REFERENCES  
Agarwal S, Mittal S. A randomised prospective trial of intrauterine insemination versus timed 
intercou rse in superovulated cycles with clomiphene. The Indian journal of medical research  
2004;120: 519- 522.  
Ayeleke RO, Asseler JD, Cohlen BJ, Veltman -Verhulst SM. Intra -uterine insemination for unexplained 
subfertility. The Cochrane database of systematic revi ews 2020;3: Cd001838.  
Bhattacharya S, Hamilton MP, Shaaban M, Khalaf Y, Seddler M, Ghobara T, Braude P, Kennedy R, 
Rutherford A, Hartshorne G  et al.  Conventional in -vitro fertilisation versus intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection for the treatment of non -male -factor infertility: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet  
2001;357: 2075- 2079.  
Bhattacharya S, Harrild K, Mollison J, Wordsworth S, Tay C, Harrold A,  McQueen D, Lyall H, Johnston L, 
Burrage J  et al.  Clomifene citrate or unstimulated intrauterine insemination compared with expectant 
management for unexplained infertility: pragmatic randomised controlled trial. BMJ (Clinical research 
ed) 2008;337: a716.  
Bosch E, Espinós JJ, Fabregues F, Fontes J, García -Velasco J, Llácer J, Requena A, Checa MA, Bellver J. 
ALWAYS ICSI? A SWOT analysis. Journal of assisted reproduction and genetics 2020;37: 2081- 2092.  
Dang VQ, Vuong LN, Luu TM, Pham TD, Ho TM, Ha AN, Truong  BT, Phan AK, Nguyen DP, Pham TN  et 
al. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection versus conventional in -vitro fertilisation in couples with infertility 
in whom the male partner has normal total sperm count and motility: an open -label, randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet  2021;397: 1554- 1563.  
Foong SC, Fleetham JA, O'Keane JA, Scott SG, Tough SC, Greene CA. A prospective randomized trial of conventional in vitro fertilization versus intracytoplasmic sperm injection in unexplained infertility. Journal of assisted reproduction and genetics 2006;23: 137- 140.  
Goldman MB, Thornton KL, Ryley D, Alper MM, Fung JL, Hornstein MD, Reindollar RH. A randomized 
clinical trial to determine optimal infertility treatment in older couples: the Forty and Over Treatment 
Trial (FORT -T). Fertility and sterility  2014;101: 1574 -1581.e1571 -1572.  
Harira M. Use of Letrozole versus clomiphene -estradiol for treating infertile women with unexplained 
infertility not responding well to clomiphene alone, comparative study. Middle east fertility society 
journal  2018;23: 384- 387.  
Ibrahim MI, Moustafa RA, Abdel -Azeem AA. Letrozole versus clomiphene citrate for superovulation in 
Egyptian women with unexplained infertility: a randomized controlled trial. Archives of gynecology 
and obstetrics  2012;286: 1581 -1587.  
Nandi A, Raja G, Whit e D, Tarek ET. Intrauterine insemination + controlled ovarian hyperstimulation 
versus in vitro fertilisation in unexplained infertility: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Archives 
of gynecology and obstetrics 2022;305: 805- 824.  
Pandian Z, Gibreel A, B hattacharya S. In vitro fertilisation for unexplained subfertility. The Cochrane 
database of systematic reviews  2015;2015: Cd003357.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  87 
III.3 Mechanical -surgical procedures  
PICO  QUESTION : WHAT IS THE VALUE OF MECHANICAL -SURGICAL P ROCEDURES ?  
RESECTION OF POLYPS OR FIBROIDS  
Evidence  
Spontaneous conception  
In an RCT, 200 women with at least two years of unexplained infertility (UI) and without suspicion of 
uterine abnormalities were randomly assigned to have office microhysteroscopy or not. These couples 
were trying to conceive spontaneously. In the microhysteroscopy group, when pathology was detected, 
treatment was done, including h ysteroscopic resection of endometrial polyps and submucous fibroids, 
and excision of a uterine septum. In 70% of patients no uterine abnormality was found. The primary 
outcome of live birth was not reported. In favour of micro hysteroscopy the o ngoing PR  was 43/100 vs.  
10/100 (RR 4.30 , 95%  CI 2.29 -8.07), clinical PR  was 57/100 vs. 15/100 ( RR 3.80 , 95%  CI 2.31- 6.24) . No 
adverse events were reported  (Seyam et al., 2015) .  
In a RCT, 94 women with UI (≥1 year of fertility -oriented intercourse , normal ovarian function, normal 
hysterosalpingography, a normal post- coital test and normal semen analysis of the partner) but with  
fibro ids on transvaginal ultrasound , were assigned to have the fibroids removed or not. If there was an 
intramural fibroid <4. 0 cm this was removed by laparotomy and in case of a submucous fibroid this was 
removed hysteroscopically. It is uncertain if surgical removal of fibroids improved clinical pregnancy 
rates (OR 2.44, 95% CI 0.97- 6.17). There was insufficient evidence to show a benefit of fibroid removal 
on miscarriage rates (OR 1.54, 95% CI 0.47 -5.00) (Casini et al., 2006) . 
Recomm endation  
Hysteroscopy for the detection and possible correction of 
intrauterine abnormalities not seen at routine imaging is 
not recommended.  Strong  ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification  
There is insufficient evidence on the effectiveness of hysteroscopic surgery in women with unexplained infertility. The current evidence does not support the correction of these minor intrauterine 
abnormalities Reported randomised trials are at serious risk of bias and other studies lack control 
groups. In the setting of first IVF cycles, no significant difference in live birth rate was found (RR 1.20; 
95% CI 0.96 -1.49, 2 RCT, 953 women) (Kamath et al., 2019) . Surgery is only advised in a well -controll ed 
research setting (preferably randomised trials) in women with well -defined definitions for abnormality 
and clinical outcome.  
For treatment of uterine fibroids in women with otherwise unexplained infertility there is insufficient 
evidence to make any recommendation.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  88 
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6 , Annex 7  and Annex 8  
(question III.3) . 
 
TUBAL FLUSHING  
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis, including 15 RCTs and 3864 women with subfertility, 
investigated the effect of tubal flushing with oil -soluble contrast media (OSCM)  or water -soluble 
contrast media (WSCM)  on reproductive outcomes  (Wang et al., 2020) .  
Oil soluble contrast media (OSCM) versu s no flushing  
OSCM may increase the odds of live birth (OR 3.27, 95% CI 1.57 -6.85, 3 RCTs, 204 women) and  clinical 
pregnancy (OR 3.54, 95% CI 2.08- 6.02, 4 RCTs, 506 women)  (Wang et al., 2020) .  
Water soluble contrast media (WSCM) versus no flushing   
It is uncertain whether flushing with WSCM increases live birth rate (OR 1.13, 95% CI 0.67 -1.91, 1 RCT, 
334 women). It is uncertain whether flushing with WSCM increases clinical pregnancy rate (OR 1.14, 
95% CI 0.71- 1.84, 1 RCT, 334 women) (Wang et al., 2020) . 
Oil versus water  soluble contrast media   
Live birth rate was reported in 3 RCTs. In two RCTs, a higher live birth rate was reported with OSCM (OR 
1.64 95% CI 1.27- 2.11, 1119 women; OR 3.45, 95% CI 1.97- 6.03, 398 women). In one RCT, no evidence 
of a difference between grou ps was found (OR 0.92, 95% CI 0.60 -1.40, 533 women). Tubal flushing with 
OSCM probably increases the odds of clinical pregnancy compared to WSCM (OR 1.42, 95% CI 1.10-
1.85, 6 RCTs, 2598 women). Flushing with OSCM probably increased the odds in intravasatio n (OR 5.00, 
95% CI 2.25 -11.12, 4 RCTs, 1912 women). No difference in infection or haemorrhage between OSCM 
and WSCM and no serious adverse events reported (Wang et al., 2020) . 
The largest trial comparing oil versus water soluble contrast media involved 1119 (OSCM: n=557 vs. 
WSCM: n=562)  infertile women undergoing HSG  with a 5 year follow- up . In the OSCM group, 39.8% of 
the women needed no other treatment, 34.6% underwent IUI and 25.6% had IVF/ICSI in the 5 years following HSG. In the WSCM group, 35.0% of the women had no other treatment, 34.2% had IUI and 
30.8% had IVF/ICSI in the 5 years following HSG (p=0.113) . During the 5 -year period there was a 
significantly higher ongoing pregnancy  rate (RR 1.07, 95% CI 1.00 -1.14) and live birth rate (RR 1.11, 95% 
CI 1.03 -1.20) and a shorter time to ongoing pregnancy (10.0 months (95% C I 8.5 -11.5) vs . 13.7 months 
(95% CI 11.7 -15.8) ), in favour of OSCM  compared with WSCM  used at HSG (van Welie et al., 2021) . 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  89 
Recommendation  
HSG (i.e. , tubal flushing) with an oil-soluble contrast 
medium  is preferable over a water -soluble contrast 
medium.  Risks and benefits of tubal flushing with oil -
soluble contrast medium should be discussed with all 
couples with unexplained infertility.  Conditional  ⊕⊕ 
Justification  
Current evidence shows that HSG performed with OSCM is preferred over WSCM. This may lead to 
more clinical pregnancies and live births at no extra cost. Part of the evidence for this question was 
derived from ovulatory infertile women with diagnosis other than UI. However, the largest trial by 
Dreyer et al., 2017, included 1119 women with UI (Dreyer et al., 2017) .  
Risks of tubal flushing with oil -based contrast are low  with the most frequently reported complication 
being intravasation. Since the introduction of oil -based contrast in 1928 serious consequences of 
embolism have been reported in four cases, emphasising the importance of performing HSG’s under 
fluorescence guidance in order to abandon the procedure in a timely manner (Roest et  al., 2021) . 
Further information  
Details o f the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6, Annex 7 and Annex 8 
(question III.3).  
MINIMAL TO MILD ENDOMETRIOSIS  
Evidence  
In a Cochrane systematic review evaluating  the role of laparoscopic surgery versus diagnostic 
laparoscopy in women with minimal or mild endometriosis, results from 3 randomised trials were 
pooled (Bafort et al., 2020) . There was an improvement in clinical pregnancy rate  with laparoscopy  (OR 
1.89, 95% CI 1.25 -2.86, 3 RCTs, 528 participants). There was insufficient data on the safety of the 
intervention.  
Conclusion  
If incidentally minimal to mild endometriosis is found  at laparoscopy , this is not further considered 
unexplained infertility by the GDG.  
Justification  
The GDG recommends against routine laparoscopy. If incidentally minimal to mild endometriosis is 
found , this is considered outside the scope of this guideline . The reader is referred to the ESHRE 
guideline on Endometriosis  (Becker et al., 2022) .  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evid ence tables are available in Annex 6 and Annex 7 (question III.3) . 
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  90 
ENDOMETRIAL INJURY /SCRATCH ING 
Evidence  
Timed intercourse  
A recent randomised trial in women with UI included 220 women who were randomized. Endometrial 
biopsy  or placebo procedure  took place between D1 -12 of the menstrual cycle; second attempt was 
allowed if the first was unsuccessful. Couples had regular unprot ected sexual intercourse for 3 cycles. 
There was no difference in the outcomes of live birth  (10/113 (9%) vs. 7/107 (7%); OR 1.39, 95% CI 
0.50- 4.03) , ongoing pregnancy (10/113 (9%) vs. 7/107 (7%); OR 1.39, 95% CI 0.50 -4.03) or  miscarriage  
(2/113 (2%) vs. 1/107 (1%); OR 20.01, 95% CI 0.19 -43.82)  (Wong et al., 2022) .  
An RCT with 234 women with UI undergoing timed intercourse with OS , randomised women to receive 
endometrial biopsy  on the day of LH surge detection or mock  biopsy . Ongoing pregnancy rate  was 
significantly higher in women receiving endometrial scratch (17/114 (14.9%) vs. 6/103 (5.8%) ; OR: 2.83 
95% CI 1.07 -7.49)). There was no significant difference in miscarriage  rate (3 (17.64%) vs. 1 (14.28%))  
(Parsanezhad et al., 2013) . 
IUI 
In an RCT with 96  women  suffering from infertility of unknown cause undergoing IUI with OS , women 
received an  endometrial scratch in the midluteal phase (days 21 –26 of the cycle, n=54) or no 
endometrial injury (n=42). There was no statistical difference i n ongoing pregnancy rate (4/54 (10%) vs. 
2/42 (4.76%)) between women undergoing endometrial scratch or not. Multiple pregnancies and 
miscarriages were not observed (Yildiz et al., 2021) . 
In a randomised trial , 150 women with UI and an indication for IUI were randomised between scratch 
on day 6 -7 of their treatment cycle or no scratch. Couples received up to 3 cycles of IUI. There was no 
difference in ongoing pregnancy rate (6/75 (8.0%) vs. 8/75 (10.7%); RR 0.75, 95% CI 0.27- 2.06) or 
multiple pregnancy rate (0/75 vs. 1/75) (Ghuman et al., 2020) . 
An RCT with 120  women  suffering from infertility of unknown cause undergoing IUI with OS , 
randomised women to receive an endometrial injury on cycle day 3 or no endometrial injury. There 
were no significant differences in clinical pregnancy rate (11/59 (18.6%) vs. 10/59 (16.9% )) or 
miscarriage rate (1/59 (1.7%) vs. 3/59 (5.1%))  between women undergoing endometrial injury or not  
(Jafarabadi et al., 2020) . 
An RCT with 80 women suffering from infertility of unknown cause undergoing IUI with OS , randomised 
women to receive endometrial scratch in the midluteal phase (days 21 –25 of the cycle) or no 
endometrial injury. There were no significant differences in clinical pregnancy rate (11/40 (27.5%) vs. 
5/40 (12.5%) ) between women undergoing endometrial scratch or not (Senocak et al., 2017) .  
An RCT with 154 women with UI, randomised patients to  undergo OS and IUI with o r without 
endometrial scratch on the day of final oocyte maturation . Clinical pregnancy rate was significantly 
higher in women receiving endometrial injury compared to controls (30/77 (39%) vs. 14/77 (18.2%)). 
There was no statistical difference in multiple pregnancy rate (2/77 (6.7%) vs. 1/77 (7.1%)) or abortion 
rate (5/30 (16.7%) vs. 3/14 (21.4%))  (Maged et al., 2016) .   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  91 
Recommendation  
Endometrial scratching should not be offered  for 
unexplained infertility . Strong  ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification  
In addition to established therapies for UI  such as IUI or IVF, endometrial scratching or injury has been 
proposed to increase the probability of pregnancy. It is hypothesised that local mechanical endometrial 
injury may enhance the receptivity of the endo metrium and facilitate embryo implantation through 
inflammatory and immunological responses  (Dekel et al., 2010, Gnainsky et al., 2015, Gnainsky et al., 
2010, Granot et al., 2012) .  
Timing of injury of  the endometrium differed in the studies. In some studies, scratching was perf ormed 
in the luteal phase of the cycle preceding the treatment cycle (Senocak et al., 2017, Yildiz et al., 2021)  
in others, in the proliferative phase of the treatment cycle (Ghuman et al., 2020, Jafarabadi et al., 2020, 
Maged et al., 2016, Parsanezhad et al., 2013, Wong et al., 2022) . In most studies , the endometrium was 
injured by taking a biopsy but in two an embryo transfer or biopsy catheter was used and moved up 
and down to injure the endometrium (Maged et al., 2016, Yildiz et al., 2021) .  
Although it is a low- cost procedure, which can be done at the outpatient clinic without anaesthetics, 
the evidence does not show better pregnancy outcome if scratching was performed before intercourse 
or before IUI in couples with UI.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6, Annex 7 and Annex 8 
(question III.3).  
 
 
REFERENCES  
Bafort C, Beebeejaun Y, Tomassetti C, Bosteels J, Duffy JM. Laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis. 
The Cochrane database of systematic r eviews  2020;10: Cd011031.  
Becker CM, Bokor A, Heikinheimo O, Horne A, Jansen F, Kiesel L, King K, Kvaskoff M, Nap A, Petersen K  
et al.  ESHRE guideline: endometriosis. Human reproduction open 2022;2022: hoac009.  
Casini ML, Rossi F, Agostini R, Unfer V. Effe cts of the position of fibroids on fertility. Gynecological 
endocrinology : the official journal of the International Society of Gynecological Endocrinology  
2006;22: 106- 109.  
Dekel N, Gnainsky Y, Granot I, Mor G. Inflammation and implantation. American jou rnal of 
reproductive immunology (New York, NY : 1989)  2010;63: 17- 21. 
Dreyer K, van Rijswijk J, Mijatovic V, Goddijn M, Verhoeve HR, van Rooij IAJ, Hoek A, Bourdrez P, Nap 
AW, Rijnsaardt- Lukassen HGM  et al.  Oil-Based or Water -Based Contrast for Hysterosalpingography in 
Infertile Women. The New England journal of medicine  2017;376: 2043- 2052.  
Ghuman NK, Raikar S, Singh P, Gothwal M, Yadav G. Improving reproductive outcomes of intrauterine 
insemination: Does e ndometrial scratch injury help? A randomised controlled trial. European journal 
of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology  2020;253: 225- 231.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  92 
Gnainsky Y, Granot I, Aldo P, Barash A, Or Y, Mor G, Dekel N. Biopsy -induced inflammatory conditions 
impr ove endometrial receptivity: the mechanism of action. Reproduction (Cambridge, England)  
2015;149: 75- 85. 
Gnainsky Y, Granot I, Aldo PB, Barash A, Or Y, Schechtman E, Mor G, Dekel N. Local injury of the 
endometrium induces an inflammatory response that prom otes successful implantation. Fertility and 
sterility  2010;94: 2030- 2036.  
Granot I, Gnainsky Y, Dekel N. Endometrial inflammation and effect on implantation improvement and 
pregnancy outcome. Reproduction (Cambridge, England)  2012;144: 661- 668.  
Jafarabadi MN, Bagheri M, Ebrahimi Z, Shariat M, Haghollahi F. Endometrial scratching effect on 
pregnancy rate in intrauterine insemination cycles: a randomized controlled trial. International journal 
of women's health and reproduction sciences 2020;8: 85- 89. 
Kamath MS, Bosteels J, D'Hooghe TM, Seshadri S, Weyers S, Mol BWJ, Broekmans FJ, Sunkara SK. Screening hysteroscopy in subfertile women and women undergoing assisted reproduction. The 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews  2019;4: Cd012856.  
Maged AM, Al -Inany H, Salama KM, Souidan, II, Abo Ragab HM, Elnassery N. Endometrial Scratch 
Injury Induces Higher Pregnancy Rate for Women With Unexplained Infertility Undergoing IUI With Ovarian Stimulation: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Reproductive sciences (Thousa nd Oaks, Calif)  
2016;23: 239- 243.  
Parsanezhad ME, Dadras N, Maharlouei N, Neghahban L, Keramati P, Amini M. Pregnancy rate after 
endometrial injury in couples with unexplained infertility: A randomized clinical trial. Iranian journal of 
reproductive medici ne 2013;11: 869 -874.  
Roest I, Rosielle K, van Welie N, Dreyer K, Bongers M, Mijatovic V, Mol BW, Koks C. Safety of oil -based 
contrast medium for hysterosalpingography: a systematic review. Reproductive biomedicine online  
2021;42: 1119- 1129.  
Senocak GC, Yap ca OE, Borekci B. Comparison of pregnancy rates between patients with and without 
local endometrial scratching before intrauterine insemination. Journal of gynecology obstetrics and human reproduction 2017;46: 687- 690.  
Seyam EM, Hassan MM, Mohamed Sayed Ga d MT, Mahmoud HS, Ibrahim MG. Pregnancy Outcome 
after Office Microhysteroscopy in Women with Unexplained Infertility. International journal of fertility & sterility  2015;9: 168- 175.  
van Welie N, Pham CT, van Rijswijk J, Dreyer K, Verhoeve HR, Hoek A, de Br uin JP, Nap AW, van Hooff 
MHA, Goddijn M  et al.  The long -term costs and effects of tubal flushing with oil -based versus water -
based contrast during hysterosalpingography. Reproductive biomedicine online  2021;42: 150- 157.  
Wang R, Watson A, Johnson N, Cheung  K, Fitzgerald C, Mol BWJ, Mohiyiddeen L. Tubal flushing for 
subfertility. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews  2020;10: Cd003718.  
Wong TY, Lensen S, Wilkinson J, Glanville EJ, Acharya S, Clarke F, Das S, Dawson J, Hammond B, Jayaprakasan K  et al.  Effect of endometrial scratching on unassisted conception for unexplained 
infertility: a randomized controlled trial. Fertility and sterility  2022;117: 612- 619.  
Yildiz G, Kurt D, Mat E, Yildiz P. The effect of local endometrial injury on the success of intr auterine 
insemination. Journal of Experimental and Clinical Medicine (Turkey)  2021;38: 521 -524.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  93 
III.4 Alternative therapeutic approaches  
PICO  QUESTION : WHAT IS THE EFFECTIVENESS OF ALTERNATIVE THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES ?  
ANTIOXIDANTS  
Evidence  
A systematic review and meta -analysis compared oral antioxidant treatment combined with an 
infertility treatment with placebo and infertility treatment in couples with unexplained infertility  (UI). 
Similar live birth rates were reported in both groups ( OR 1.50 , 95% CI 0.60 -3.72,  2 RCTs, 133 women ). 
Multiple pregnancy rate  was not significantly different (8.9% vs . 11.1%, OR 0.65, 95% CI 0.26- 1.62, 1 
RCT, 804 women) (Showell et al., 2020) . 
Recommendation  
Adjunct oral antioxidant therapy to women undergoing 
fertility treatment is probably not recommended.  Conditional  ⊕ 
 
Adjunct oral antioxidant therapy to male s undergoing 
fertility treatment is probably not recommended.  Conditional  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
Current low- quality evidence does not show a benefit of antioxidant treatment in males or females with 
UI. Generally, antioxidants are not very expensive, however, their  benefit was not demonstrated.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6, Annex 7 and Annex 8 
(question III.4).  
 
ACUPUNCTURE  
Evidence  
One RCT including 76 women with UI investigated the effect of acupuncture sessions before and after 
embryo transfer (n=38) during IVF. Live birth rate was significantly higher in the acupuncture group vs. 
controls (52.8% (19/36) vs. 27.8% (10/36)). The STAI -1 score, indicative of anxiety  levels, was 
significantly lower after embryo transfer in the acupuncture group vs. controls (28.8 (3.3) vs.  41.1 (6.8)) 
(Guven et al., 2020) .  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  94 
Recommendation  
Acupuncture in women is probably not recommended  Conditional  ⊕⊕ 
 
Justification  
The evidence on acupuncture in unexplained infertility is very limited and of low quality. The selected 
study only looked at acupuncture in the context of IVF. Furthermore, in infertility, there is no agreement 
on the techniques of acupuncture , i.e. , acupuncture points to use  or timing.  Therefore, acupuncture 
cannot be recommended for patients with unexplained infertility.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6,  Annex 7 and Annex 8 
(question III.4).  
 
NUTRACEUTICALS (INOSITOL ) 
Evidence  
One RCT including 86 women with UI compared adjuvant treatment with myo -inositol suppositories  
(n=43)  during timed intercourse cycles with placebo (n=43). Pregnancy rates were 18.6% (8/43) in the 
myo -inositol group compared to 6.97% (3/43) in the control group. No test of statistical significance 
was performed (Montanino Oliva et al.,  2020) .  
Recommendation  
Inositol supplementation  in women is probably not 
recommended.  Conditional  ⊕ 
 
Justification  
There is a plethora of nutraceuticals and the GDG was  unable to find convincing evidence of benefit . 
The evidence quality was judged to be very low. Nutraceuticals are generally not very expensive, 
however, their benefit was not demonstrated.  
Further information  
Details of the literature study and evidence tables are available in Annex 6, Annex 7 and Annex 8 
(question III.4).  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  95 
PSYCHOTHERAPY  
Evidence  
No relevant studies were identified investigating the effect of psychotherapy in couples with unexplained 
infertility.  
Recommendation  
Psychological support , including psychotherapy,  is 
recommended for patients when needed . GPP  
 
Justification  
No studies  were  identifi ed regarding psychotherapy in patients with UI  specifically . However, 
psychotherapy can help infertility patients to improve health -related quality of life, anxiety and/or 
depression . Further information on psychosocial needs that patients experience across their treatment 
pathway, and how fertility clinic staff can detect and address these needs can be found in the ESHRE 
guideline on Routine Psychosocial C are (Gameiro et al., 2015) . 
 
TRADITIONAL CHINESE MEDICINE (TCM)  
Evidence  
Most literature was in Chinese language, where only publications in English were considered for this 
guideline.  
One uncontrolled study wa s identified, where Onkyeong -tang and herbal medicine for ovulation and 
implantation were administered to women with UI. After treatment, the women were followed for 3 
menstrual cycles of observation. Live birth rate was 7.8% (7/90), ongoing pregnancy per  clinical  
pregnancy was 53.85% (7/13)  and 37% (33/90)  of women experienced adverse events,  but none were 
serious  (Choi et al., 2021) . 
 
DIET, EXERCISE , BEHAVIOURAL THERAPY  
Behavioural therapy is an umbrella term for types of therapy that treat mental health disorders. This 
form of therapy looks to identify and help change potentially self -destructive or unhealthy behaviours. 
It is based on the idea that all behaviours are learned and that behaviours can be changed (McKay and 
Tryon, 2002) . 
Evidence  
No relevant studies were identified investigating the effect of diet, exercise or behavioural therapy in 
couples with UI.   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  96 
Recommendation  
A healthy diet  and regular exercise , supported by 
behavioural therapy when necessary,  are recommended.  GPP  
 
Justification  
Although the GDG was unable to identify evidence of a specific association between certain diets or 
exercise regimes and unexplained infertility specifically, reproductive outcomes are known to be 
impaired in men and women with low and high B MIs. The standard advice and medical investigation 
and interventions apply equally to patients with UI as to any other causes of infertility. Patients 
generally value advice about lifestyle and healthy alternatives to maximise fertility in the context of 
their social and cultural environment. While healthy lifestyle intervention may improve spontaneous 
conception, active weight loss treatment in assisted reproduction has not yet shown a benefit in getting 
pregnant.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
Choi SJ, Kim DI, Yoon SH, Lim CY, Lee JM, Choe CM. Effectiveness and safety of Korean medicine for 
treating women with unexplained infertility: A multi -center observational study. Integrative medicine 
research  2021;10: 100751.  
Gameiro S, Boivin J, Dancet E , de Klerk C, Emery M, Lewis -Jones C, Thorn P, Van den Broeck U, Venetis 
C, Verhaak CM  et al.  ESHRE guideline: routine psychosocial care in infertility and medically assisted 
reproduction -a guide for fertility staff. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2015;30: 2476 -2485.  
Guven PG, Cayir Y, Borekci B. Effectiveness of acupuncture on pregnancy success rates for women 
undergoing in vitro fertilization: A randomized controlled trial. Taiwanese journal of obstetrics & 
gynecology  2020;59: 282 -286.  
McKay D, Tryo n WW. Behavior Therapy: Theoretical Bases. In Hersen M and Sledge W (eds) 
Encyclopedia of Psychotherapy . 2002. Academic Press, New York, pp. 277 -291.  
Montanino Oliva M, Buonomo G, Carra MC, Lippa A, Lisi F. Myo -inositol impact on sperm motility in 
vagina a nd evaluation of its effects on foetal development. European review for medical and 
pharmacological sciences  2020;24: 2704 -2709.  
Showell MG, Mackenzie -Proctor R, Jordan V, Hart RJ. Antioxidants for female subfertility. The 
Cochrane database of systematic r eviews  2020;8: Cd007807.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  97 
IV. Q uality of Life 
 
PICO  QUESTION : IS THERE A DIFFERENCE IN QOL FOR PATIENTS WITH UNEXPLAINED VERSUS 
EXPLAINED INFERTILITY ?  
Evidence  
In a secondary analysis of two  RCTs, the fertility -related quality of life  (QoL)  was compared between 
couples with a known infertility cause (PCOS) and couples with unexplained infertility. The fertility -
related quality of life was measured with FertiQoL; a higher score indicates a better QoL. With exception 
of the relational domain, w omen with PCOS (n=733) had lower FertiQoL scores than women with UI  
(n=865) , which were largely explained by the differences in BMI, demographics and hirsutism between 
the groups. Males from a couple with UI (n=849)  had lower scores than males partnered with women 
who had PCOS  (n=641) (Santoro et al., 2016) . 
This result is however not in line with the data by Warchol -Biedermann et al.  who surveyed 185 married 
males on four occasions  (before diagnostic disclosure, two to three months after diagnostic disclosure, 
before the third appointment, and before the fourth appointment)  (Warchol -Biedermann, 2021) . In 
this study, it was reported  that unintentionally  childless males from couple s with unexplained infertility 
undergoing fertility workup an d treatment for the first time had significantly higher FertiQoL scores for 
the emotional, mind -body and relational domains compared to males from a couple suffering from 
male factor infertility, female factor infertility or mixed factor infertility  before  diagnostic disclosure and 
in the follow- up 2 to 3 months after the diagnostic disclosure . The score for the social domain of the 
FertiQoL was similar over all pathology groups and study visits (Warchol -Biedermann, 2021) . 
In another cohort study  (n = 110), the degree of subjective wellbeing was measured using the von 
Zerssen symptom checklist resulting in an impairment score; healthy test persons fall close to 14.3.  
Impairment scores were compared between known infertility (female, male and coupl e) and 
unexplained infertility  (n=5) . No significant difference was found on the level of impairment between 
the different diagnostic groups of men and women respectively. Women attain the greatest rating of 
impairment (mean = 17.6) in the symptom checklis t when, from a somatic point of view, they solely  are 
responsible for the involuntary childlessness, followed by infertile women with a n infertile partner and 
women with idiopathic infertility ; women score the lowest rating if the cause of infertility is only 
attributed to their partner . Men from a couple with idiopathic sterility score the lowest compared to 
men in couples with known infertility (Kowalcek et al., 2001) . 
Recommendation  
Healthcare professionals should  be aware that  
- there is probably no difference in QoL between 
women with unexplained infertility versus  women in 
couples with known causes of infertility, except 
when the cause of infertility is PCOS, where the QoL Conditional  ⊕  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  98 
is lower.  
- QoL is probably higher in men from a couple with 
unexplained infertility compared to men from a 
couple with known causes of infertility except when 
the cause of infertility is men with a partner with 
PCOS, then the men from a couple with unexplained 
infertility have a lower QoL.  
 
Justification  
Current evidence indicates that there is probably no difference in QoL between women with 
unexplained and explained infertility, except for PCOS. For males with UI, QoL is probably higher 
compared to explained infertility. It is possible that Qo L is impair ed in the partner who is perceived to 
be responsible for infertility (Santoro et al., 2016) . 
 
 
REFERENCES  
Kowalcek I, Wihstutz N, Buhrow G, Diedrich K. Subjective well -being in infertile couples. Journal of 
psychosomatic obstetrics and gynaecology  2001;22: 143 -148.  
Santoro N, Eisenberg E, Trussell JC, Craig LB, Gracia C, Huang H, Alve ro R, Casson P, Christman G, 
Coutifaris C  et al.  Fertility -related quality of life from two RCT cohorts with infertility: unexplained 
infertility and polycystic ovary syndrome. Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2016;31: 2268- 2279.  
Warchol -Biedermann K. The Etiology of Infertility Affects Fertility Quality of Life of Males Undergoing 
Fertility Workup and Treatment. American journal of men's health 2021;15: 1557988320982167.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  99 
Annexes  
 
Annex 1: Guideline development group  
Annex 2: Abbreviations  
Annex 3: Recommendations for research  
Annex 4: Methodology  
Annex 5: Stakeholder consultation  
Annex 6: Literature study: flowcharts, list of excluded studies  
Annex 7: Evidence tables  
Annex 8: Summary of evidence tables   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  100 
Annex  1: Guideline development group  
This guideline was composed of.  
Chair of the GDG   
Daniela Romualdi  Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, 
Department of Woman and Child Health and Public Health, Rome, 
Italy . 
GDG members   
Baris Ata  Koc University, department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Istanbul, 
Turkey  
ART Fertility Clinics, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.  
Siladitya Bhattacharya  University of Aberdeen, School of Medicine, Medical Sciences & 
Nutrition, Aberdeen, UK . 
Ernesto Bosch  IVI-RMA Valencia, Valencia, Spain . 
Michael Costello  University of New South Wales, Sydney , Australia  
NHMRC Centre of Research Excellence Women’s Health in 
Reproductive Life (WHiRL) . 
Samuel Dos Santos -Ribeiro  IVI-RMA Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.  
Ksenija Gersak  University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, and University Medical 
Centre Ljubljana, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia . 
Roy Homburg  Liverpool Womens' Hospital, Hewitt Fertility Centre, Liverpool, UK . 
Mina Mincheva  Centre for Tumour Microenvironment, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen 
Mary University of London, London, UK    
Robert Norman  The Robinson  Research  Institute The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
Australia 
NHMRC Centre of Research Excellence Women’s Health in 
Reproductive Life (WHiRL) . 
Terhi Piltonen Oulu University Hospital, University of Oulu, Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Reproductive Endocrinology and IVF unit, Research Unit  of Clinical Medicine , Medical Research Centre, 
Oulu, Finland . 
Sara Somers  Ghent University hospital, Ghent, Belgium . 
Sesh K. Sunkara  King’s College London, UK . 
Harold Verhoeve  OLVG , departement of gynaecology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands . 
Patient representative   
Domenica  Scicluna  Gudja, Malta  
Methodological support   
Nathalie Le Clef  European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology , Belgium   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  101 
 
DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST  
All members of the guideline development group were asked to declare possible conflicts of interest 
by means of the disclosure forms (see ESHRE Manual for Guideline Development ). 
 
 Conflicts of interest  
Daniela Romualdi  Honoraria from IBSA and Novo Nordisk  
Baris Ata  Speakers fees from Merck, Gedeon Richter , Organon and Intas 
Pharma . 
Part of the advisory board of Organon Turkey and president of the 
Turkish Society of Reproductive Medicine.  
Siladitya Bhattacharya  Editor and contributing author, Reproductive Medicine for the 
MRCOG, Cambridge University Press  
Speakers fees from Merck, Organon, Ferring, the Ostetric and 
Gynaecological Society of Singapore and the Taiwanese Society for 
Reproductive Medicine  
Part of the METAFOR and CAPE trials  data monitoring committee  
Ernesto Bosch  Research grants from Roche diagnostics , Gedeon Richter  and IBSA  
Consulting fees from Merck, Ferring, MSD, Roche Diagnostics, IBSA, Abbott, Gedeon Richter  
Speaker’s fees from Merck, Ferring, Gedeon Richter, IBSA , MSD, 
Roche Diagnostics  
Salary or position funding from IVI -RMA Valencia  
Ownership by stock or partnership from IVI -RMA Valencia and Mint 
diagnostics  
Michael Costello  None declared.  
Samuel Dos Santos -Ribeiro  Research grants from Roche  Diagnostics, Organon, Theramex;  
Consulting fees from Ferring  Pharmaceuticals , MSD and  Organon;  
Speaker’s fees from Ferring  Pharmaceuticals , MSD /Organon , Besins , 
Theramex, Gedeon Richter;  
Stock or stock options from IVI Lisboa, Clínica de Rep rodução 
assistida Lda;  
Equipment/medical writing/gifts from Roche Diagnostics and Ferring 
Pharmaceuticals .  
Ksenija Gersak  None declared.  
Roy Homburg  None declared.  
Mina Mincheva  Consulting fees from Mojo Fertility Ltd  
Robert Norman  Research grant from Australian National Health and Medical 
Research Council (NHMRC),  Consulting fees from Flinders Fertility Adelaide , VinMec Hospital 
Hanoi Vietnam   
Speaker’s fees from Merck Australia , Cadilla Pharma India, Ferring 
Australia   
Chair clini cal advisory committee Westmead Fertility and research 
institute MyDuc Hospital Vietnam.  
Terhi Piltonen  is part of the Research Council of Finland  
Research grant s from Roche  Diagnostics, Novo Nordics and Sigrid  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  102 
Juselius foundation  
Speaker’s fees from Gedeon Richter, Roche, Exeltis , Organon, Ferring 
and Korento patient organisation  
is part of NFOG, AE -PCOS society and several Finnish associations  
Sara Somers  None declared.  
Sesh Sunkara  Speaker’s fees from Merck, Ferring, MSD, Pharmasure  
Harold Verhoeve  Consulting fees from Ferring Pharmaceuticals  
Donia Scicluna  None declared.  
Nathalie Le Clef  None declared.  
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  103 
Annex 2: Abbreviations  
AA Arachidonic acid  
AMH  Anti-Müllerian hormone  
AFC Antral follicle count  
ART Assisted reproduction technology  
ASA Anti-sperm antibodies  
AUC  Area under the curve  
BBT Basal body temperature  
CAT Chlamydia antibody testing  
CC Clomiphene Citrate  
CCCT  Chlomiphene citrate challenge test  
CI Confidence interval  
CT Chlamydia Trachomatis  
DFI DNA fragmentation index  
DHA  Docosahexaenoic acid  
DNA  Desoxyribonucleic acid  
EIA Enzyme Immunoassay  
ELISA  Enzyme -Linked Immuno Sorbent Assay.  
ET Embryo transfer  
FRAP  Ferric reducing antioxidant power  
GDG  Guideline development group  
GPP Good practice point  
HR Hazard ratio  
HSG  Hysterosalpingography  
HyCoSy  Hystero salpingo -contrast -sonography  
HyFoSy  Hystero salpingo -foam -sonography  
ICSI Intracytoplasmic sperm injection  
IgA Immunoglobulin A  
IgG Immunoglobulin G  
IF Immunofluorescence  
IQR Interquartile range  
IU International unit/infectious units  
IUI Intra -uterine insemination  
IVF In vitro fertilization  
LH Luteinizing hormone  
LR Likelihood ratio  
MAR  Medically assisted reproduction  
MAR test  Mixed antiglobulin reaction test  
MD Mean difference  
MDA  Malondialdehyde  
MIF Micro immunofluorescence  
NO Nitric oxide  
NOS  Nitric oxide synthase  
NPV  Negative predictive value  
NT Nitrotyrosine  
OR Odds ratio   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  104 
ORT Ovarian reserve test  
OS Ovarian stimulation  
OSCM  Oil-soluble contrast media  
OSI Oxidative stress index  
PC Protein carbonyl group  
PCR Polymerase Chain Reaction  
PID Pelvic inflammatory disease  
PPV Positive predictive value  
RCT Randomized controlled trial 
RD Risk difference  
ROC -AUC  Receiver operating characteristic – area under the curve  
ROS Reactive oxygen species  
RR Relative risk/risk ratio  
SCSA  Sperm chromatin structure assay  
SDF Sperm DNA fragmentation  
SET Single embryo transfer  
SH Thiol group  
SIS Saline infusion sonography  
SMD  Standardized mean difference  
SOD  Superoxide dismutase  
TAC Total antioxidant capacity  
TAS Total antioxidant status  
TBARS  2-thiobarbituric acid -reactive substances  
TOS Total oxidant status  
TVUS  Transvaginal ultrasound  
UI Unexplained Infertility  
US Ultrasound  
WMD  Weighted mean difference  
WSCM  Water -soluble contrast media     
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  105 
Annex 3: Recommendations for research on 
Unexplained Infert ility 
From the literature and discussion of the available evidence, several topics were identified for which 
evidence is inconsistent, insufficient or non- existing. For the benefit of patients with unexplained 
infertility , the GDG recommends that future research, where possible in well -designed RCTs, should 
focus on these research gaps.  
The top-3 of research recommendations with the highest priority  identified by the GDG are:  
1. Can a predictive model be developed, tested and validated to compare the outcomes of 
different management strategies for couples with UI?  
2. What is the optimal ART for UI?  
3. What is the value of performing current methods to assess sperm DNA integrity to predict 
clinical outcomes (pregnancy rates, live birth rates and miscarriage r ates) in couples with UI?  
Furthermore, the GDG would like to draw attention to the importance of research of male infertility. 
With a steady decline in sperm quality reported in the last 50 years, particularly sperm counts, male 
infertility has become a gl obal public health issue  (Levine et al., 2023, Levine et al., 2017) . Over the past 
decade, there has been increasing evidence showing an association between male r eproductive health 
and general health, with male infertility being proposed as a possible biomarker for current and future health  (Burke et al., 2022, Chen et al., 2022, Del Giudice et al., 2021, Ventimiglia et al., 2015) . However, 
up to 70% of male idiopathic and unexplained infertility cases remain with no aetiological factor  (Punab 
et al., 2017, Salonia et al., 2023, Tüttelmann et al., 2018) . MAR is routinely used for clinical management 
of male infertility when no causative factor is identified. Inadequate assessment of the cau ses of male 
infertility and the lack of strong evidence - supported treatment options puts a disproportionate burden 
on the female partner. Considering that the use of MAR is steadily increasing worldwide (Wyns et al., 
2022) , a paradigm shift in treatment of male factor infertility becomes essential  (Björndahl, 2022, De 
Jonge and Barratt, 2019, Duffy et al., 2021) . Therefore, re -focusing research efforts on addressing gaps 
in the understanding of male infertility, such as identifying new aetiological causes, clinical diagnostics, 
and MAR treatment options, will enable the development of more personalised therapeutic options to 
manage couple’s infertility and improve reproductive outcomes.  
Other research gaps that were identified are:  
- What is t he role of vaginal microbiota in UI ? 
- Can a predictive model for fertility based upon ovarian reserve tests be developed, tested and validated ? 
- In women at risk of age -related infertility, does standar dized fertility assessment before attempting 
expectant management improve live birth rates?  
- What causes UI? 
- What is t he relationship between luteal progesterone levels and spontaneous pregnancy ? 
- What is t he impact of sperm DNA damage (evaluated via sperm D NA fragmentation tests and sperm 
chromatin condensation test) on the clinical management of couples with UI ? 
- What is the value of new and existing sperm function tests for prognosis or allocation to treatment?  
- What is t he role of lifestyle intervention ? 
- In women with otherwise unexplained infertility, does hysteroscopic removal of an endometrial polyp 
increase live birth rates ? 
- Can age -related infertility be prevented ?  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  106 
- What is the role of different endometrial biomarkers ? 
- What is t he role of  oxidative stress markers in semen in couples with UI ? 
- In women with a uterine septum and otherwise unexplained infertility does hysteroscopic resection 
increase live birth rates ? 
- What is the role of oxidative stress biomarkers in endometrial implantation ? 
- What is t he relationship between regular menstrual cycles and proof of ovulation ? 
- In women with mild intrauterine adhesions and otherwise unexplained infertility does removal increase live birth rates ? 
 
 
REFERENCES  
Björndahl L. A paradigmatic shift in the care of male factor infertility: how can the recommendations 
for basic semen examination in the sixth edition of the WHO manual and the ISO 23162:2021 standard help? Reproductive biomedicine online  2022;45: 731- 736.  
Burke ND, Nixon B, Roman SD, Schjenken JE, Walters JLH, Aitken RJ, Bromfield EG. Male infertility and 
somatic health -  insights into lipid damage as a mechanistic link. Nature reviews Urology  2022;19: 
727-750.  
Chen T, Belladelli F, Del Giudice F, Eisenber g ML. Male fertility as a marker for health. Reproductive 
biomedicine online 2022;44: 131 -144.  
De Jonge C, Barratt CLR. The present crisis in male reproductive health: an urgent need for a political, 
social, and research roadmap. Andrology  2019;7: 762- 768.  
Del Giudice F, Kasman AM, Chen T, De Berardinis E, Busetto GM, Sciarra A, Ferro M, Lucarelli G , 
Belladelli F, Salonia A  et al.  The Association between Mortality and Male Infertility: Systematic Review 
and Meta -analysis. Urology  2021;154: 148- 157.  
Duffy JMN, Adamson GD, Benson E, Bhattacharya S, Bhattacharya S, Bofill M, Brian K, Collura B, Curtis 
C, Evers JLH  et al.  Top 10 priorities for future infertility research: an international consensus 
development study. Fertility and sterility  2021;115: 180- 190.  
Levine H, Jørgensen N, Martino -Andrade A, Mendiola J, Weksler -Derri D, Jolles M, Pinotti R, Swan SH. 
Temporal trends in sperm count: a systematic review and meta -regression analysis of samples 
collected globally in the 20th and 21st centuries. Human reproduction update  2023;29: 157 -176.  
Levine H, Jørgensen N, Martino -Andrade A, Mendiola J, Weksler -Derri D, Mindlis I, Pinotti R, Swan SH. 
Temporal trends in sperm count: a systematic review and meta -regression analysis. Human 
reproduction update  2017;23: 646- 659.  
Punab M, Poolamets O, Paju P, Vihljajev V, Pomm K, Ladva R, Korrovits P, Laan M. Causes of ma le 
infertility: a 9 -year prospective monocentre study on 1737 patients with reduced total sperm counts. 
Human reproduction (Oxford, England)  2017;32: 18- 31. 
Salonia A, Bettocchi C, Carvalho J, Corona G, Jones TH, Kadioǧlu A, al. e. EAU guidelines on Sexual  and 
Reproductive Health. 2023.  
Tüttelmann F, Ruckert C, Röpke A. Disorders of spermatogenesis: Perspectives for novel genetic diagnostics after 20  years of unchanged routine. Medizinische Genetik : Mitteilungsblatt des 
Berufsverbandes Medizinische Genetik  eV 2018;30: 12 -20. 
Ventimiglia E, Capogrosso P, Boeri L, Serino A, Colicchia M, Ippolito S, Scano R, Papaleo E, Damiano R, Montorsi F  et al.  Infertility as a proxy of general male health: results of a cross -sectional survey. 
Fertility and sterility  2015;1 04: 48- 55. 
Wyns C, De Geyter C, Calhaz -Jorge C, Kupka MS, Motrenko T, Smeenk J, Bergh C, Tandler -Schneider A, 
Rugescu IA, Goossens V. ART in Europe, 2018: results generated from European registries by ESHRE. 
Human reproduction open 2022;2022: hoac022.
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  107 
Annex 4: Methodology  
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT  
The European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) guidelines are developed based 
on the Manual for ESHRE guideline development (N. Vermeulen, N. Le Clef, S. Mcheik, A. D'Angelo , K. 
Tilleman, Z. Veleva, W.L.D.M. Nelen, Manual for ESHRE guidelin e development, version 201 9), which 
can be consulted on the ESHRE website ( www.eshre.eu /guidelines). The principal aim of this manual is 
to provide stepwise advice on ESHRE guideline dev elopment for members of ESHRE guideline 
development groups. The manual  describes a 12 -step procedure for writing clinical management 
guidelines by the guideline development group, supported by the ESHRE methodological expert:  
 
The current guideline was developed and funded by ESHRE, which covered expenses associated with 
the guideline meetings (travel, hotel and catering expenses) associated with the literature searches 
(library costs, costs associated with the retrieval of pape rs) and with the implementation of the 
guideline (printing, publication costs). The National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia 
covered the expenses of the 2 Australian members of the panel (MC and RJN). Except for 
reimbursement of their trav el expenses, GDG members did not receive any payment for their 
participation in the guideline development process.  
The scope of the guideline and first version of the key questions were drafted by member s of the ESHRE 
Special Interest Group  (SIG) Reproduc tive Endocrinology , SIG Andrology , SIG Safety and Quality in ART  
and SIG Nurs ing and Midwi fery and two representatives of the Monash University NHMRC Centre for 
Research Excellence in Women’s Reproductive Health.  We strived towards a balance in gender and 
location within Europe. Several online  meeting of the guideline development group w ere organized to 
discuss the key questions and redefine them through the PICO process (patients –  interventions – 
comparison – outcome). This resulted in a final list of 21 key questions. Based on the defined key words, 
literature searches were performed by the methodological expert (Dr. N. Le Clef). Key words were 
sorted to importance and used for searches in PUBMED/MEDLINE  and the Cochrane library. We 
searched the databases from inception up to 24  October  2022 . 
Literature searches were performed as an iterative process. In a first step, systematic reviews and meta -
analyses were collected. If no results were found, the search was ext ended to randomized controlled 
trials, and further to cohort studies and case reports, following the hierarchy of the levels of evidence . 
References  were selected or excluded by the methodological expert and expert GDG member based 
on title and abstract an d knowledge of the existing literature. If necessary, additional searches were 
performed in order to get the final list of papers. It is not within ESHRE's remit to conduct a formal 
 
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  108 
investigation or to draw formal conclusions regarding the misconduct of an  individual or group of 
individuals or to determine whether a published article should be retracted. However, papers that are 
withdrawn, have a published editorial note of concern or a published expression of concern have been 
excluded from the guideline. In future revision or update of the guideline, the GDG will actively verify 
the status of all the referenced studies.  
The quality of the selected papers was assessed by means of the quality assessment checklist, defined in the ESHRE guideline manual.  Furthermore, the evidence was collected and summarized in an 
evidence table according to GIN format ( http://www.g -i-n.net/activities/etwg
).  
The quality assessmen t and evidence tables were constructed by the expert GDG members. Summary 
of findings (SoF) tables were  prepared following the GRADE approach for intervention studies which 
reported the critical outcome s. The critical outcomes for this guideline were: live  full-term singleton 
birth, live birth, ongoing pregnancy rate, multiple pregnancies/multiple births.  
GDG meetings were organized to discuss the draft recommendations and the supporting evidence and to reach consensus on the final formulation of the recomm endations. In a final step, all evidence and 
recommendations were combined in the evidence- based  guideline: “ Unexplained Infertility ”. 
LIST OF KEY QUESTIONS  
DEFINITION OF UNEXPLAINED INFERTILITY  
Question I.1 After how many months of unprotected intercourse should a couple be defined as 
infertile?  
Question I.2 Should frequency of sexual intercourse affect the definition of UI?  
Question I.3 Should female or male partner’s age affect the definition of UI?  
Question I.4 Should couples with mild infe rtility factors be included in the definition of UI?  
DIAGNOSIS OF UNEXPLAINED INFERTILITY  
Question II.1 Which is the reliability and convenience of methods to confirm regular ovulation?  
Question II.2 What is the reliability of parameters detecting good o ocyte/corpus luteum quality?  
Question II.3 Should one or more tests of ovarian reserve be included in the diagnostic work -up? 
Question II.4 What is the accuracy of commonly used tests of tubal patency?  
Question II.5a Which diagnostic procedures should be  performed to confirm a normal uterine 
structure/anatomy, uterine wall/myometrium?  
Question II.5b Which additional diagnostic procedures should be performed to confirm an anatomically 
normal uterine cavity?  
Question II.6 Should women undergo a laparoscopy  before being diagnosed with UI?  
Question II.7 What is the need for female lower genital tract investigations?  
Question II.8 Should men undergo additional diagnostic procedures to confirm normal genito -urinary 
anatomy before being diagnosed with UI?  
Question II.9 Is there added value of additional tests in the male with normal WHO semen analysis?   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  109 
Question II.10 S hould there be additional evaluations of possible systemic cause of UI in the couple?  
TREATMENT OF UNEXPLAINED INFERTILITY  
Question III.1 What is the value of expectant management compared to active treatment for patients 
with UI?  
Question III.2 a If acti ve treatment is pursued, which type of active treatment for UI?  
Question III.2b What is the value of IVF versus ICSI?  
Question III.3 What is the value of mechanical -surgical procedures?  
Question III.4 What is the effectiveness of alternative therapeutic  approaches?  
QUALITY OF LIFE  
Question IV.1 Is there a difference in QoL for patients with unexplained versus explained infertility?  
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS  
We labelled the recommendations as either ‘‘strong’’ or ‘‘conditional’’ according to the GRADE 
approach. Suggested interpretation of strong and conditional recommendations by patients, clinicians 
and health care policy makers is as follows:  
Implications f or Strong recommendation  Conditional recommendation  
Patients  Most individuals in this situation would 
want the recommended course of action, 
and only a small proportion would not  The majority of individuals in this situation 
would want the suggested course of 
action, but many would not  
Clinicians  Most individuals should receive the 
intervention  
Adherence to this recommendation 
according to the guideline could be used as 
a quality criterion or performance indicator  
Formal decision aids are not likely to be 
needed to help individuals make decisions 
consistent with their values and 
preferences  Recognise that different choices will be 
appropriate for individual patients and that 
you must help each patient arrive at a 
management decision con sistent with his 
or her values and preferences  
Decision aids may be useful in helping 
individuals to make decisions consistent 
with their values and preferences  
Policy makers  The recommendation can be adopted as 
policy in most situations  Policy making wil l require substantial 
debate and involvement of various 
stakeholders  
 
For each recommendation it is mentioned whether it is strong or conditional and what the quality of 
the supporting evidence was. In the justification section, more data are provided on the considerations taken into account when formulating the recommendations: balance between desirable and 
undesirable effects, certainty of the evidence of effects, certainty in how people value the outcome, 
acceptability and feasibility of the  intervention. Impact on health equity and resource impact were only 
discussed where relevant.  For interventions where there was no evidence from studies focussing on 
unexplained infertility specifically to support the recommendation, the quality of the ev idence was 
automatically graded as very low (+OOO).   
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  110 
STRATEGY FOR REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINE DRAFT  
After finalization of the guideline draft, the review process was initiated. The draft guideline was 
published on the ESHRE website, accompanied by the reviewers’ comments form and a short 
explanation of the review process. The guideline was open for review between 12 December 2022 and 
30 January  2023 . 
To notify interested clinicians, we sent out an invitation to review the guideline by email to all ESHRE members.  
Selected reviewers were invited personally by email. These reviewers included:  
• Coordinators a nd deputies of the ESHRE SIG Reproductive Endocrinology,  SIG Andrology , SIG 
Reproductive Surgery , SIG Safety and Quality in ART and SIG Nursing and Midwifery . 
• Contact persons of patient organizations across Europe.  
• Contact persons of international and national societies focused on IVF/ICSI across Europe.  
All reviewers are listed in annex 5. The Reviewer comments processing report, including further 
information on the review and a list of all comments per reviewer with the response form ulated by the 
GDG will be published on the ESHRE website.  
GUIDELINE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY  
The standard dissemination procedure for all ESHRE guidelines comprises publishing and announcement.  
Each guideline is published on the ESHRE w ebsite and in Human  Reproduction Open. The 
announcement procedure includes a news item in “Focus on Reproduction”, a newsflash on the ESHRE 
website homepage and a short presentation at the ESHRE Annual meeting. All participants in the annual 
ESHRE meeting will be informed ab out the development and release of new guidelines; all related 
national societies and patient organizations are informed about the guideline release. They are asked 
to encourage local implementation by, for instance, translations or condensed versions, but they are 
also offered a website link to the original document.  
Patient versions of the guideline will be developed by a subgroup of the GDG together with patient 
representatives. The patient version is a translation of the recommendations in everyday lan guage, with 
emphasis on questions important to patients. It aims to help patients understand the guideline’s 
recommendations and facilitates clinical decision -making.  
To further enhance implementation of the guideline, the members of the GDG, as experts in  the field, 
will be asked to select recommendations for which they believe implementation will be difficult and 
make suggestions for tailor -made implementation interventions (e.g. option grids, flow- charts, 
additional recommendations, addition of graphic/v isual material to the guideline).  
Further translation tools will be developed by CRE in partnership with ESHRE.    
  
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  111 
SCHEDULE FOR UPDATING THE GUIDELINE  
The current guideline will be considered for revision in 202 7 (four years after publication). An 
intermediate search for new evidence will be performed two years after publication, which will inform 
the GDG of the necessity of an update.  
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at the time of publication. 
However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this 
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can be found at 
www.es hre.eu /guidelines . 
 
For more details on the methodology of ESHRE guidelines, visit www.eshre.eu/guidelines  
 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  112 
Annex 5: Stakeholder consultation  
 
As per routine development procedures , the guideline  draft was open for review for 6 weeks, between 
12 December 2022 and 30 January 2023 . All reviewers, their comments and the reply of the guideline 
development group are summarized in the review report, which is published on the ESHRE website as 
supporting documentation to the guideline. The list of representatives of professional organization, and 
of individual experts that pro vided comments to the guideline are summarized below.  
Organisation  Country  Representative  
German Society of Andrology (DGA e.V.)  
German Society of Urology, working group 
Andrology  Germany  Sabine Kliesch  
Institute of Reproductive Medicine, Kolkata  India  Pratip Chakraborty  
Centre for Human Reproductive Science, 
Birmingham Health Partners, The University of 
Birmingham  UK Jackson Kirkman -Brown 
Meurig Gallagher  
Reproductive medicine AmsterdamUMC, The 
Netherlands and the Netherlands Cochrane 
Gynaecolog y&Fertility  
The Netherlands  J.A. Wessel,  
Elena Kostova,  
Monique Mochtar,  
Madelon van Wely,  
Femke Mol,  
Mariette Goddijn  
European Academy of Andrology  Europe  Dimitrios G. Goulis  
Giovanni Corona  
German Society for Reproductive Medicine 
(DGRM) and URZ Germany  Ziller V.,  
Goeckenjahn M.,  
Köhn F. -M..,  
Hancke K. ,  
Sonntag B.  
Bundesverband Reproduktionsmedizinischer 
Zentren (BRZ)  Germany  Ulrich A. Knuth,  
Michael Ludwig  
German Society of Human Reproductive 
Biology  Germany  Verena Nordhoff  
Unexplained Infertility Guideline Australian 
Adaptation Committee  Australia   
 
Reviewer  Country  
Joel Bernstein  Australia  
Gustavo Botti  Argentina  
Maruf Siddiqui  Bangladesh  
Jean Calleja -Agius  Malta  
Hunida Elmegrab  Libya  
Bulent Tandogan  Turkey  
Carlos Calhaz -Jorge  Portugal  
Liliana Ramos  The Netherlands   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  113 
Michael Morris  Switzerland  
Adam Balen  UK 
George Lainas  Greece  
Mahmoud A Abdel -Aleem  Egypt  
Marco Sbracia  Italy  
Mario Sousa  Portugal  
Maria Elisabetta Coccia  Italy  
Michael Grynberg  France  
Exalto N.  
Emanuel MH.  The Netherlands  
Ben Mol  Australia  
Mitranovici Melinda Ildiko  Romania  
Panayotidis Costas  Greece  
Nusrat Mahmud  Bangladesh  
Aboubakr Mohamed Elnashar  Egypt  
Mira Töyli  Finland  
Petya Andreeva  Bulgaria  
Kalmantis Konstantinos  Greece  
Åsa Magnusson  Sweden  
Christina Bergh,  
Jan Bosteels  
Frank Broekmans  
Astrid Cantineau  
Arri Coomarasamy  
Vinh Dang  
Annemieke Hoek  
Joop Laven  
Rong Li  
Abha Maheswari  
Ben W. Mol  
Anja Pinborg  
Annika Strandell  
Chris Venetis  
Lan Vuong  
Madelon van Wely  Sweden  
Belgium  
The Netherlands  
UK 
Vietnam  
China  
Australia  
Denmark  
Maria Schubert  Germany  
Monica Varma  India  
Christophe Blockeel  Belgium  
Priya Bhide  UK 
Lars Björndahl  Sweden  
 
   
Unexplained Infertility guideline 202 3  114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology -  All rights reserved  
The content of these ESHRE guidelines has been published for personal and educational use only. No 
commercial use is authorised. No part of the ESHRE guidelines may be translated or reprodu ced in any 
form without prior written permission of the ESHRE communications manager.  
 