NICE
National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence
Preterm labour and birth
NICE guideline
Published: 20 November 2015
Last updated: 10 June 2022
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng25
NICE
guideline
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals
and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service.
It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the
responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in
consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the
guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to
use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and
developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate
unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health
inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be
inconsistent with complying with those duties.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
O NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Contents
Overview
Who is it for?......
Recommendations.........
1.1 Information and support.
5
сл
5
6
Care of women at risk of preterm labour.
1.2 Prophylactic vaginal progesterone and prophylactic cervical cerclage
1.3 Diagnosing preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (P-PROM).
7
7
1.4 Antenatal prophylactic antibiotics for women with P-PROM
1.5 Identifying infection in women with P-PROM
1.6 Emergency cervical cerclage.
Care of women with suspected or established preterm labour
1.7 Diagnosing preterm labour for women with intact membranes.
1.8 Tocolysis.…………………
1.9 Maternal corticosteroids......
1.10 Magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection.........
1.11 Intrapartum antibiotics
10
11
11
12
12
14
15
17
18
18
20
1.12 Fetal monitoring...
1.13 Mode of birth....
1.14 Timing of cord clamping for preterm babies (born vaginally or by caesarean birth) ........... 21
Terms used in this guideline...........
Recommendations for research......
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research.
Rationale and impact
Prophylactic vaginal progesterone.
Emergency cervical cerclage
Repeat courses of maternal corticosteroids
21
24
24
26
29
29
31
31
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Context.....
Finding more information and committee details......
Update information
33
34
35
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
This guideline is the basis of QS135.
Overview
This guideline covers the care of women with a singleton pregnancy at increased risk of, or
with symptoms and signs of, preterm labour (before 37 weeks), and women with a
singleton pregnancy having a planned preterm birth. It aims to reduce the risks of preterm
birth for the baby and describes treatments to prevent or delay early labour and birth.
In this guideline, we use the terms 'woman' or 'mother' throughout. These should be taken
to include people who do not identify as women but are pregnant or have given birth.
Who is it for?
Healthcare professionals who care for women at increased risk of or with symptoms
and signs of preterm labour and women having a planned preterm birth
•
Commissioners and providers of maternity services
• Women at increased risk of or with symptoms and signs of preterm labour and women
having a planned preterm birth, and their families and carers
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
1.1 Information and support
1.1.1
When giving information and support to women at increased risk of preterm
labour, or with suspected, diagnosed or established preterm labour, or having a
planned preterm birth (and their family members or carers as appropriate):
•
ensure this is given as early as possible, taking into account the likelihood of
preterm birth and the status of labour
• follow the principles in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS
services
• bear in mind that the woman (and their family members or carers) may be
particularly anxious
1.1.2
•
give both oral and written information
• describe the symptoms and signs of preterm labour
•
explain about the care that may be offered. [2015]
For women who are having a planned preterm birth or are offered treatment for
preterm labour in line with the sections on tocolysis, maternal corticosteroids and
magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection (and their family members or carers as
appropriate), provide information and support that includes:
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
• information about the likelihood of the baby surviving and other outcomes
(including long-term outcomes) and risks for the baby, giving values as
natural frequencies (for example, 1 in 100)
.
•
•
•
explanation of the neonatal care of preterm babies, including location of care
explanation of the immediate problems that can arise when a baby is born
preterm
explanation of the possible long-term consequences of prematurity for the
baby (how premature babies grow and develop)
ongoing opportunities to talk about and state their wishes about resuscitation
of the baby
•
an opportunity to tour the neonatal unit
1.1.3
•
an opportunity to speak to a neonatologist or paediatrician. [2015]
Be aware that, according to the 2021 Mothers and babies: reducing risk through
audits and confidential enquiries across the UK (MBRRACE-UK) report on
perinatal mortality, women from some minority ethnic backgrounds or who live in
deprived areas have an increased risk of stillbirth and may need closer monitoring
and additional support. The report showed that across all births (not just those
which are preterm):
•
.
compared with white babies (32 out of 10,000), the stillbirth rate is:
more than twice as high in black babies (72 out of 10,000)
around 50% higher in Asian babies (51 out of 10,000)
compared with the least deprived areas (23 out of 10,000), the still birth rate
is twice as high in the most deprived areas (47 out of 10,000). [2022]
Care of women at risk of preterm labour
1.2 Prophylactic vaginal progesterone and
O NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
prophylactic cervical cerclage
1.2.1
Offer a choice of prophylactic vaginal progesterone or prophylactic cervical
cerclage to women who have both:
•
a history of spontaneous preterm birth (up to 34+0 weeks of pregnancy) or
loss (from 16+0 weeks of pregnancy onwards), and
⚫ results from a transvaginal ultrasound scan carried out between 16+0 and
24+0 weeks of pregnancy that show a cervical length of 25 mm or less.
Discuss the risks and benefits of both options with the woman, and make a
shared decision on which treatment is most suitable. [2019, amended 2022]
In April 2024, the only licensed preparation of progesterone for this indication
was vaginal 200 mg capsules.
1.2.2 Consider prophylactic vaginal progesterone for women who have either:
1.2.3
1.2.4
•
a history of spontaneous preterm birth (up to 34+0 weeks of pregnancy) or
loss (from 16+0 weeks of pregnancy onwards), or
• results from a transvaginal ultrasound scan carried out between 16+0 and
24+0 weeks of pregnancy that show a cervical length of 25 mm or less.
[2019, amended 2022]
In April 2024, the only licensed preparation of progesterone for this indication
was vaginal 200 mg capsules.
When using vaginal progesterone, start treatment between
16+0 and 24+0 weeks of pregnancy and continue until at least 34 weeks. [2019]
Consider prophylactic cervical cerclage for women when results of a transvaginal
ultrasound scan carried out between 16+0 and 24+0 weeks of pregnancy show a
cervical length of 25 mm or less, who have had either:
preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (P-PROM) in a previous pregnancy
or
O NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.2.5
•
a history of cervical trauma. [2015, amended 2019]
If prophylactic cervical cerclage is used, ensure a plan is made and documented
for removal of the suture. [2019, amended 2022]
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prophylactic
vaginal progesterone.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
clinical effectiveness of prophylactic progesterone in preventing preterm labour.
1.3 Diagnosing preterm prelabour rupture of
membranes (P-PROM)
1.3.1 In a woman reporting symptoms suggestive of P-PROM, offer a speculum
examination to look for pooling of amniotic fluid and:
1.3.2
• if pooling of amniotic fluid is observed, do not perform any diagnostic test
but offer care consistent with the woman having P-PROM (see the sections
on antenatal prophylactic antibiotics for women with P-PROM, identifying
infection in women with P-PROM and maternal corticosteroids)
•
if pooling of amniotic fluid is not observed, perform an insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-1 test or placental alpha-microglobulin-1 test of vaginal
fluid. [2015, amended 2019]
If the results of the insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 or placental alpha-
microglobulin-1 test are positive, do not use the test results alone to decide what
care to offer the woman, but also take into account her clinical condition, medical
and pregnancy history and gestational age, and either:
•
offer care consistent with the woman having P-PROM (see the sections on
antenatal prophylactic antibiotics for women with P-PROM, identifying
infection in women with P-PROM and maternal corticosteroids or
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.3.3
• re-evaluate the woman's diagnostic status at a later time point. [2015]
If the results of the insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 or placental alpha-
microglobulin-1 test are negative and no amniotic fluid is observed:
•
•
do not offer antenatal prophylactic antibiotics
explain to the woman that it is unlikely she has P-PROM, but that she should
return for reassessment if there are any further symptoms suggestive of
P-PROM or preterm labour. [2015, amended 2022]
1.3.4 Do not use nitrazine to diagnose P-PROM. [2015]
1.3.5
Do not perform diagnostic tests for P-PROM if labour becomes established in a
woman reporting symptoms suggestive of P-PROM. [2015]
1.4 Antenatal prophylactic antibiotics for women
with P-PROM
1.4.1
1.4.2
1.4.3
1.4.4
As prophylaxis for intrauterine infection, offer women with P-PROM oral
erythromycin 250 mg 4 times a day for a maximum of 10 days or until the woman
is in established labour (whichever is sooner). [2015, amended 2022]
For women with P-PROM who cannot tolerate erythromycin or in whom
erythromycin is contraindicated, consider an oral penicillin for a maximum of
10 days or until the woman is in established labour (whichever is sooner). [2015,
amended 2019]
Do not offer women with P-PROM co-amoxiclav as prophylaxis for intrauterine
infection. [2015]
For guidance on the use of intrapartum antibiotics, see the section on
intrapartum antibiotics in NICE's guideline on neonatal infection, and when
applicable also see the section on treatment for women with prolonged prelabour
rupture of membranes who have group B streptococcal colonisation, bacteriuria
or infection. [2015]
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.5 Identifying infection in women with P-PROM
1.5.1
1.5.2
1.5.3
Use a combination of clinical assessment and tests (C-reactive protein, white
blood cell count and measurement of fetal heart rate using cardiotocography) to
diagnose intrauterine infection in women with P-PROM. [2015]
Do not use any one of the following in isolation to confirm or exclude intrauterine
infection in women with P-PROM:
•
a single test of C-reactive protein
⚫ white blood cell count
• measurement of fetal heart rate using cardiotocography. [2015]
If the results of the clinical assessment or any of the tests are not consistent with
each other, continue to observe the woman and consider repeating the tests.
[2015]
1.6 Emergency cervical cerclage
1.6.1
1.6.2
Do not offer emergency cervical cerclage to women with:
signs of infection, or
• active vaginal bleeding, or
uterine contractions. [2015, amended 2022]
Consider emergency cervical cerclage for women between 16+0 and 27+6 weeks
of pregnancy with a dilated cervix and exposed, unruptured fetal membranes.
Also:
• take into account gestational age (being aware that the benefits are likely to
be greater for earlier gestations) and the extent of cervical dilatation
• discuss with a consultant obstetrician and consultant paediatrician. [2015,
amended 2022]
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.6.3
1.6.4
If emergency cervical cerclage is being considered, explain to the woman (and
their family members or carers, as appropriate):
• about the risks of the procedure
• that it aims to delay the birth, and so increase the likelihood of the baby
surviving and of reducing serious neonatal morbidity [2015, amended 2022]
If emergency cervical cerclage is used, ensure that a plan is made and
documented for removal of the suture. [2019, amended 2022]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on emergency
cervical cerclage.
Care of women with suspected or established
preterm labour
1.7 Diagnosing preterm labour for women with
intact membranes
1.7.1
1.7.2
Explain to women reporting symptoms of preterm labour who have intact
membranes (and their family members or carers, as appropriate):
• about the clinical assessment and diagnostic tests that are available
• how the clinical assessment and diagnostic tests are carried out
• what the benefits, risks and possible consequences of the clinical
assessment and diagnostic tests are, including the consequences of false-
positive and false-negative test results and taking into account gestational
age. [2015]
Offer a clinical assessment to women reporting symptoms of preterm labour who
have intact membranes. This should include:
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.7.3
1.7.4
1.7.5
⚫ clinical history taking
•
the observations described for the initial assessment of labour in NICE's
guideline on intrapartum care
• a speculum examination (followed by a digital vaginal examination if the
extent of cervical dilatation cannot be assessed; be aware that if a swab for
fetal fibronectin testing is anticipated [see recommendation 1.7.5] the swab
should be taken before any digital vaginal examination). [2015]
If the clinical assessment suggests that the woman is in suspected preterm
labour and she is 29+6 weeks pregnant or less, advise treatment for preterm
labour as described in the sections on tocolysis and maternal corticosteroids.
[2015]
If the clinical assessment suggests that the woman is in suspected preterm
labour and she is 30+0 weeks pregnant or more, consider transvaginal ultrasound
measurement of cervical length as a diagnostic test to determine likelihood of
birth within 48 hours. Act on the results as follows:
• if cervical length is more than 15 mm, explain to the woman that it is unlikely
to be preterm labour and:
-
think about alternative diagnoses
discuss with her the benefits and risks of going home compared with
continued monitoring and treatment in hospital
advise her that if she does decide to go home, she should return if
symptoms suggestive of preterm labour persist or recur
• if cervical length is 15 mm or less, view the woman as being in diagnosed
preterm labour and offer treatment as described in the sections on tocolysis
and maternal corticosteroids. [2015]
Consider fetal fibronectin testing as a diagnostic test to determine likelihood of
birth within 48 hours for women who are 30+0 weeks pregnant or more if
transvaginal ultrasound measurement of cervical length is indicated, but is not
available or not acceptable. Act on the results as follows:
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.7.6
1.7.7
1.7.8
1.7.9
• if fetal fibronectin testing is negative (concentration 50 ng/ml or less), explain
to the woman that it is unlikely she is in preterm labour and:
-
think about alternative diagnoses
discuss with her the benefits and risks of going home compared with
continued monitoring and treatment in hospital
advise her that if she decides to go home, she should return if symptoms
suggestive of preterm labour persist or recur
• if fetal fibronectin testing is positive (concentration more than 50 ng/ml),
view the woman as being in diagnosed preterm labour and offer treatment as
described in the sections on tocolysis and maternal corticosteroids. [2015]
If a woman in suspected preterm labour who is 30+0 weeks pregnant or more
does not have transvaginal ultrasound measurement of cervical length or fetal
fibronectin testing to exclude preterm labour, offer treatment consistent with her
being in diagnosed preterm labour (see the sections on tocolysis and maternal
corticosteroids). [2015]
Do not use transvaginal ultrasound measurement of cervical length and fetal
fibronectin testing in combination to diagnose preterm labour. [2015]
Ultrasound scans should be performed by healthcare professionals with training
in, and experience of, transvaginal ultrasound measurement of cervical length.
[2015]
For guidance on the use of other biomarker tests used for the diagnosis of
preterm labour, see NICE's diagnostics guidance on biomarker tests to help
diagnose preterm labour in women with intact membranes. [2019]
1.8 Tocolysis
1.8.1
Take the following factors into account when making a decision about whether to
start tocolysis:
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.8.2
1.8.3
1.8.4
⚫ whether the woman is in suspected or diagnosed preterm labour
• other clinical features (for example, bleeding or infection) that may suggest
that stopping labour is contraindicated
.
•
gestational age at presentation
likely benefit of maternal corticosteroids (see the section on maternal
corticosteroids)
availability of an appropriate level of neonatal care (if there is need for
transfer to another unit). See also NHS England's guidance on saving babies'
lives care bundle version 2 (recommendation 5.9).
⚫ the preference of the woman. [2015, amended 2022]
Consider nifedipine for tocolysis for women between 24+0 and 25+6 weeks of
pregnancy who have intact membranes and are in suspected preterm labour.
In November 2015, this was an off-label use of nifedipine. See NICE's information
on prescribing medicines. [2015]
Offer nifedipine for tocolysis to women between 26+0 and 33+6 weeks of
pregnancy who have intact membranes and are in suspected or diagnosed
preterm labour.
In November 2015, this was an off-label use of nifedipine. See NICE's information
on prescribing medicines. [2015]
If nifedipine is contraindicated, offer oxytocin receptor antagonists for tocolysis.
[2015]
1.8.5 Do not offer betamimetics for tocolysis. [2015]
1.9 Maternal corticosteroids
In June 2022 this was an off-label use of betamethasone and dexamethasone. See NICE's
information on prescribing medicines.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.9.1
1.9.2
1.9.3
1.9.4
1.9.5
1.9.6
1.9.7
For women between 22+0 and 23+6 weeks of pregnancy who are in suspected
or established preterm labour, are having a planned preterm birth or have
P-PROM (see the section on diagnosing P-PROM), discuss with the woman (and
her family members or carers, as appropriate) and the multidisciplinary team the
use of maternal corticosteroids in the context of her individual circumstances.
[2015, amended 2022]
Offer maternal corticosteroids to women between 24+0 and 33+6 weeks of
pregnancy who are in suspected, diagnosed or established preterm labour, are
having a planned preterm birth or have P-PROM. [2015, amended 2019]
Consider maternal corticosteroids for women between 34+0 and 35+6 weeks of
pregnancy who are in suspected, diagnosed or established preterm labour, are
having a planned preterm birth or have P-PROM. [2015]
Consider a single repeat course of maternal corticosteroids for women less than
34+0 weeks of pregnancy who:
• have already had a course of corticosteroids when this was more than 7 days
ago, and
•
are at very high risk of giving birth in the next 48 hours.
Where the woman is less than 30+0 weeks pregnant or if there is suspected
growth restriction, take into account the possible impact on fetal growth of a
repeat course of maternal corticosteroids. [2022]
Do not give more than 2 courses of maternal corticosteroids for preterm birth.
[2022]
When offering or considering maternal corticosteroids, discuss the benefits and
risks with the woman (and her family members or carers, as appropriate). [2015,
amended 2022]
For guidance on the use of corticosteroids in people with diabetes, see NICE's
guideline on diabetes in pregnancy. [2019]
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on repeat courses of
maternal corticosteroids.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B:
effectiveness of repeat courses of maternal corticosteroids for fetal lung maturation.
1.10 Magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection
In August 2019, the use of intravenous magnesium sulfate in recommendations 1.10.1
to 1.10.3 was off label. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines.
This guideline does not recommend using magnesium sulfate beyond 24 hours. But if
uncertainty around exact timing of delivery results in repeat administration, follow the
MHRA safety advice on the prolonged or repeated use of magnesium sulfate in
pregnancy.
1.10.1
1.10.2
For women between 23+0 and 23+6 weeks of pregnancy who are in established
preterm labour or having a planned preterm birth within 24 hours, discuss with
the woman (and her family members or carers, as appropriate) the use of
intravenous magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection of the baby, in the context of
her individual circumstances. [2019]
Offer intravenous magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection of the baby to women
between 24+0 and 29+6 weeks of pregnancy who are:
• in established preterm labour, or
•
having a planned preterm birth within 24 hours. [2015]
1.10.3 Consider intravenous magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection of the baby for
women between 30+0 and 33+6 weeks of pregnancy who are:
⚫ in established preterm labour, or
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
•
having a planned preterm birth within 24 hours. [2015]
1.10.4
1.10.5
1.10.6
Give a 4 g intravenous bolus of magnesium sulfate over 15 minutes, followed by
an intravenous infusion of 1 g per hour until the birth or for 24 hours (whichever is
sooner). [2015]
For women on magnesium sulfate, monitor for clinical signs of magnesium toxicity
at least every 4 hours by recording pulse, blood pressure, respiratory rate and
deep tendon (for example, patellar) reflexes. [2015]
If a woman has or develops oliguria or other evidence of renal failure:
• monitor more frequently for magnesium toxicity
• reduce or stop the dose of magnesium sulfate. [2015, amended 2022]
1.11 Intrapartum antibiotics
1.11.1
For guidance on the use of intrapartum antibiotics in established preterm labour,
see NICE's guideline on neonatal infection. [2019]
1.12 Fetal monitoring
Monitoring options: cardiotocography and intermittent
auscultation
1.12.1
Discuss with women in suspected, diagnosed or established preterm labour (and
their family members or carers, as appropriate):
⚫ the purpose of fetal monitoring and what it involves
⚫ the clinical decisions it informs at different gestational ages
.
if appropriate, the option not to monitor the fetal heart rate (for example, at
the threshold of viability). [2015]
O NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.12.2
1.12.3
1.12.4
1.12.5
Involve a senior obstetrician in discussions about whether and how to monitor the
fetal heart rate for women who are between 23+0 and 25+6 weeks pregnant.
[2015]
Explain the different fetal monitoring options to the woman (and her family
members or carers, as appropriate), being aware that:
⚫ there is limited evidence about the usefulness of specific features to suggest
hypoxia or acidosis in preterm babies
• the available evidence is broadly consistent with that for babies born at term
(see the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour)
•
a normal cardiotocography trace is reassuring and indicates that the baby is
coping well with labour, but an abnormal trace does not necessarily indicate
that fetal hypoxia or acidosis is present. [2015]
Explain that there is an absence of evidence that using cardiotocography
improves the outcomes of preterm labour for the parent or the baby compared
with intermittent auscultation. Include family members or carers in the discussion,
as appropriate. [2015]
In established preterm labour with no other risk factors (see the NICE guideline
on fetal monitoring in labour), offer a choice of fetal heart rate monitoring using
either:
.
•
cardiotocography using external ultrasound or
intermittent auscultation. [2015]
1.12.6
For guidance on using intermittent auscultation for fetal heart rate monitoring,
see the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour. [2015]
Fetal scalp electrode
1.12.7
Do not use a fetal scalp electrode for fetal heart rate monitoring if the woman is
less than 34+0 weeks pregnant unless all of the following apply:
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.12.8
• it is not possible to monitor the fetal heart rate using either external
cardiotocography or intermittent auscultation
• it has been discussed with a senior obstetrician
• the benefits are likely to outweigh the potential risks
⚫ the alternatives (immediate birth, intermittent ultrasound and no monitoring)
have been discussed with the woman and are unacceptable to her. [2015]
Discuss with the woman (and her family members or carers, as appropriate) the
possible use of a fetal scalp electrode between 34+0 and 36+6 weeks of
pregnancy if it is not possible to monitor the fetal heart rate using either external
cardiotocography or intermittent auscultation. [2015]
Fetal blood sampling
1.12.9
1.12.10
1.12.11
Do not carry out fetal blood sampling if the woman is less than 34+0 weeks
pregnant. [2015]
Discuss with the woman the possible use of fetal blood sampling between 34+0
and 36+6 weeks of pregnancy if the benefits are likely to outweigh the potential
risks. [2015]
When offering fetal blood sampling, advise the woman that if a blood sample
cannot be obtained a caesarean section is likely. Also see the advice on fetal
blood sampling in the NICE guidelines on intrapartum care for women with
existing medical conditions or obstetric complications and their babies and
intrapartum care. [2015, amended 2020]
1.13 Mode of birth
1.13.1
Discuss the general benefits and risks of caesarean birth and vaginal birth with
women in suspected, diagnosed or established preterm labour and in P-PROM
(and their family members or carers, as appropriate). See the section on planning
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
1.13.2
1.13.3
1.13.4
mode of birth in NICE's guideline caesarean birth. [2015]
Explain to women in suspected, diagnosed or established preterm labour and
women with P-PROM about the benefits and risks of caesarean birth that are
specific to gestational age. In particular, highlight the difficulties associated with
performing a caesarean birth for a preterm birth, especially the increased
likelihood of a vertical uterine (classical) incision and the implications of this for
future pregnancies. [2015, amended 2022]
Explain to women in suspected, diagnosed or established preterm labour that
there are no known benefits or harms for the baby from caesarean birth, but the
evidence is very limited. [2015]
Consider caesarean birth for women presenting in suspected, diagnosed or
established preterm labour between 26+0 and 36+6 weeks of pregnancy with
breech presentation. [2015]
1.14 Timing of cord clamping for preterm babies
(born vaginally or by caesarean birth)
1.14.1 Wait at least 60 seconds before clamping the cord of preterm babies unless there
are specific maternal or fetal conditions that need earlier clamping. [2015,
1.14.2
amended 2022]
Position the baby at or below the level of the placenta before clamping the cord.
[2015]
Terms used in this guideline
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. For
other definitions see the NICE glossary and the Think Local, Act Personal Care and
Support Jargon Buster.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Cervical trauma
Physical injury to the cervix including surgery; for example, previous cone biopsy (cold
knife or laser), large loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ; any number) or
radical diathermy.
Diagnosed preterm labour
A woman is in diagnosed preterm labour if she is in suspected preterm labour and has had
a positive diagnostic test for preterm labour.
Emergency cervical cerclage (previously known as 'rescue')
Cervical cerclage performed as an emergency procedure for premature cervical dilatation,
often with exposed fetal membranes.
Established preterm labour
A woman is in established preterm labour if she has progressive cervical dilatation from
4 cm with regular contractions (see the definition of the established first stage of labour in
NICE's guideline on intrapartum care).
MBRRACE-UK
Mothers and babies: reducing risk through audits and confidential enquiries across the UK
(MBRRACE-UK) is a series of audits carried out with the aim of identifying causes of
maternal and perinatal death and morbidity and making recommendations to inform
maternity care and so reduce these poor outcomes.
Preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (P-PROM)
A woman is described as having P-PROM if she has ruptured membranes before
37+0 weeks of pregnancy but is not in established labour.
Suspected preterm labour
A woman is in suspected preterm labour if she has reported symptoms of preterm labour
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
and has had a clinical assessment (including a speculum or digital vaginal examination)
that confirms the possibility of preterm labour, but rules out established labour.
Symptoms of preterm labour
A woman has presented before 37+0 weeks of pregnancy reporting symptoms that might
be indicative of preterm labour (such as abdominal pain), but no clinical assessment
(including speculum or digital vaginal examination) has taken place.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Recommendations for research
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research.
As part of the 2019 update, the guideline committee made 3 additional recommendations
for research on prophylactic progesterone. As part of the 2022 update, the guideline
committee made an additional recommendation for research on repeating maternal
corticosteroids.
Key recommendations for research
1 Repeating maternal corticosteroids
Is a single repeat dose or a single repeat course (2 doses) of maternal corticosteroids
more effective than a single course for preterm neonatal outcomes and longer-term
outcomes for babies and children, and what is the optimal time interval between
completing the initial course (2 doses) and the repeat dose or course? [2022]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale section on repeat courses of maternal corticosteroids.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B:
effectiveness of repeat courses of maternal corticosteroids for fetal lung maturation.
2 Prophylactic vaginal progesterone
Does progesterone reduce the risk of preterm birth in women who have risk factors for
preterm birth, but do not have a short cervix (cervical length of more than 25 mm)? [2019]
Why this is important
Preterm birth is a cause of significant morbidity for women and babies, and impacts
negatively on women and their families, as well as being costly to the NHS. There is good
evidence for the use of progesterone to reduce preterm birth, however studies include
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
women with a combination of risk factors for preterm birth, such as a history of preterm
birth and a shortened cervix.
There is no evidence for the effectiveness of progesterone in women who do not have a
short cervix, but who do have other risk factors for preterm birth. It is therefore difficult to
decide if progesterone should be recommended for women, and also whether measuring
the cervical length to guide treatment is necessary.
3 Prophylactic vaginal progesterone
Does progesterone reduce the risk of preterm birth in women who have a short cervix
(cervical length of 25 mm or less), but do not have other risk factors for preterm birth?
[2019]
Why this is important
Preterm birth is a cause of significant morbidity for women and babies, and impacts
negatively on women and their families, as well as being costly to the NHS. There is good
evidence for the use of progesterone to reduce preterm birth, however studies include
people with a combination of risk factors for preterm birth, such as a history of preterm
birth and a shortened cervix.
There is a lack of evidence for the effectiveness of progesterone in women with a cervical
length of 25 mm or less, but without other risk factors for preterm birth. It is therefore
difficult to decide if progesterone should be recommended for women, and consequently
whether measuring the cervix to guide treatment is necessary for women with no other
risk factors.
4 Prophylactic vaginal progesterone
At what gestation should treatment with prophylactic vaginal progesterone for the
prevention of preterm birth be started and stopped? [2019]
Why this is important
Preterm birth is a cause of significant morbidity for women and babies, and impacts
negatively on women and their families, as well as being costly to the NHS. There is good
evidence for the use of progesterone to reduce preterm birth, however studies do not
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 25 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
define the optimal gestational age that this treatment should be started and stopped, and
it is therefore difficult to recommend when it should start and the optimal duration of
treatment.
5 Prophylactic vaginal progesterone and prophylactic cervical
cerclage
What is the clinical effectiveness of prophylactic cervical cerclage alone compared with
prophylactic vaginal progesterone alone and with both strategies together for preventing
preterm birth in women with a short cervix and a history of spontaneous preterm birth?
[2015]
Why this is important
Preterm birth causes significant neonatal morbidity and mortality, as well as long-term
disability. Therefore strategies for preventing preterm birth are important. There are
recognised risk factors for preterm birth, and so interventions can be offered to women
with these risk factors. Both prophylactic cervical cerclage and prophylactic vaginal
progesterone are effective in preventing preterm birth in women with a short cervix and a
history of preterm birth, but there is limited evidence on which is more effective, and the
relative risks and benefits (including costs) of each. More randomised research is needed
to compare the relative effectiveness of prophylactic cervical cerclage and prophylactic
vaginal progesterone in improving both neonatal and maternal outcomes. This will help
women and healthcare professionals to make an informed decision about which is the
most effective prophylactic option.
Other recommendations for research
6 Identifying infection in women with preterm prelabour rupture
of membranes (P-PROM)
What is the diagnostic accuracy of serial C-reactive protein testing to identify
chorioamnionitis in women with P-PROM? [2015]
Why this is important
Identifying infection in women with P-PROM is needed to provide best practice care. Early
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 26 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
diagnosis of infection allows consideration of therapeutic strategies (including antibiotics
and/or early birth). Effective treatment of infection is particularly important given that
sepsis is a common direct cause of maternal death. There is currently limited evidence
that serial C-reactive protein testing might be useful, but the committee is aware that this
strategy is in common practice.
Evidence from diagnostic studies is needed about the accuracy of serial C-reactive protein
testing for identifying chorioamnionitis, which is one of the most common and serious
infective complications of P-PROM.
7 Emergency cervical cerclage
What is the clinical effectiveness of emergency cerclage in improving outcomes for women
at risk of preterm birth? [2015]
Why this is important
There is some evidence from randomised studies that emergency cerclage might be
effective in improving neonatal outcomes in women with a dilated cervix and exposed,
intact fetal membranes. However, there is uncertainty about the magnitude of this effect.
The full consequences of this strategy and the subgroups of women at risk of preterm
labour who might particularly benefit are not known. A randomised controlled trial would
best address this question, but a national registry of the most critical outcomes (neonatal
mortality and morbidity, maternal morbidity) could also be considered for women who did
not want to participate in a randomised trial but who opt for 'rescue' cerclage.
8 Magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection
What is the clinical effectiveness of a bolus plus infusion of magnesium sulfate compared
with a bolus alone for preventing neurodevelopmental injury in babies born preterm?
[2015]
Why this is important
There is evidence from randomised studies that magnesium sulfate has neuroprotective
properties for the baby when given to women who will deliver preterm up to 34+0 weeks
of pregnancy. However, there is uncertainty about the best method of administering
magnesium sulfate for this purpose, with different studies using different strategies. There
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 27 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
are significant advantages for the woman and for reducing healthcare costs if a bolus is as
effective as a bolus plus infusion, because magnesium sulfate has side effects for the
woman, and more monitoring is needed for infusion, with additional associated healthcare
costs. A randomised controlled trial would best address this question by assessing the
effects of each method on neonatal and maternal outcomes.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 28 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Rationale and impact
These sections briefly explain why the committee made the recommendations and how
they might affect practice.
Prophylactic vaginal progesterone
Recommendations 1.2.1 to 1.2.5
Why the committee made the recommendations
There was good evidence that vaginal progesterone reduced the risk of preterm birth
before 34 weeks in women with a previous history of preterm birth, and in women with a
short cervix (25 mm or less). The committee were aware that these groups overlapped, as
some women with a previous history of preterm birth will also have a short cervix.
Therefore, they adopted the recommendation from the previous guideline to offer vaginal
progesterone to women with a previous history of preterm birth and a short cervix. The
committee concluded that, as in the previous guideline, progesterone should be offered as
an equal option with cervical cerclage (for which no new evidence review had been done),
as there is no evidence to determine which of these options is more effective.
As the treatment options are very different (regular use of vaginal progesterone
throughout pregnancy, compared with a single operative procedure), the committee
highlighted that the choice of treatment should be made after discussion of the risks and
benefits of the 2 treatments.
The committee were aware that there is uncertainty about which risk factors should be
used to identify women at risk of preterm birth (cervical length measurements, previous
history of preterm birth, previous cervical surgery). There is also variation in practice
across the country about which women are offered cervical length scanning. Cervical
scanning is currently offered when there is clinical concern about the risk of preterm birth,
rather than as a routine part of antenatal care. Also, vaginal progesterone may be effective
at reducing preterm birth for women with some risk factors, but not others.
Identifying specific groups of women who would benefit from treatment with progesterone
was difficult because of the overlap in risk factors for an individual woman: some women
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 29 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
with a previous history of preterm birth also have a cervical length of 25 mm or less, and
some women with a cervical length of 25 mm or less also have a previous history of
preterm birth. Therefore, it was hard to determine which of these 2 factors could identify
women at high risk of preterm birth who would definitely benefit from treatment with
vaginal progesterone. Consequently, the committee agreed that treatment with
progesterone should be considered for women with either of these risk factors (cervical
length of 25 mm or less, or a previous history of preterm birth). Because of the uncertainty
over the benefits of progesterone in women who have risk factors for a preterm birth but
do not have a cervical length of 25 mm or less, and women who have a cervical length of
25 mm or less but do not have a history of preterm birth, the committee made
recommendations for research on this topic.
The timing of progesterone administration varied between the studies. However, most
trials started treatment between 16+0 and 24+0 weeks. This was in keeping with the
experience of the committee members, therefore they made a recommendation to start
treatment at any suitable time during that range of gestational age. There was no evidence
on when progesterone should be stopped, but the committee's experience was that it
should be continued until at least 34 weeks. As there was uncertainty about these timings,
the committee also made a recommendation for research on the optimal timing of
treatment.
The recommendation on ensuring a plan is in place for removal of the suture when
prophylactic cervical cerclage is used was made in response to an NHS England safety
report, which highlighted some instances when removal did not happen.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Vaginal progesterone is a relatively inexpensive and commonly used treatment for women
at risk of preterm birth, so the recommendations are unlikely to significantly alter practice.
As vaginal progesterone should now be considered for women with a history of preterm
birth (with an unknown cervical length or a cervical length greater than 25 mm on scan),
this might increase the use of progesterone, but the benefits of reduced numbers of
preterm births are likely to lead to cost savings overall.
The recommendation on planning for removal of the suture when prophylactic cervical
cerclage is used is not expected to affect practice.
Return to recommendations
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 30 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Emergency cervical cerclage
Recommendation 1.6.4
Why the committee made the recommendation
The recommendation on ensuring a plan is in place for removal of the suture when
emergency cervical cerclage is used was made in response to an NHS England safety
report, which highlighted some instances when removal did not happen.
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation is not expected to affect practice.
Return to recommendation
Repeat courses of maternal corticosteroids
Recommendations 1.9.4 to 1.9.6
Why the committee made the recommendations
There was some evidence that repeat doses of maternal corticosteroids reduce
birthweight, but the absolute reductions in birthweight were small, with a mean difference
in birthweight of 114 g between women receiving repeat courses and women receiving a
single course. Subgroup analyses showed reductions were seen when corticosteroids
were administered at lower gestational ages (below 30 weeks), when administered at
intervals of less than 7 days, and when higher doses of more than 24 mg (total dose of
repeat course) were administered. There was also a significant trend for reducing
birthweight as the number of repeat courses increased. There was no evidence of benefit
of maternal corticosteroids on chronic lung disease, but the committee were aware of a
benefit seen with the need for respiratory support in neonates, although this outcome had
not been prioritised for inclusion in the review. There was good evidence that repeat
courses of maternal corticosteroids had no effect or beneficial effects on perinatal
mortality, neonatal admission, intraventricular haemorrhage, growth at 2 years and
neurodevelopmental delay. The committee agreed that a single repeat course may be
beneficial in certain circumstances, when the previous course had been given more than
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 31 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
7 days previously and preterm birth was imminent, but that with multiple repeat courses
the effects on birthweight may outweigh the benefits. However, the committee agreed
that corticosteroids administered for other reasons during pregnancy would not count
towards this total of 2 courses, and so clarified in their recommendation that only courses
administered for preterm labour should be counted.
The committee were concerned with the lack of evidence for longer-term
neurodevelopmental and growth outcomes beyond 2 years and lack of evidence on the
optimal dose and interval for the repeat corticosteroids and so made a recommendation
for research.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations provide guidance on when a single repeat course of maternal
corticosteroids may be used, and so may reduce variation in practice. This may increase
the number of women who receive a single repeat course, and may reduce the number of
multiple (more than 2) courses of maternal corticosteroids given. The cost impact is
therefore likely to be minimal considering the low cost of a course of maternal
corticosteroids and the relatively small population of women for whom this will be
considered.
Return to recommendations
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 32 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Context
Preterm birth is the single biggest cause of neonatal mortality and morbidity in the UK.
Over 52,000 babies (around 7.3% of live births) in England and Wales in 2012 were born
preterm (that is, before 37+0 weeks of pregnancy). There has been no decline in the
preterm birth rate in the UK over the last 10 years.
Babies born preterm have high rates of neonatal and infant mortality, and the risk of
mortality increases as gestational age at birth decreases. Babies who survive preterm
birth have increased rates of disability. Recent UK studies comparing cohorts born in 1995
and 2006 have shown improved rates of survival (from 40% to 53%) for extreme preterm
births (born between 22 and 26 weeks). Rates of disability in survivors were largely
unchanged over this time period.
The major long-term consequence of prematurity is neurodevelopmental disability.
Although the risk for the individual child is greatest for those born at the earliest
gestational ages, the global burden of neurodevelopmental disabilities depends on the
number of babies born at each of these gestations, and so is greatest for babies born
between 32 and 36 weeks, less for those born between 28 and 31 weeks, and least for
those born at less than 28 weeks gestation.
Around 75% of preterm births occur after preterm labour, which may or may not be
preceded by preterm prelabour rupture of membranes. The remaining women giving birth
preterm have an elective preterm birth when this is thought to be in the fetal or maternal
interest (for example, because of extreme growth retardation in the baby or maternal
conditions such as pre-eclampsia).
This guideline reviews the evidence for the best way to provide treatment for women who
present with symptoms and signs of preterm labour, and women who are scheduled to
have an early planned birth. It also reviews how preterm birth can be optimally diagnosed
when symptoms are present, given that many women thought to be in preterm labour on a
clinical assessment will not give birth preterm.
The guideline does not cover who should and should not have medically indicated preterm
birth, or diagnostic or predictive tests in asymptomatic women.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 33 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Finding more information and committee
details
To find out what NICE has said on topics related to this guideline, see the NICE topic page
on intrapartum care.
For full details of the evidence and the guideline committee's discussions, see the
evidence reviews and full guideline. You can also find information about how the guideline
was developed, including details of the committee.
NICE has produced tools and resources to help you put this guideline into practice. For
general help and advice on putting NICE guidelines into practice, see resources to help
you put NICE guidance into practice.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 34 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Update information
June 2022: We have reviewed the evidence and made new recommendations on the use
of repeat courses of maternal corticosteroids. These recommendations are marked
[2022].
Recommendations that have been deleted, or changed without an evidence review
Some recommendations have been deleted from the 2015 guideline. Appendix 1 sets out
these recommendations and includes details of replacement recommendations. If there is
no replacement recommendation, an explanation for the deletion is given.
Some recommendations from the 2015 guideline have been amended with changes that
could affect the intent without reviewing the evidence. These are labelled [2015, amended
2022]. Appendix 2 sets out these recommendations and includes details of the revised
recommendations and the reasons for the changes.
August 2019: We have reviewed the evidence and made new recommendations on the
effectiveness of prophylactic vaginal progesterone and prophylactic cervical cerclage for
preterm labour and birth. These recommendations are marked [2019].
We have also made some changes without an evidence review:
•
•
updated recommendations to show cervical length of 25 mm or less as indicative of a
high risk of preterm birth for consistency
updated licensing information for erythromycin and magnesium sulfate use during
pregnancy
.
updated the time period when corticosteroids are offered to women with suspected
preterm labour to reflect current practice
•
updated advice on insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 test or placental alpha-
microglobulin 1 testing in preterm rupture of membranes to remove the word
'consider', making it clearer when the tests should be used.
These recommendations are marked [2015, amended 2019].
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 35 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Minor changes since publication
April 2024: We updated the licensing information about progesterone for
recommendations 1.2.1 and 1.2.2. Progesterone was previously an off-label treatment for
this indication.
October 2023: We updated links throughout to the NICE guideline on intrapartum care,
which has been updated.
December 2022: We updated the links in recommendations 1.12.3, 1.12.5 and 1.12.6 to refer
to the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour.
April 2021: In recommendation 1.4.4, we added a link to the section on women with
prolonged prelabour rupture of membranes who have group B streptococcal colonisation,
bacteriuria or infection, in NICE's updated guideline on neonatal infection.
January 2021: A duplicate link was removed from recommendation 1.12.11. Footnotes were
incorporated into the main text to improve accessibility.
August 2020: Links to the NICE guidelines on intrapartum care for women with existing
medical conditions or obstetric complications and their babies and intrapartum care for
healthy women and babies were added to recommendation 1.12.11. This recommendation is
marked [2015, amended 2020].
October 2019: The review date for recommendation 1.3.1 was updated to show it had been
amended in 2019 without an evidence review.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-1529-3
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 36 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
Preterm labour and birth (NG25)
Accreditation
NICE accredited
www.nice.org.uk/accreditation
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 37 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
37
