Management of Breech Presentation
Women with a breech presentation at term should be offered external cephalic version (ECV) unless there is an absolute contraindication. They should be advised on the risks and benefits of ECV and the implications for mode of delivery. Women who have a breech presentation at term following an unsuccessful or declined offer of ECV should be counseled on the risks and benefits of planned vaginal breech delivery versus planned caesarean section. Women should be informed that planned caesarean section leads to a small reduction in perinatal mortality compared with planned vaginal breech delivery. When planning delivery for a breech baby, the risk of perinatal mortality is approximately 0.5/1000 with caesarean section after 39+0 weeks of gestation, and approximately 2.0/1000 with planned vaginal breech birth. Women should be informed that planned vaginal breech birth increases the risk of low Apgar scores and serious short-term complications, but has not been shown to increase the risk of long-term morbidity. Clinicians should counsel women in an unbiased way that ensures a proper understanding of the absolute as well as relative risks of their different options. Women should be informed that planned caesarean section for breech presentation at term carries a small increase in immediate complications for the mother compared with planned vaginal birth. Caesarean section increases the risk of complications in future pregnancy, including the risks of opting for vaginal birth after caesarean section, the increased risk of complications at repeat caesarean section, and the risk of an abnormally invasive placenta. Women should be given an individualized assessment of the long-term risks of caesarean section based on their individual risk profile and reproductive intentions, and counseled accordingly. Women should be informed that caesarean section has been associated with a small increase in the risk of stillbirth for subsequent babies although this may not be causal. Following the diagnosis of persistent breech presentation, women should be assessed for risk factors for a poorer outcome in planned vaginal breech birth. The presence of a skilled birth attendant is essential for safe vaginal breech birth. Units with limited access to experienced personnel should inform women that vaginal breech birth is likely to be associated with greater risk and offer antenatal referral to a unit where skill levels and experience are greater. Where a woman presents with an unplanned vaginal breech labor, management should depend on the stage of labor, whether factors associated with increased complications are found, availability of appropriate clinical expertise and informed consent. Women near or in active second stage of labor should not be routinely offered caesarean section. Where time and circumstances permit, the position of the fetal neck and legs, and the fetal weight should be estimated using ultrasound, and the woman counseled as with planned vaginal breech birth. All maternity units must be able to provide skilled supervision for vaginal breech birth where a woman is admitted in advanced labor and protocols for this eventuality should be developed. Women should be informed that induction of labor is not usually recommended. Augmentation of slow progress with oxytocin should only be considered if the contraction frequency is low in the presence of epidural analgesia. Women should be informed that the effect of epidural analgesia on the success of vaginal breech birth is unclear, but that it is likely to increase the risk of intervention. Women should be informed that while evidence is lacking, continuous electronic fetal monitoring may lead to improved neonatal outcomes. Birth in a hospital with facilities for immediate caesarean section should be recommended with planned vaginal breech birth, but birth in an operating theatre is not routinely recommended. Women should be informed that adherence to a protocol for management reduces the chances of early neonatal morbidity. Adequate descent of the breech in the passive second stage is a prerequisite for encouragement of the active second stage. Either a semirecumbent or an all-fours position may be adopted for delivery and should depend on maternal preference and the experience of the attendant. Assistance, without traction, is required if there is delay or evidence of poor fetal condition. All obstetricians and midwives should be familiar with the techniques that can be used to assist vaginal breech birth. Simulation equipment should be used to rehearse the skills that are needed during vaginal breech birth by all doctors and midwives. Guidance for the case selection and management of vaginal breech birth should be developed in each department by the healthcare professionals who supervise such births. Departments should consider developing a checklist to ensure comprehensive counseling of the woman regarding planned mode of delivery for babies presenting by the breech.

Women with breech presentation at term following an unsuccessful or declined offer of ECV should be counselled on the risks and benefits of planned vaginal breech delivery versus planned caesarean section. Planned caesarean section leads to a small reduction in perinatal mortality compared with planned vaginal breech delivery. Women should be informed that planned vaginal breech birth increases the risk of low Apgar scores and serious short-term complications, but has not been shown to increase the risk of long-term morbidity. Clinicians should counsel women in an unbiased way that ensures a proper understanding of the absolute as well as relative risks of their different options. Women should also be informed about the risks of complications in future pregnancies associated with caesarean section.

The safety of vaginal breech delivery depends on antenatal assessment and the skill and experience of the birth attendant. Factors that affect safety include the presence of risk factors, such as high or low estimated fetal weight, footling presentation, or evidence of antenatal fetal compromise. Intrapartum management should be based on the stage of labor, availability of appropriate clinical expertise, and informed consent. Continuous fetal monitoring may lead to improved neonatal outcomes. Adequate descent of the breech in the passive second stage is necessary for a successful delivery. The woman can choose between a semirecumbent or all-fours position for delivery, depending on preference. Assistance during the active second stage should be provided without traction if there is a delay or evidence of poor fetal condition.

All maneuvers to avoid fetal trauma should be followed, including grasping the fetus around the pelvic girdle and avoiding hyperextension of the neck. Signs that delivery should be assisted include lack of tone or color, or delay, commonly due to extended arms or neck. Intervention to expedite breech birth is necessary if there is evidence of poor fetal condition or a delay of more than 5 minutes from delivery of the buttocks to the head. Selective episiotomy is recommended over routine episiotomy. Different techniques for assisted breech delivery are available, and the mode of delivery should be individualized based on various factors. The decision about mode of delivery for preterm breech babies should be made by an experienced obstetrician following a thorough clinical evaluation, taking into account the stage of labor and potential risks. Delivery of a second twin in breech presentation should be managed based on individual circumstances, with planned caesarean section not routinely recommended. Organizational and governance arrangements should be in place to support a routine vaginal breech delivery service, including simulation training for healthcare professionals and the development of guidelines for case selection and management.

Breech birth supports strict management protocol and skilled birth attendants. Future research should evaluate all-fours position, pelvimetry, and epidural analgesia for vaginal breech birth. Auditable topics include documentation of delivery discussions, vaginal delivery rates, and adverse outcomes. Useful links and support groups are available for further information.

The method of delivery and neonatal mortality among very low birth weight infants, pregnancy outcomes by mode of delivery among breech births, and the impact of cesarean delivery versus vaginal delivery on survival and morbidity for the breech fetus are important factors to consider in clinical practice.