External Cephalic Version (ECV) is a manipulation procedure to turn a breech baby to a head-down position. ECV has a success rate of approximately 50% and reduces the chance of a caesarean section. Labour after ECV may have a slightly higher rate of caesarean section and instrumental delivery. Predicting the success of ECV can be done to some extent, but models should not be routinely used. Using tocolysis with betamimetics can improve the success rates of ECV. ECV should be offered at term from 37 weeks of gestation. Regional analgesia is not routinely recommended but may be considered for repeat attempts or for women who cannot tolerate ECV without analgesia.

In nulliparous women with a low chance of spontaneous version, ECV from 36+0 weeks of gestation seems pragmatic. There is limited evidence on contraindications for ECV, but it is generally contraindicated in certain conditions. ECV after one caesarean delivery appears to have no greater risk than with an unscarred uterus. ECV has a very low complication rate, with rare reported risks. ECV should be performed where facilities for monitoring and surgical delivery are available. Anti-D immunoglobulin is recommended for women undergoing ECV who are D negative. ECV should only be performed by trained practitioners. The uptake of ECV can be increased by timely identification of breech presentation and provision of evidence-based information. Moxibustion may be considered for breech presentation at 33-35 weeks of gestation. Methods to improve antenatal detection of breech presentation, uptake of ECV, and success rate of ECV are recommended for future research. Auditable topics include complications of/after ECV and maternal perceptions/experience of ECV.

Cephalic version for breech presentation at term. Observational studies show success and complications rates. Spontaneous version after failed external cephalic version may occur. Timing of delivery and mode of delivery after successful external cephalic version are important factors to consider. Tocolysis and anesthesia can impact the success rate of external cephalic version. Patient satisfaction and experiences with external cephalic version should be considered. Recurrence of breech presentation in consecutive pregnancies is possible. Moxibustion and postural management are alternative methods for cephalic version. Further research may be needed in areas of clinical uncertainty.

Case-control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias, or chance and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal. Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series. Expert opinion. Good practice point/check. Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group.