Management of Premenstrual Syndrome
When clinically reviewing women for PMS, symptoms should be recorded prospectively over two cycles using a symptom diary. Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues may be used for 3 months for a definitive diagnosis if the completed symptom diary alone is inconclusive. Referral to a gynaecologist should be considered when simple measures have failed and the severity of PMS justifies gynaecological intervention. Women with severe PMS may benefit from being managed by a multidisciplinary team. An integrated holistic approach should be used when treating women with PMS. Drospirenone-containing combined oral contraceptives (COCs) may be effective for PMS and should be considered as a first-line pharmaceutical intervention. Percutaneous estradiol combined with cyclical progestogens has been shown to be effective for managing physical and psychological symptoms of severe PMS. Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) should be considered routinely as a treatment option for severe PMS. SSRIs should be considered one of the first-line pharmaceutical management options in severe PMS. Spironolactone can be used in women with PMS to treat physical symptoms. Hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy can be considered when medical management has failed or other gynaecological conditions indicate surgery. A decision-making algorithm is provided for the treatment of PMS.

1. Purpose and scope
This guideline reviews the diagnosis, classification, and management of premenstrual syndrome (PMS), examining pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatments.

2. Introduction and background epidemiology
Considerable work has been done to achieve consensus on the recognition, diagnosis, classification, and management of PMS. Differentiating physiological menstrual symptoms from PMS is based on the timing and impact on daily activities.

2.2 Classification of PMS (ISPMD consensus)
Core premenstrual disorders (PMDs) are the most commonly encountered type of PMS, with symptoms affecting daily functioning during the luteal phase. Variant PMDs include different subtypes like premenstrual exacerbation of underlying disorders and progestogen-induced PMDs.

4. How is PMS diagnosed?
Diagnosis of PMS involves recording symptoms prospectively over two cycles using a symptom diary. Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues may be used for a definitive diagnosis if symptoms are inconclusive.

5. What aspects are involved in delivering a service to women with PMS?
Referral to a gynaecologist should be considered when simple measures have failed to control symptoms. General practitioners manage most cases of PMS, with referral to secondary care for confirmed PMS.

6. How is PMS managed?
Complementary therapies may be beneficial for some women with PMS, although evidence is conflicting. An integrated holistic approach should be considered, taking into account interactions with conventional medicines.

When treating women with severe PMS, CBT should be considered routinely as a treatment option. Drospirenone-containing COCs may represent effective treatment for PMS and should be considered as a first-line pharmaceutical intervention. Continuous therapy with drospirenone-containing COCs may be more effective than cyclic regimens. Percutaneous estradiol combined with cyclical progestogens has been shown to be effective for managing severe PMS symptoms. Micronised progesterone is recommended for progestogenic opposition. GnRH analogues are highly effective in treating severe PMS.

PMS, GnRH analogues should be reserved for severe cases. Add-back therapy and BMD monitoring are recommended for long-term use. SSRIs are first-line treatment for severe PMS, with luteal or continuous dosing options. Discontinuation of SSRIs should be gradual to avoid withdrawal symptoms. Spironolactone can be used for physical symptoms in PMS. Hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy may be beneficial for severe cases of PMS.

PMS, hysterectomy, and bilateral oophorectomy can be considered when medical management has failed, long-term GnRH analogue treatment is required, or other gynaecological conditions indicate surgery. Hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy remove the ovarian cycle completely, allowing the use of estrogen replacement without progestogen. Surgery should not be contemplated without preoperative use of GnRH analogues as a test of cure. Women being surgically treated for PMS should be advised to use HRT, particularly if they are younger than 45 years of age. Endometrial ablation and hysterectomy with conservation of the ovaries are not recommended for severe PMS. Conservation of the ovaries will lead to persistence of PMS.

Phytomedicine has been shown to relieve premenstrual mood changes, improve leg health, reduce fluid retention, and alleviate premenstrual symptoms. Nutritional supplements, such as calcium and soy isoflavones, have also been effective in treating premenstrual syndrome. Acupuncture and herbal treatments, such as Vitex agnus castus, Ginkgo biloba, and saffron, have shown promising results in managing premenstrual symptoms. Hormonal treatments, including oral contraceptives and danazol, have been successful in treating premenstrual dysphoric disorder and severe premenstrual symptoms. Additionally, GnRH analogues with add-back therapy have been effective in treating premenstrual syndrome and endometriosis. Smoking has been associated with an increased risk of fractures in women.

Minimize scientific references and clinical details. Use exercise, cognitive behavioral therapy, vitamin B6, and combined oral contraceptives as first-line treatments for PMS.

day 15–28) low dose SSRIs, e.g. citalopram/escitalopram 10 mg
Second line Estradiol patches (100 micrograms) + micronised progesterone (100 mg or 200 mg [day 17–28], orally or vaginally) or LNG-IUS 52 mg 
Higher dose SSRIs continuously or luteal phase, e.g. citalopram/escitalopram 20–40 mg
Third line GnRH analogues + add-back HRT (continuous combined estrogen + progesterone [e.g. 50–100 micrograms estradiol patches or 2–4 doses of estradiol gel combined with micronised progesterone 100 mg/day] or tibolone 2.5 mg) 
Fourth line Surgical treatment ± HRT