Antenatal corticosteroids within seven days prior to preterm birth reduce perinatal and neonatal death and respiratory distress syndrome. For planned caesarean birth between 37+0 and 38+6 weeks, an informed discussion should take place about potential risks and benefits. Corticosteroids should be offered between 24+0 and 34+6 weeks for imminent preterm birth. Antenatal corticosteroids should be offered to women with PPROM at increased risk of preterm birth. Birth should not be delayed for antenatal corticosteroids if it impacts the health of the woman or baby.

Tolerance for up to 5 days after administration (with higher risk in diabetic women). Likely to reduce birthweight if birth more than 7 days after steroids. No benefits likely if birth is more than 7 days after starting treatment. May increase psychiatric and behavioral diagnoses if children born at term. Effects of unnecessary antenatal corticosteroids are not well described. Less evidence for women with multiple pregnancy. While no long-term harms have been proven, large-scale observational studies necessary for pharmacovigilance are lacking. Likely to reduce respiratory support and increase neonatal hypoglycemia. May decrease admission to NNU with respiratory morbidity. May reduce educational attainment at school age. Short-term complications such as hypoglycemia have not been rigorously studied. Rescue course likely to reduce need for respiratory support and birthweight. Diabetes should not be considered an absolute contraindication to antenatal corticosteroids for fetal lung maturation. In women with diabetes, additional insulin should be given according to an agreed protocol. Birth should not be delayed for antenatal corticosteroids if the indication for birth is impacting the health of the woman or her baby. A course of antenatal corticosteroids should be offered if planned early birth is necessary for hypertension in pregnancy. If imminent preterm birth is likely, a course of antenatal corticosteroids should be offered to women whose babies are thought to be small-for-gestational-age or have fetal growth restriction.

Antenatal corticosteroids should be offered to women with PPROM who are at increased risk of preterm birth. There is limited evidence to recommend repeat courses of antenatal corticosteroids if a woman remains at imminent risk of preterm birth seven days after administration. Antenatal corticosteroids are most effective in reducing RDS in pregnancies that birth between 24 hours and 7 days of administration of the second dose.

Antenatal corticosteroids show significant reductions in cases of RDS and cerebroventricular hemorrhage among infants born within specific time frames. There is also a reduction in fetal and neonatal death with timely administration of antenatal corticosteroids. However, caution is advised due to limitations in the data analysis. Accumulated data supports the early effects of antenatal corticosteroids on reducing mortality. Concerns regarding risks to women include increased blood glucose levels and potential effects on the cardiovascular system. Risks to the baby include lower birth weight, neonatal hypoglycemia, and potential long-term effects on development. WHO recommends offering antenatal corticosteroids only when necessary hospital services are available to minimize risks.

Birth should not be delayed to administer antenatal corticosteroids when there are serious concerns about maternal or fetal condition that will be alleviated by expedited birth. In the presence of systemic infection, the potential beneficial effects of antenatal corticosteroids intended for the baby are balanced against the effect of exacerbating the severity of systemic infection both for the woman and her baby. Corticosteroids cause immune suppression, so there is a potential risk of worsening systemic infection. Women should be informed that no reduction in serious morbidity or long-term benefits have been seen with repeat corticosteroids but babies who receive repeat doses are smaller. There is currently limited evidence to recommend repeat courses of antenatal corticosteroids if a woman remains at imminent risk of preterm birth seven days after administration. The maximum number of corticosteroid courses given in any one pregnancy should not exceed three. Studies are required to determine the effectiveness of antenatal corticosteroids in reducing neonatal morbidity when administered prior to elective cesarean birth at term. The gestational age range at which antenatal corticosteroids provide benefit remains controversial and requires further investigation. The safety and effectiveness of steroids in multiple pregnancies, women with diabetes, and women with chorioamnionitis require further investigation. Research is needed to investigate the effectiveness of lower doses of corticosteroids and the potential off-target effects of different formulations and dosing schedules. Follow-up studies are needed to determine the long-term effects of antenatal corticosteroids.

Antenatal corticosteroids for reducing adverse maternal and child outcomes in special populations of women at risk of imminent preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Managing hyperglycaemia during antenatal steroid administration, labour, and birth in pregnant women with diabetes. Should antenatal corticosteroids be considered in women with gestational diabetes before planned late gestation caesarean section. Effects of antenatal corticosteroid administration on mortality and long-term morbidity in early preterm, growth-restricted infants. Antenatal corticosteroids in preterm small-for-gestational age infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Use of antenatal corticosteroids in special circumstances. Single versus weekly courses of antenatal corticosteroids in preterm premature rupture of membranes. Multiple courses of antenatal corticosteroid therapy in patients with preterm premature rupture of membranes. Neonatal sepsis after betamethasone administration to patients with preterm premature rupture of membranes. Length of latency with preterm premature rupture of membranes before 32 weeks’ gestation. Duration of the latency period in preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Length of latency with preterm premature rupture of membranes before 32 weeks’ gestation. Association of fetal growth restriction with neurocognitive function after repeated antenatal betamethasone treatment vs placebo. Antenatal corticosteroids for preterm premature rupture of membranes: single or repeat course. The clinical use of corticosteroids in pregnancy. Antenatal corticosteroids: an assessment of anticipated benefits and potential risks. Antenatal corticosteroids for accelerating fetal lung maturation for women at risk of preterm birth. Different corticosteroids and regimens for accelerating fetal lung maturation for women at risk of preterm birth. Maternal intramuscular dexamethasone versus betamethasone before preterm birth. Transplacental versus direct fetal corticosteroid treatment for accelerating fetal lung maturation where there is a risk of preterm birth. Antenatal dexamethasone for early preterm birth in low-resource countries. Corticosteroid therapy for prevention of respiratory distress syndrome in severe preeclampsia. Antenatal corticosteroid therapy and blood pressure at 14 years of age in preterm children. Neurodevelopmental disorders among term infants exposed to antenatal corticosteroids during pregnancy. Impact of antenatal synthetic glucocorticoid exposure on endocrine stress reactivity in term-born children. Persistent effects of antenatal synthetic glucocorticoids on endocrine stress reactivity from childhood to adolescence. Long-term impacts of prenatal synthetic glucocorticoids exposure on functional brain correlates of cognitive monitoring in adolescence. Prenatal betamethasone exposure and psychopathology risk in extremely low birth weight survivors in the third and fourth decades of life. A population-based, multifaceted strategy to implement antenatal corticosteroid treatment versus standard care for the reduction of neonatal mortality due to preterm birth in low-income and middle-income countries.