Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are prenatal diagnostic tests offered to pregnant women for various reasons. It is important to inform women about the additional risk of miscarriage associated with these procedures. Amniocentesis should not be performed before 15 weeks of gestation, while CVS should not be performed before 10 weeks of gestation. Women with multiple pregnancies have a slightly higher risk of miscarriage. Screening for blood-borne viruses should be reviewed before an invasive test is considered. Care should be organized to provide appropriate support for women and their partners through prenatal screening. It is important to provide information on aftercare and options for continuing or terminating the pregnancy based on the test results. The risks associated with these procedures can be minimized by ensuring they are performed by appropriately trained operators. Additionally, results from CVS should be interpreted carefully, and decisions regarding ongoing care should be made in consultation with healthcare providers.

Maintain competency with Maternal Fetal Medicine subspecialty training, fetal medicine Advanced Skills TrainingModules or equivalent international qualification. Maintain competency by completing or supervising, ideally, a minimum of 20 amniocentesis or CVS procedures annually. Seek support from a more experienced operator if anticipated/encountered difficulties. Review practice where an operator’s annual loss rate of normal babies exceeds 3% for either amniocentesis or CVS. Perform amniocentesis after 15+0 weeks’ gestation and CVS should not be performed before 10+0 weeks’ gestation. CVS should ideally be performed from 11+0 weeks’ gestation to reduce technical challenges. In multiple pregnancies, detailed counseling and pregnancy mapping are essential. Women with multiple pregnancies should be informed of the additional risk of pregnancy loss. Consider third-trimester amniocentesis for specific indications. Review screening results for blood-borne viruses before invasive testing and discuss individualized risk of viral transmission. Optimize antiretroviral treatment to aim for an undetectable viral load before procedures. The risk of mother to child transmission of infection is low with proper management.

Amniocentesis has shown a significant increase in mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of Hepatitis B when HBV DNA is over 500 copies/ml. There is currently no evidence of risk of MTCT following amniocentesis for Hepatitis C.

Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling in HIV-infected pregnant women: a multicentre case series. Amniocentesis in HIV pregnant women: 16 years of experience. Amniocentesis and mother-to-child human immunodeficiency virus transmission in the Agence Nationale de Recherches sur le SIDA et les Hepatites Virales French Perinatal Cohort. Amniocentesis in pregnant HIV-infected patients. Amniocentesis and women with hepatitis B, hepatitis C, or human immunodeficiency virus. Risk of vertical transmission of hepatitis B after amniocentesis in HBs antigen-positive mothers. Detection of hepatitis C virus RNA (HCV RNA) in amniotic fluid: a prospective study.