The guideline provides recommendations for managing Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy and Hyperemesis Gravidarum. It suggests using an objective and validated index like the Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) and HyperEmesis Level Prediction (HELP) tools to classify severity. Ketonuria should not be used to assess severity. First line antiemetics such as anti (H1) histamines, phenothiazines and doxylamine/pyridoxine (Xonvea®) are safe and effective and should be prescribed initially. Ondansetron is also safe and effective and can be used as a second line antiemetic if first line antiemetics are ineffective. Metoclopramide is also safe and effective and can be used alone or in combination with other antiemetics. Women should be asked about previous adverse reactions to antiemetic therapies. Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) with additional potassium chloride in each bag, guided by daily monitoring of electrolytes, is the most appropriate intravenous hydration. Combinations of different drugs should be used in women who do not respond to a single antiemetic. Thiamine supplementation should be given to all women admitted with vomiting, or severely reduced dietary intake. All therapeutic measures should be tried before considering termination of pregnancy. The guideline aims to provide updated evidence-based information regarding the diagnosis and subsequent management of NVP and HG across community, ambulatory day care and inpatient settings.

Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy (NVP) is diagnosed when onset is prior to 16 weeks of gestation and other causes of nausea and vomiting have been ruled out. Hyperemesis Gravidarum (HG) is diagnosed when symptoms start in early pregnancy, nausea and/or vomiting are severe enough to cause an inability to eat and drink normally and strongly limits daily activities of living. Signs of dehydration contribute to the diagnosis. The Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) and HyperEmesis Level Prediction (HELP) tools can be used to classify the severity of NVP and HG. Clinicians should be aware of the features in history, examination and investigation that allow NVP and HG to be assessed and for their severity to be monitored. Ketonuria is not an indicator of dehydration in pregnancy and should not be used to assess severity. NVP typically starts between the fourth and seventh weeks of gestation, peaks in the ninth week, and resolves by the 20th week in 90% of women. The HELP score can be used to track progress with treatment in women with severe NVP and HG. NVP and HG are associated with hyponatraemia, hypokalaemia, low serum urea, raised haematocrit and ketonuria with a metabolic hypochloraemic alkalosis. Liver function tests are abnormal in up to 40% of women with HG, with the most likely abnormality being a rise in transaminases. Levels of both bilirubin and amylase may be mildly elevated. These abnormalities improve as the HG resolves. Ketonuria is not an indicator of dehydration and is not associated with severity of NVP or HG. Clinical assessment with the HELP or PUQE scores are better indicators of severity. Severe malnutrition can be assessed with anthropometric measures such as mid-upper arm circumference and validated nutrition screening tools such as the Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST) which can be adapted for pregnancy.

The text discusses investigations and care for patients with nausea and vomiting during pregnancy (NVP) and hyperemesis gravidarum (HG). Investigations include urinalysis, urea and electrolytes, full blood count, blood glucose level, and ultrasound scan. In refractory cases, thyroid function tests, liver function tests, calcium and phosphate, amylase, and venous blood gas may be checked. Mild NVP can be managed in the community with antiemetics. If community measures fail, ambulatory day care is recommended. Inpatient care is considered for continued nausea and vomiting, inability to keep down oral antiemetics, clinical dehydration or weight loss, confirmed or suspected comorbidity. An ultrasound scan should be scheduled for inpatients to confirm viability and gestational age. Women who are not dehydrated can be cared for in the community with antiemetics, reassurance, oral hydration and dietary advice. If women are unable to tolerate oral antiemetics or oral fluids then ambulatory day care management is appropriate. Combinations of different drugs should be used in women who do not respond to a single antiemetic.

For severe Hyperemesis Gravidarum, parenteral, transdermal, or rectal administration may be more effective than oral regimen. Corticosteroids should be used where standard therapies have been ineffective and in combination with antiemetics. Clinicians should use antiemetics they are familiar with, and may need to use drugs from different classes or combinations of two or more antiemetics. A combination of doxylamine and pyridoxine is the only licensed treatment for NVP in the UK. Ondansetron has been shown to be superior to doxylamine and pyridoxine in reducing nausea and vomiting. Antihistamines should be first line, with ondansetron as second line. Corticosteroids should not be used until conventional treatment with intravenous fluid replacement and regular antiemetics has been proven to be ineffective. Ginger foodstuffs or over the counter tablets have little or no efficacy for severe NVP and HG. Safety data exists for antiemetics such as anti (H1) histamines, phenothiazines and pyridoxine-doxylamine, and they should be prescribed initially when required for NVP and HG. Ondansetron is safe as a second line treatment if first line antiemetics are ineffective. Metoclopramide is safe and can be used alone or in combination with other antiemetics.

Dystonic reactions are significantly less common in non-pregnant patients receiving a slow infusion as opposed to a bolus injection of 10 mg of metoclopramide. Women should be asked about previous adverse reactions to antiemetic therapies. If adverse reactions occur, medications should be promptly stopped. Women should not be prescribed medications that have caused previous adverse reactions. Antihistamines, phenothiazines, and dopamine antagonists, including metoclopramide and domperidone, can be used to manage women's symptoms. Ondansetron use in the first trimester of pregnancy is not associated with an overall increase in malformation rate. However, conflicting findings have led to warnings to avoid ondansetron in the first trimester. Due to the risk of extrapyramidal effects with metoclopramide, it should be used as second-line therapy and only for short-term use. Corticosteroid use in the first trimester is not associated with an increase in risk of congenital malformations. Urea and serum electrolyte levels should be checked daily in women requiring intravenous fluids. Histamine type-2 receptor blockers or proton pump inhibitors may be used for women developing gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, oesophagitis or gastritis. Thiamine supplementation should be given to all women admitted with vomiting. Women admitted with HG should be offered thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin.

Graduated compression stockings should be used when low-molecular-weight heparin is contra-indicated. Thromboprophylaxis can be discontinued upon discharge unless other indications exist for continuation. Women with HG have an increased risk of venous thromboembolism. Women with previous or current NVP or HG should consider avoiding iron-containing preparations if these exacerbate symptoms or consider an alternative route of administering iron. Women should be questioned about their bowel habits and offered laxatives if constipated, especially if ondansetron is used. Treatment with proton pump inhibitors should be offered for Gastro-oesophageal reflux. Women with conditions requiring oral medication may need antiemetics and adjusted medication times. HG increases risks in conditions like diabetes mellitus, gastric band, gastric bypass, and gastric sleeve surgery. Women requiring intravenous fluids should have daily monitoring of fluid and serum electrolyte levels. Oesophago-gastroduodenoscopy is indicated in cases of haematemesis or severe epigastric pain. Wernicke encephalopathy due to vitamin B1 deficiency is a potentially fatal medical emergency. Thiamine supplementation is recommended for all women admitted with HG. Women with HG should discontinue thromboprophylaxis at discharge or when HG resolves. Women with severe NVP or HG should be offered serial scans to monitor fetal growth in the late second or third trimester. Upon discharge, women should be advised to continue with their antiemetics and know how to access further care. Normal saline with additional potassium chloride is the most appropriate intravenous hydration.

The use of dextrose infusions for fluid replacement in nausea and vomiting during pregnancy (NVP) and hyperemesis gravidarum (HG) is not recommended. The most important intervention is intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement. Dextrose-containing solutions can precipitate Wernicke encephalopathy in thiamine-deficient states and should be avoided. High doses of parenteral thiamine should be given to prevent Wernicke encephalopathy. 

NVP and HG can adversely affect a woman's quality of life. Practitioners should assess the severity of a woman's symptoms in relation to her quality of life and social situation. A full assessment of both physical and mental health status during the pregnancy should be carried out and psychological support should be provided if necessary. Information about patient support groups should be provided to all women admitted with nausea and vomiting in pregnancy.

NVP has been reported to reduce quality of life, impairing a woman's ability to function on a day-to-day basis, and negatively affects relationships with her partner and family. Women with HG are three to six times more likely than women with NVP to have low quality of life. 

Depressive symptoms and poor mental health are associated with severity of NVP. Pre-existing mental health conditions may be exacerbated by HG particularly where prescribed oral medications are not being taken or kept down due to vomiting. Clinical assessment should be considered for depression, anxiety and postnatal depression with appropriate referral. Poor mental health can persist post-partum and HG is a risk factor for postpartum PTSD. Pregnancy sickness specific counselling may be helpful either during or after pregnancy.

In women experiencing severe Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy (NVP) or Hyperemesis Gravidarum (HG), input should be sought from allied professionals such as mental health teams and dieticians to provide a holistic approach to care. If standard treatments fail to manage symptoms, enteral tube feeding or parenteral treatment should be considered. Parenteral nutrition is a high-risk intervention and should only be considered when all other treatments have failed. There are no defined criteria for starting parenteral or enteral tube feeding. The effectiveness of these treatments is not well established and they are often employed as a last resort. Feeding options include nasogastric, nasoduodenal or nasojejunal tubes, or percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy or gastrojejunostomy feeding. Parenteral feeding with a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC line) is often better tolerated than enteral feeding; however, it carries a higher risk of infection and vascular complications.

Before considering termination of pregnancy, all therapeutic measures should have been offered. Around 10% of women with HG will terminate a wanted pregnancy due to the condition. Treatment options of antiemetics, corticosteroids, enteral tube and parenteral feeding, and correction of electrolyte or metabolic disturbances should be considered before deciding that the only option is termination of pregnancy.

There is no evidence of significant impact on long-term all-cause mortality in women who experience NVP or HG. However, these women are at increased risk of Postnatal Depression (PND), anxiety and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) postpartum.

Women with hyperemesis gravidarum (HG) have an increased risk of depression, anxiety, and postnatal depression. Recurrence of HG in future pregnancies is common, with rates varying from 15% to 81%. Symptoms of HG should resolve rapidly after birth, if not, further investigation is necessary. A systematic review found an association between HG and a small increase in adverse health outcomes for children born to women with HG. Women with previous HG are advised to use lifestyle/dietary modifications and antiemetics that were useful in the previous pregnancy to reduce the risk of HG in the current pregnancy. A study showed a lower recurrence rate of HG in women who took pre-emptive antiemetics before pregnancy or before the onset of symptoms.

Hospitalizations during pregnancy are a common occurrence. The need for hospital care can be determined by factors such as nausea and vomiting during pregnancy, which is not limited to 'morning sickness'. Recurrence risk in hyperemesis gravidarum is a significant concern. The global rates of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy have been quantified in a meta-analysis. Recurrence, postponing pregnancy, and termination rates after hyperemesis gravidarum have been studied. Clinical management of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum across primary and secondary care is crucial. Fetally-encoded GDF15 and maternal GDF15 sensitivity are major determinants of nausea and vomiting in human pregnancy. New variants in GDF15 associated with hyperemesis gravidarum have been uncovered. GDF15 also plays a role in familial and recurrent hyperemesis gravidarum. A prospective study of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy has been conducted. The Windsor definition for hyperemesis gravidarum has been established. Reliable and valid measures of nausea and vomiting have been developed. The Index of Nausea, Vomiting, and Retching is a new format of the Index of Nausea and Vomiting. The Motherisk-PUQE scoring system for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy has been developed and validated. A modified Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis and Nausea (PUQE) scoring index has been validated to assess the severity of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. The 24-hour Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE-24) scale is used for the same purpose. The HyperEmesis Level Prediction (HELP Score) Identifies Patients with Indicators of Severe Disease.

The clinical guideline cites various studies on hyperemesis gravidarum and malnutrition in pregnancy. It discusses the association of Wernicke's encephalopathy with abnormal liver function in hyperemesis gravidarum, that ketonuria is not associated with disease severity, and the use of diagnostic markers for the condition. The guideline also reviews the use of the Mid-Upper Arm Circumference (MUAC) and Dietary Diversity Score for assessing malnutrition in pregnant women and the clinical value of muscle mass assessment in malnutrition. It refers to the Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool and the 'MUST' Explanatory Booklet for malnutrition screening. 

The guideline further discusses the management of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, risk perception regarding drug use in pregnancy, and the safety of drugs for treating nausea and vomiting. It also covers the relevance of thiamine evaluation, outpatient care for hyperemesis, and the comparison of day care with inpatient management for nausea and vomiting. The guideline also reviews the utility of corticosteroids in treating hyperemesis gravidarum and the comparison of ondansetron with doxylamine and pyridoxine, and with metoclopramide for treating hyperemesis gravidarum.

This text includes references to various studies examining treatments for severe nausea and vomiting during pregnancy, also known as hyperemesis gravidarum. Treatments studied include ondansetrone, metoclopromide, granisetron, promethazine, vitamin B6, oral pyridoxine, doxylamine succinate-pyridoxine HCl, corticosteroids, ginger, and metoclopramide. The studies vary in their results, with some finding certain treatments more effective than others. Some studies also examine the safety of these treatments, including potential risks of major congenital malformations and fetal death.

The text discusses various studies examining the use of ondansetron during pregnancy and its potential association with congenital malformations and oral clefts in offspring. Some studies include a systematic review and meta-analysis of ondansetron use and the risk of major congenital malformations, a comparative study on the safety of ondansetron for nausea and vomiting during pregnancy, and a study on the use of ondansetron in early pregnancy and the risk of congenital malformations. Other studies examined the risk of neonatal ventricular septal defect with first trimester ondansetron use, the off-label use of ondansetron in pregnancy in Western Australia, and the safety of ondansetron and chlorpromazine for hyperemesis gravidarum in first trimester pregnancy. There was also a study on potential risk factors for child malnutrition in rural Kerala, India, and a study on symptoms and pregnancy outcomes associated with extreme weight loss among women with hyperemesis gravidarum.

10. 1007/  s0040  4-  013-   2906-   x
 115. Maltepe C, Koren G. The management of nausea and vomiting 
of pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum--a 2016 update. J 
Obstet Gynaecol Can. Jun 2016;38(6):505-16. https://  doi. org/  10. 
1016/  j.  jogc.  2016.  04.  009
 116. Grooten IJ, Roseboom TJ, Painter RC. Barriers and challenges in 
hyperemesis gravidarum research. Nutr Metab Insights. 2015;8:33-9. 
https://  doi. org/  10. 4137/  NMI.  S29528
 117. Hizli D, Kamalak Z, Kosus A, Kosus N, Akkurt G. Hyperemesis 
gravidarum and depression in pregnancy: is there an association? 
J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol. Dec 2012;33(4):171-5. https://  doi. 
org/  10. 3109/  01674  82012  724165
 118. Poursharif B, Korst LM, MacGibbon KW, Fejzo MS, Romero R, 
Goodwin TM. Elective pregnancy termination in a large cohort of 
women with hyperemesis gravidarum. Contraception. Dec 
2007;76(6):451-5. https://  doi. org/  10. 1016/j.  contra.  2007.  07.  010
 119. Uguz F, Gezginc K, Kayhan F, Cicek E, Kantarci AH. Is hyperemesis 
gravidarum associated with mood, anxiety and personality disorders: 
a case-control study. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2012 Jul-Aug 
2012;34(4):398-402. https://  doi. org/  10. 1016/j.  genhosppsych.  2012. 
03. 020
 120. Tan PC, Vani S, Lim BK, Omar SZ. Anxiety and depression in 
hyperemesis gravidarum: prevalence, risk factors and correlation 
with clinical severity. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. Apr 
2010;149(2):153-8. https://  doi. org/  10. 1016/j.  ejogrb.  2009.  12.  019
 121. Mitchell-Jones N, Gallos I, Farren J, Tobias A, Bottomley C, Bourne 
T. Psychological morbidity associated with hyperemesis gravidarum: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG. Jan 2017;124(1):20-30. 
https://  doi. org/  10. 1111/  1471-   0528.  14337
 122. Dean C, Bannigan K, Marsden J. Reviewing the effect of hyper -
emesis gravidarum on women's lives and mental health. Br J Mid -
wifery. 2018;26(2):109-19. https://  doi. org/  10. 12968/  bjom.  2018.  26. 
2. 109
 123. Mazzotta P, Stewart D, Atanackovic G, Koren G, Magee LA. Psycho -
logical effects of treatments for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. Jan 2000;182(1 Pt 1):256-61. https://  doi. org/  10. 
1016/  S0002-   9378(00)  70235  -  3
 124. Heitmann K, Nordeng H, Havnen GC, Solheimsnes A, Holst L. The 
burden of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: severe impacts 
on quality of life, daily life functioning and willingness to become 
pregnant again - results from a cross-sectional study. BMC Preg -
nancy Childbirth. Apr 11 2017;17(1):75. https://  doi. org/  10. 1186/ 
s1288  4-  017-   1278-   8
 125. E

The attached text includes references to multiple clinical studies examining the impact of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy on women's quality of life. These studies indicate that these symptoms can significantly affect daily life functioning, willingness to become pregnant again, and can lead to emotional distress, anxiety, and depression. Some studies also highlight the importance of psychosocial context in understanding the impact of these symptoms on health-related quality of life. Additionally, the text references a survey that identified interventions women use to alleviate their symptoms. The studies also suggest that severe nausea and vomiting during pregnancy can lead to increased rates of sick leave.

The text discusses various studies and resources related to hyperemesis gravidarum, a severe form of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. The studies cover various aspects of the condition, including its impact on health-related quality of life, its associations with depression, anxiety, and stress, and its psychosocial burden. Other research investigates the termination of pregnancy due to hyperemesis gravidarum, women's responses to the condition, and its potential associations with cognitive, behavioural, and emotional well-being. Some studies also explore the historical stigma of hyperemesis gravidarum, women's experiences with the condition, and the perspectives of women on the management and consequences of the condition. Further research investigates the psychiatric consultation of patients with hyperemesis gravidarum, the biological-psychological controversy surrounding the condition, and its impact on maternal mental health and maternal-fetal attachment. Other studies examine the factors related to nausea, vomiting, and fatigue in early pregnancy, and the potential link between nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and depression. Some research also challenges the theory of a psychiatric etiology of hyperemesis gravidarum and investigates the potential link between the condition and personality characteristics. Other studies compare the incidence of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy between depressed women treated with antidepressants and non-depressed women, and explore the potential psychological factors of hyperemesis gravidarum. Some research also suggests that psychiatric factors do not affect the recurrence risk of hyperemesis gravidarum.

Clinical studies suggest a correlation between hyperemesis gravidarum (severe nausea and vomiting during pregnancy) and psychological symptoms such as depression and anxiety. There is also an association between hyperemesis gravidarum and increased rates of pregnancy termination and suicidal ideation. Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can also be a complication in pregnancy, and there is an association between the degree of nausea in pregnancy and subsequent posttraumatic stress. Hyperemesis gravidarum may also be complicated by Helicobacter pylori infection. Treatment strategies for hyperemesis gravidarum include total parenteral nutrition support to improve pregnancy outcomes, and in some cases, nutritional treatment by nasogastric tube feeding.

Nasojejunal feeding, percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy, and feeding jejunostomy have been used in the treatment of severe hyperemesis gravidarum. Termination is not the preferred treatment for severe hyperemesis gravidarum, with successful management possible using prednisolone. Elective pregnancy termination has been observed in a large cohort of women with hyperemesis gravidarum. Mortality secondary to hyperemesis gravidarum has been reported. Long-term health outcomes of children born to mothers with hyperemesis gravidarum have been studied, with a systematic review and meta-analysis conducted. The protective effects of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy against adverse fetal outcomes have been studied. Preemptive treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy has been explored. Research priorities for hyperemesis gravidarum have been identified through a patient-clinician partnership. The Irish Medicines in Pregnancy Service has issued a position statement on ondansetron use in pregnancy.

The guideline uses a standardised grading scheme to classify evidence levels and recommendations. Evidence levels range from 1++ (high-quality meta-analyses or randomised controlled trials with very low risk of bias) to 4 (expert opinion). Recommendation grades range from A (at least one meta-analysis or RCT rated as 1++, directly applicable to the target population) to D (evidence level 3 or 4, or extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+). Good Practice Points are recommended best practices based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group.

The guideline includes the Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) index which measures the severity of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, and the HyperEmesis Level Prediction Score (HELP) to predict the severity of hyperemesis gravidarum.

Recommended antiemetic therapies and dosages are provided, with first, second, and third line treatments. First line treatments include Doxylamine and Pyridoxine, Cyclizine, Prochlorperazine, Promethazine, and Chlorpromazine. Second line treatments include Metoclopramide, Domperidone, and Ondansetron. The third line treatment is Hydrocortisone, which should be reserved for cases where standard therapies have failed.

The guideline also includes treatment algorithms for Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy (NVP) and Hyperemesis Gravidarum (HG) in primary care, ambulatory care, emergency department and inpatient care.

This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by a team of experts. The guideline has been endorsed by the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM); Association of Early Pregnancy Units (AEPU); and General Practitioners Championing Perinatal Care (GPCPC); and supported by the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP). Several organisations and individuals provided comments at peer review. The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. The review process will commence in 2027. The guidelines are produced as an educational aid to good clinical practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.