Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are prenatal diagnostic tests that should not be performed before specific gestational ages. Women should be informed of the additional risk of miscarriage associated with these procedures, which is likely to be below 0.5%. It is important to provide individualized counseling and review screening results for blood-borne viruses before considering an invasive test. Care should be organized to support women and their partners through the decision-making process and provide appropriate aftercare. Procedure-related risks may be increased with less skilled operators, so training and maintaining good practice are essential. Additionally, the results of chorionic villus sampling can be affected by placental mosaicism in a small percentage of cases. Discussions regarding ongoing care should be based on the test results and individual circumstances.

Maintain competency by completing or supervising a minimum of 20 amniocentesis or CVS procedures annually. Seek support from a more experienced operator if difficulties are anticipated or encountered. Amniocentesis should be performed after 15+0 weeks' gestation to avoid risks. CVS should not be performed before 10+0 weeks' gestation. Perform CVS from 11+0 weeks' gestation to reduce technical challenges. Detailed counseling and pregnancy mapping are essential for women with multiple pregnancies. Considerations for third-trimester amniocentesis include a low risk of preterm labor and culture failure. Review screening results for blood-borne viruses before invasive testing to assess the risk of mother to child transmission. Optimize antiretroviral treatment for undetectable viral load before procedures. The risk of mother to child transmission of Hepatitis B is low with a viral load less than 6.99 log10 copies/ml. Limited data are available for mother to child transmission of Hepatitis C.

Amniocentesis has shown an increased risk of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of Hepatitis B when the HBV DNA is over 500 copies/ml. There is currently no evidence of risk of MTCT following amniocentesis for Hepatitis C.

Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling in HIV-infected pregnant women: a multicentre case series. Amniocentesis in HIV pregnant women: 16 years of experience. Amniocentesis and mother-to-child human immunodeficiency virus transmission in the French Perinatal Cohort. Amniocentesis in pregnant HIV-infected patients. Amniocentesis and women with hepatitis B, hepatitis C, or human immunodeficiency virus. Risk of vertical transmission of hepatitis B after amniocentesis in HBs antigen-positive mothers. Detection of hepatitis C virus RNA in amniotic fluid.