Care of Women with Obesity in Pregnancy

Primary care services should ensure that all women of childbearing age have the opportunity to optimise their weight before pregnancy. Women of childbearing age with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should receive information and advice about the risks of obesity during pregnancy and childbirth, and be supported to lose weight before conception and between pregnancies. Women should be informed that weight loss between pregnancies reduces the risk of stillbirth, hypertensive complications, and fetal macrosomia.

Women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater wishing to become pregnant should be advised to take 5 mg folic acid supplementation daily. Obese women are at high risk of vitamin D deficiency, but routine vitamin D supplementation remains uncertain.

All maternity units should have facilities and equipment to care for pregnant women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater. Women with a booking BMI 40 kg/m2 should have a moving and handling risk assessment in the third trimester.

All pregnant women should have their weight, height, and BMI measured at the antenatal booking visit. Consideration should be given to reweighing women during the third trimester.

All pregnant women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should be provided with information about the risks associated with obesity in pregnancy. Dietetic advice should be provided early in pregnancy. Anti-obesity drugs are not recommended in pregnancy.

Pregnant women with a booking BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should be referred to an obstetric anaesthetist for assessment. Women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater have a pre-existing risk factor for developing venous thromboembolism during pregnancy.

Women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should be screened for gestational diabetes and hypertensive complications of pregnancy. Women with more than one moderate risk factor may benefit from taking aspirin daily. Women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should be screened for mental health problems.

Serial measurement of symphysis fundal height is recommended for fetal monitoring. Intrapartum fetal monitoring should follow NICE recommendations. In the absence of good-quality evidence, intrapartum care should follow NICE guidelines.

Women with maternal obesity should have an informed discussion with their obstetrician and anaesthetist about a plan for labour and birth. Elective induction of labour at term in obese women may reduce the chance of caesarean birth without increasing adverse outcomes. Women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should have an individualised decision for vaginal birth after caesarean section.

Class I and II maternal obesity is not a reason for advising birth within a consultant-led unit. Women with class III obesity should receive continuous midwifery care during labour. In the absence of current evidence, intrapartum care should follow NICE guidelines. Women with a BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should have venous access established early in labour. Active management of the third stage of labour is advised for all women, with additional considerations for those with a BMI greater than 30 kg/m2.

Postoperative wound care following caesarean section in women with obesity:
- Women with class 1 obesity or greater should receive prophylactic antibiotics at the time of surgery.
- Women undergoing caesarean section with more than 2 cm subcutaneous fat should have suturing of the subcutaneous tissue space.
- Routine use of negative pressure dressing therapy, barrier retractors, and subcutaneous drains is not recommended.

Initiation and maintenance of breastfeeding in women with maternal obesity:
- Women with a BMI of 30 kg/m2 or greater should receive specialist advice and support for breastfeeding.

Postnatal care and follow-up after pregnancy:
- Maternal obesity should be considered when deciding on postnatal contraception.
- Women with class I obesity or greater should continue to receive nutritional advice post-childbirth.

Support for minimal interpregnancy weight gain or risks of future pregnancy:
- Women should be supported to lose weight postpartum and offered referral to weight management services.

Management of pregnancy following bariatric surgery:
- A waiting period of 12-18 months after bariatric surgery is recommended before attempting pregnancy.
- Women with previous bariatric surgery should have consultant-led antenatal care and nutritional surveillance.
- Referral to a dietician for specialized nutritional needs is recommended for women with previous bariatric surgery.

The neonatal bone mineral content did not differ significantly between infants born to mothers assigned to cholecalciferol 1000 iu/day and those assigned to placebo. Cholecalciferol 1000 iu/day was found to be sufficient for most pregnant women to maintain vitamin D levels and was safe. Antenatal care for women with obesity should include multidisciplinary care and access to appropriate facilities and equipment. Maternity units should have a central list of necessary equipment for women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater. Pregnant women with a BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should have a moving and handling risk assessment. Weight, height, and BMI should be measured at the booking visit, with consideration for reweighing in the third trimester. Pregnant women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should be informed about the risks associated with obesity in pregnancy. Dietetic advice and exercise guidance should be offered early in pregnancy. Anti-obesity drugs are not recommended during pregnancy. Pregnant women with a booking BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should be referred to an obstetric anaesthetist for assessment. Obesity is a risk factor for anaesthetic-related complications. Risk assessments for anaesthetic and pressure sores should be conducted for women with a BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater.

Tissue viability issues. BMI > 40 kg/m2 and immobility are risk factors for pressure sores. Assess risk using validated scale. Screen all pregnant women with BMI > 30 kg/m2 for gestational diabetes. Obese women have increased risk of gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia. Consider aspirin for high-risk women. Obese women have increased risk of VTE. Screen obese pregnant women for mental health problems. Obese pregnant women at increased risk of fetal structural anomalies. Maternal obesity affects screening for chromosomal and structural anomalies. Consider transvaginal ultrasound and diagnostic testing for high-risk obese women. Obese pregnant women may require extra time and repeat scans for fetal anomaly detection.

Fetal surveillance during pregnancy for women with obesity should include serial measurement of symphysis fundal height (SFH) from 24 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound can be considered if SFH measurements are inaccurate. Intrapartum fetal monitoring should follow NICE recommendations, with intermittent monitoring using Pinard stethoscope or Doppler ultrasound. Women with obesity are at increased risk of stillbirth and prolonged pregnancy. Induction of labor may be considered to reduce the risk of caesarean birth in obese women. Decision for mode of birth should be individualized, considering comorbidities and preferences. Planned caesarean section may not reduce morbidity in women with class III obesity. Induction of labor for suspected macrosomia may reduce the risk of shoulder dystocia and fetal fractures. A detailed plan for obstetric and anesthetic management should be in place for women with obesity.

Women with obesity and a previous caesarean section should have an individualized decision for VBAC following informed discussion and consideration of all relevant clinical factors. Obesity is a risk factor for unsuccessful VBAC, with Class III obesity associated with increased rates of uterine rupture during trial of labor and neonatal injury. Women with obesity are at significantly higher risk of shoulder dystocia, emergency caesarean section, and postpartum hemorrhage. Maternal obesity is not a reason in itself for advising birth within a CLU, but further consideration of birth setting may be required. Continuous midwifery care is recommended for women with obesity in established labor, with consideration of additional measures to prevent pressure sores and monitor fetal condition. Intrapartum care for women with obesity should follow NICE guidelines. Women with a BMI of 40 kg/m2 or greater should have venous access established early in labor. Surgical approaches for performing caesarean section on obese women should follow NICE guidelines, with consideration for individual circumstances. Postoperative wound care for obese women undergoing caesarean section should include prophylactic antibiotics, suturing of the subcutaneous tissue space, and consideration of negative pressure wound therapy. Breastfeeding initiation and maintenance may be more challenging for women with obesity and should receive appropriate specialist advice and support. Postnatal contraception advice should be given according to guidelines, considering the increased risk of VTE in women with obesity. Women with obesity should continue to receive nutritional advice and follow-up for long-term health risks, particularly for those with gestational diabetes.

Support in the community for minimal interpregnancy weight gain includes postpartum weight loss support and referral to weight management services. Women with previous bariatric surgery should wait 12-18 months before attempting pregnancy to stabilize weight and address nutritional deficiencies. These women have high-risk pregnancies and should receive consultant-led care, nutritional surveillance, and advice from a dietician. Pregnancy can exacerbate nutritional deficiencies, especially for women with malabsorptive procedures. Nutritional surveillance and screening are recommended every trimester for women with previous bariatric surgery.

Anesthetic and obstetric outcomes in morbidly obese parturients: a 20-year follow-up retrospective cohort study. Maternal obesity and postpartum hemorrhage after vaginal and cesarean delivery among nulliparous women at term: a retrospective cohort study. Obesity and fetal-maternal outcomes. A systematic review of maternal obesity and breastfeeding intention, initiation and duration. Maternal obesity and risk of neural tube defects: a meta-analysis. Pre-pregnancy weight and the risk of stillbirth and neonatal death. The consequences of obesity and excess weight gain in pregnancy. Management of Women with Obesity in Pregnancy. Peri-operative management of the morbidly obese patient. Antenatal care for uncomplicated pregnancies. Gestational weight gain in obese women by class of obesity and select maternal/newborn outcomes: a systematic review. Healthier women, healthier reproductive outcomes: recommendations for the routine care of all women of reproductive age. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland and Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association guidelines for Obstetrics Anaesthetic Services. "If she wants to eat...and eat and eat...fine! It’s gonna feed the baby": pregnant women and partners’ perceptions and experiences of pregnancy with a BMI >40 kg/m2. Antiobesity drugs in early pregnancy and congenital malformations in the offspring. First trimester exposure to topiramate and the risk of oral clefts in the offspring: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reducing the risk of acid aspiration during cesarean section. The association of BMI and Braden total score on the occurrence of pressure ulcers. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines for diabetes in pregnancy. Maternal adiposity as an independent risk factor for pre-eclampsia: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Hypertension in pregnancy: diagnosis and management. The role of aspirin dose on the prevention of preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction. Associations between body mass index and maternal weight gain on the delivery of LGA infants in Chinese women with gestational diabetes mellitus. Venous thromboembolism during pregnancy and the postpartum period: incidence, risk factors, and mortality. Reducing the Risk of Venous Thromboembolism during Pregnancy and the Puerperium.

Reducing the Risk of Venous Thromboembolic Disease in Pregnancy and the Puerperium: Acute Management. LMWH prophylaxis provides more effective thrombin inhibition in morbidly obese pregnant women. Enoxaparin dosing after cesarean delivery in morbidly obese women. Impact of socioeconomic deprivation on maternal perinatal mental illnesses. Predictors of body image during the first year postpartum. Recognising the symptoms of eating disorders in pregnancy. Patterns of remission, continuation, and incidence of broadly defined eating disorders during early pregnancy. Antipsychotics during pregnancy: relation to fetal and maternal metabolic effects. Anxiety and depressed mood in obese pregnant women. Weight gain restriction for obese pregnant women. Dietary and lifestyle interventions to limit weight gain during pregnancy for obese or overweight women. Maternal overweight and obesity and the risk of congenital anomalies. Influence of maternal BMI on genetic sonography. Effect of increased body mass index on first-trimester ultrasound examination for aneuploidy risk assessment. Fetal nuchal translucency thickness evaluation in the overweight and obese gravida. Ultrasound screening for fetal aneuploidy using soft markers in the overweight and obese gravida. The impact of maternal plasma DNA fetal fraction on next-generation sequencing tests for common fetal aneuploidies. Fetal fraction in maternal plasma cell-free DNA at 11-13 weeks' gestation. Effect of maternal obesity on the risk of fetal loss after amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling. Impact of maternal obesity on the procedure of mid-trimester anomaly scan. Limitations of the fetal anatomic survey via ultrasound in the obese obstetrical population. Suboptimal second-trimester ultrasonographic visualization of the fetal heart in obese women. Investigation and Management of the Small-for-Gestational-Age Fetus. A comparison of three methods of assessing inter-observer variation applied to measurement of the symphysis-fundal height. Fetal growth screening by fundal height measurement. Intrapartum care for healthy women and babies. Life-table analysis of the risk of perinatal death at term and post-term in singleton pregnancies. Maternal obesity and labour complications following induction of labour in prolonged pregnancy. Management of late-term and post-term pregnancies. Perinatal and maternal outcomes by planned place of birth for healthy women with low-risk pregnancies. Prevention and management of postpartum hemorrhage. Term elective induction of labour and perinatal outcomes in obese women. Maternal obesity and occurrence of fetal macrosomia. Induction of labour at or near term for suspected fetal macrosomia. Obesity as an independent risk factor for elective and emergency cesarean delivery in nulliparous women. Risk of cesarean in obese nulliparous women with an unfavorable cervix. Mode of delivery in women with class III obesity. Induction of labour versus expectant management for large-for-date fetuses. Induction of labour for suspected macrosomia at term in non-diabetic women. Birth after Previous Caesarean Birth. Impact of maternal obesity and weight gain on vaginal birth after cesarean section success. Effect of body mass index and excessive weight gain on success of vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Trial of labor or repeat cesarean delivery in women with morbid obesity and previous cesarean delivery. Obesity as a risk factor for failed trial of labor in patients with previous cesarean delivery. Challenges of obesity and obstetric anesthesia. Maternal obesity and risk of postpartum hemorrhage. A nationally representative study of maternal obesity in England, UK. Intrapartum management associated with obesity in nulliparous women. Active versus expectant management for women in the third stage of labor. Abdominal surgical incisions and perioperative morbidity among morbidly obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. The effect of cesarean delivery skin incision approach in morbidly obese women on the rate of classical hysterotomy. Evaluating the abdominal skin microbiota above and below the panniculus in gravidas with class III obesity. Postoperative morbidity in the morbidly obese parturient woman with supraumbilical and low transverse abdominal approaches. Relationship between primary cesarean delivery skin incision type and wound complications in women with morbid obesity. Type of skin incision and wound complications in the obese parturient. Vertical skin incisions and wound complications in the obese parturient. Respiratory function is impaired less by transverse than by median vertical supraumbilical incisions. Choice of abdominal operative incision in the obese patient. Risk factors for wound complications in morbidly obese women undergoing primary cesarean delivery. Complications of cesarean delivery in the massively obese parturient. Obesity as a

Obesity is an independent risk factor for infectious morbidity in patients undergoing cesarean delivery. Extreme obesity is associated with postcesarean maternal complications. Antibiotic prophylaxis may help prevent infection after cesarean section. Subcutaneous drainage may reduce wound complications after cesarean delivery in obese women. Maternal weight status, diet, and supplement use can impact breastfeeding and complementary feeding. Additional support may be needed for prepregnant obese women experiencing breastfeeding challenges. Postpartum weight retention can be reduced through interventions. Type 2 diabetes mellitus may develop after gestational diabetes. Maternal and neonatal outcomes after bariatric surgery should be carefully monitored. Maternal obesity is associated with various risks during pregnancy and childbirth, including gestational diabetes, hypertensive disorders, slower labor progress, and increased risk of caesarean section.

8) 33.0%
aUnless otherwise stated.
b99% CI.
cMedian class I obesity or greater compared with normal weight.
dOR for class III obesity.
eMedian prevalence in obese women.