Key recommendations:
- Diagnosis of PPROM is made by maternal history followed by a sterile speculum examination.
- Consider performing an IGFBP-1 or PAMG-1 test if no amniotic fluid is observed on examination.
- Antibiotics, preferably erythromycin, should be given for 10 days or until established labor.
- Corticosteroids should be offered to women with PPROM between 24+0 and 33+6 weeks.
- Clinical assessment, blood tests, and fetal heart rate should be used to diagnose chorioamnionitis.
- Expectant management until 37+0 weeks should be offered to women with PPROM after 24+0 weeks.
- Intravenous magnesium sulfate should be offered to women in labor or planned preterm birth between 24+0 and 29+6 weeks.

NG25 recommends that corticosteroids should be considered between 24+0 and 25+6 weeks’ gestation for women with suspected PPROM. Repeat courses of corticosteroids should not be routinely offered, but the decision should take into account the interval since the last course, gestational age, and likelihood of birth in the next 48 hours. Magnesium sulfate should be offered between 24+0 and 29+6 weeks of gestation for neuroprotection of the baby in women with PPROM. Tocolytic agents are not recommended for patients with PPROM. Women with PPROM should be offered emotional support during pregnancy and postnatally. Expectant management until 37+0 weeks’ gestation should be offered to women with PPROM after 24+0 weeks’ gestation, with the timing of birth discussed individually. In subsequent pregnancies following PPROM, women should be cared for by an obstetrician with an interest in preterm birth. Further research is needed to determine optimal treatments and interventions for PPROM.

Gynaecologists
Useful links and support groups:
- Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. When your waters break early. Information for you. London: RCOG; 2019.
- Little Heartbeats, a support group that promotes the awareness of PPROM [www.little-heartbeats.org.uk].
Acknowledgments:
The RCOG would like to thank Dr Sarah Prince for her assistance in developing the new Green-top Guideline format.

Miss S JhaMD, FRCOG, Shefﬁeld Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Shefﬁeld; A Pickersgill FRCOG, Manchester University
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester; L Thomas, RCOG, Epsom; Professor JE Norman, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh;
M Costantine, MD, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Houston, TX, USA; V Phupong FRTCOG, ChulalongkornUniversity, Bangkok; Dr NA Khan, Al Qassmiya Women’s and Child Hospital, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates; UK National
Screening Committee Evidence Team; G Kumar FRCOG, Wrexham Maelor Hospital, Wrexham; D Fraser FRCOG,
Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Norwich; S Roy MA MRCS MRCP, CambridgeUniversity Hospitals NHSFT, Cambridge; Little Heartbeats; H Eadon, BPharm MSc MRPharmS, National Guideline Alliance,London; Harris Wellbeing Preterm Birth Centre; J Girling, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital NHS Foundation Trust,
London; EF Magann FACOG, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA; Birth Trauma Association;
PS Yeh MRCOG, London North West University Healthcare NHS Trust, London; RCOG Women’s Network; ProfessorDOC Anumba, MBBS FWACS FRCOG MD LL.M (Medical Law), The University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld; L Chappell, King’s
College London, London; H Mactier, Honorary Secretary of the British Association of Perinatal Medicine, Glasgow.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr B Kumar FRCOG, Wrexham and Dr B Magowan FRCOG, Melrose
The chair of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr MA Ledingham FRCOG, Glasgow
1; Dr B Magowan FRCOG, Melrose1;
and Dr AM Thomson MRCOG, Paisley2.
1co-chairs from June 20182until May 2018
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conﬂicts of interest. A statement summarising any
conﬂicts of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-
services/guidelines/gtg73/.
The ﬁnal version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.
The guideline will be considered for update 3 years after publication, with an intermediate
assessment of the need to update 2 years after publication.