This guideline discusses the care of women with obesity in pregnancy. Primary care services should ensure women of childbearing age have the opportunity to optimise their weight before pregnancy. Women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should be informed about the risks of obesity during pregnancy and childbirth and be supported to lose weight before conception. Women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater wishing to become pregnant should be advised to take 5 mg folic acid supplementation daily, starting at least 1 month before conception and continuing during the first trimester of pregnancy. 

Care of women with obesity in pregnancy can be integrated into all antenatal clinics, with clear local policies and guidelines for care available. All maternity units should have a documented environmental risk assessment regarding the availability of facilities to care for pregnant women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater. 

All pregnant women should have their weight and height measured using appropriate equipment, and their BMI calculated at the antenatal booking visit. For women with obesity in pregnancy, consideration should be given to reweighing women during the third trimester to allow appropriate plans to be made for equipment and personnel required during labour and birth. 

All pregnant women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should be provided with information about the risks associated with obesity in pregnancy and how they may be minimised. Dietetic advice should be provided early in the pregnancy where possible. Anti-obesity or weight loss drugs are not recommended for use in pregnancy. 

Pregnant women with a booking BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should be referred to an obstetric anaesthetist for consideration of antenatal assessment. Women with a booking BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should have a documented risk assessment in the third trimester of pregnancy by a qualified professional to consider tissue viability issues. 

All pregnant women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should be screened for gestational diabetes according to NICE or Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines.

For hypertensive complications in obese pregnant women, an appropriate cuff size should be used for blood pressure measurements. Women with class II obesity and greater have an increased risk of pre-eclampsia. Women with more than one moderate risk factor may benefit from taking 150 mg aspirin daily from 12 weeks of gestation until birth. Hypertensive complications should be managed according to the NICE CG107.

For venous thromboembolism (VTE), women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater have a pre-existing risk factor for developing VTE during pregnancy. Risk assessment should be discussed and documented at the first antenatal visit, during pregnancy, intrapartum and postpartum. Acute VTE should be treated according to RCOG GTG No. 37b.

Women with BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater are at increased risk of mental health problems and should be screened for these during pregnancy.

For chromosomal anomalies, all women should be offered antenatal screening but some forms of screening are less effective with a raised BMI. Consider the use of transvaginal ultrasound if it is difficult to obtain nuchal translucency measurements transabdominally.

For structural anomalies, screening and diagnostic tests should be offered but their effectiveness is limited in obese pregnant women. 

For fetal surveillance, serial measurement of symphysis fundal height (SFH) is recommended from 24 weeks of gestation. Women with a BMI greater than 35 kg/m2 should be referred for serial assessment of fetal size using ultrasound. 

For labour and birth, women with maternal obesity should discuss a plan for labour and birth with their obstetrician and anaesthetist. Active management of the third stage should be recommended to reduce the risk of postpartum haemorrhage (PPH). The decision for a woman with maternal obesity to give birth by planned caesarean section should involve a multidisciplinary approach. 

For women with obesity and a previous caesarean section, an individualised decision for VBAC should be made following informed discussion and consideration of all relevant clinical factors. 

For intrapartum care, women with a BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should have venous access established early in labour and consideration should be given to the siting of a second cannula. The increased risk of PPH in those with a BMI greater than 30 kg/m2 makes active management of the third stage of labour even more important. Surgical approaches should follow NICE CG132.

Postoperative wound care is recommended following caesarean section in women with obesity. Women with class 1 obesity or greater having a caesarean section are at increased risk of wound infection and should receive prophylactic antibiotics at the time of surgery. Women undergoing caesarean section who have more than 2 cm subcutaneous fat should have suturing of the subcutaneous tissue space to reduce the risk of wound infection and wound separation. 

Obesity is associated with low breastfeeding initiation and maintenance rates. Women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should receive appropriate specialist advice and support antenatally and postnatally regarding the benefits, initiation and maintenance of breastfeeding. 

Maternal obesity should be considered when making the decision regarding the most appropriate form of postnatal contraception. Women with class I obesity or greater at booking should continue to be offered nutritional advice following childbirth from an appropriately trained professional, with a view to weight reduction. Women who have been diagnosed with gestational diabetes should have postnatal follow-up in line with NICE Guideline 3. 

Women should be supported to lose weight postpartum and offered referral to weight management services where these are available. 

A minimum waiting period of 12 –18 months after bariatric surgery is recommended before attempting pregnancy to allow stabilisation of body weight and to allow the correct identification and treatment of any possible nutritional deficiencies. Women with previous bariatric surgery have high-risk pregnancies and should have consultant-led antenatal care. They should have nutritional surveillance and screening for deficiencies during pregnancy and should be referred to a dietician for advice with regard to their specialised nutritional needs. 

Obesity is becoming increasingly prevalent in the UK population and has become one of the most commonly occurring risk factors in obstetric practice. The recommendations cover interventions prior to conception, and during and after pregnancy. 

Pregnant women who are obese are at greater risk of a variety of pregnancy-related complications compared with women of normal BMI, including pre-eclampsia and gestational diabetes. Pregnant women who are obese are also at increased risk of caesarean birth. 

This guideline was developed using standard methodology for developing RCOG Green-top Guidelines (GTGs). The Cochrane Library, EMBASE, MEDLINE, and Trip were searched for relevant papers. The search was inclusive of all relevant articles published until May 2016. A top-up literature search was performed in January 2018.

The recommendations are based on available evidence. Primary care services should ensure that all women of childbearing age have the opportunity to optimise their weight before pregnancy. Women of childbearing age with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should receive information and advice about the risks of obesity during pregnancy and childbirth, and be supported to lose weight before conception and between pregnancies. Women should be informed that weight loss between pregnancies reduces the risk of stillbirth, hypertensive complications and fetal macrosomia. Weight loss increases the chances of successful vaginal birth after caesarean (VBAC) section. Pregnant women with obesity are at increased risk of various complications including miscarriage, gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, venous thromboembolism, induced labour, dysfunctional or prolonged labour, caesarean section, anaesthetic complications, postpartum haemorrhage, wound infections and mortality. Infants of obese mothers are at increased risk of congenital anomalies, stillbirth, prematurity, macrosomia and neonatal death. 

Women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater wishing to become pregnant should be advised to take 5 mg folic acid supplementation daily, starting at least 1 month before conception and continuing during the first trimester of pregnancy. Obese women are at high risk of vitamin D deficiency. However, the evidence on whether routine vitamin D should be given to improve maternal and offspring outcomes remains uncertain. Women with a raised BMI are at increased risk of NTDs. Obese women should receive higher doses of folate supplementation in order to minimise the increased risk of fetal NTDs. Women with obesity (BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater) are at increased risk of vitamin D deficiency compared with women of a healthy weight.

The neonatal whole-body bone mineral content of infants born to mothers assigned to cholecalciferol 1000 iu/day did not significantly differ from that of infants born to mothers assigned to placebo. Supplementation of women with cholecalciferol 1000 iu/day during pregnancy ensured most pregnant women were vitamin D replete and it was safe. Care of women with obesity in pregnancy can be integrated into all antenatal clinics, with clear local policies and guidelines. Maternity services must manage the risks associated with obesity and provide comprehensive multidisciplinary care. All maternity units should have a documented environmental risk assessment regarding the availability of facilities to care for pregnant women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater. All pregnant women should have their weight and height measured, and their BMI calculated at the antenatal booking visit. For women with obesity in pregnancy, consideration should be given to reweighing women during the third trimester to allow appropriate plans to be made for equipment and personnel required during labour and birth. There is a lack of consensus on optimal gestational weight gain. Until further evidence is available, a focus on a healthy diet may be more applicable than prescribed weight gain targets.

Obese women should be provided with information about the risks associated with obesity in pregnancy and how to minimise them. Preconception counselling should inform obese women planning a pregnancy about the benefits of achieving a healthy weight and the risks associated with maternal obesity. If a woman presents for the first time during pregnancy, she should be given an early opportunity to discuss risks and management options. Risks include increased risk of gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia and fetal macrosomia, requiring increased maternal and fetal monitoring and potential difficulties with fetal monitoring, anaesthesia and caesarean section. 

Dietetic advice should be provided early in pregnancy, considering pre-existing social and cultural beliefs about pregnancy diet and weight gain. 

Anti-obesity or weight loss drugs are not recommended for use in pregnancy. Orlistat, a lipase inhibitor that inhibits the absorption of dietary fats, has not shown an increase in major malformation risk. Phentermine/topiramate promotes appetite reduction and decreases food consumption but is linked to oral clefts. Lorcaserin hydrochloride, a serotonin receptor agonist involved in the regulation of appetite, is contraindicated in pregnancy. 

Pregnant women with a booking BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should be referred to an obstetric anaesthetist for antenatal assessment. Obesity is a risk factor for many anaesthetic-related complications and has been identified as a significant risk factor for anaesthesia-related maternal mortality. 

Women with a booking BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should have a documented risk assessment in the third trimester of pregnancy by an appropriately qualified professional.

A BMI greater than 40 kg/m2 and immobility are risk factors for developing pressure sores. Risk reassessment should occur if there is a change in clinical status. Pregnant women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should be screened for gestational diabetes. Maternal obesity is a risk factor for gestational diabetes and is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes. For hypertensive complications of pregnancy in obese women, an appropriate size of cuff should be used for blood pressure measurements. Women with class II obesity and greater have an increased risk of pre-eclampsia. Women with more than one moderate risk factor may benefit from taking 150 mg aspirin daily from 12 weeks of gestation until birth. Women who develop hypertensive complications should be managed according to the NICE CG107. Women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater have a pre-existing risk factor for developing venous thromboembolism (VTE) during pregnancy. Risk assessment should be individually discussed and documented. Acute VTE in pregnant women with obesity should be treated according to RCOG GTG No. 37b. Women with BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater are at increased risk of mental health problems and should be screened for these in pregnancy. There is insufficient evidence to recommend a specific lifestyle intervention to prevent depression and anxiety in obese pregnant women.

Obese women have higher rates of depression symptoms and antenatal anxiety than women of normal weight. Studies also suggest increased risk of postpartum anxiety, eating disorders, and serious mental illness among obese women. NICE CG192 recommends women with a BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater be screened for mental health problems. Obese pregnant women are at increased risk of a range of structural anomalies and are at risk of developing congenital cardiac defects, even without gestational diabetes. Maternal obesity can impact the success of obtaining accurate NT measurements and the proportion of pregnant women who completed first trimester screening is inversely proportional to their BMI. Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) results decrease with increasing maternal weight. Diagnostic testing may be offered, considering the limitations of screening tests in obese women. Maternal obesity is a limiting factor in screening for structural anomalies during pregnancy due to difficulty in accurate visualisation of fetal structures with increasing BMI. This may result in the need for extra time for fetal anomaly scans, repeat scans, and possibly a transvaginal approach.

Fetal monitoring during pregnancy should include serial measurement of symphysis fundal height (SFH) from 24 weeks of gestation. Women with a BMI greater than 35 kg/m2 may have inaccurate SFH measurements and should be referred for serial assessment of fetal size using ultrasound. Ultrasound can be used as an alternative method when external palpation is difficult. The methods of estimating fetal growth include SFH measurements, ultrasound scanning, and clinical judgement and abdominal palpation. In women with obesity, these methods are more difficult, increasing the risk of false-negative results. Recommendations for obese women are to follow NICE CG62 and RCOG GTG No. 31 guidelines. 

Intrapartum fetal monitoring for obese women should follow NICE CG190 recommendations. Continuous fetal monitoring during labour is not supported unless there are other comorbidities or complications. 

Obese pregnant women should be aware of an increased risk of stillbirth and prolonged pregnancy. Antepartum fetal surveillance at or beyond 41 weeks of gestation should be considered, although the optimal type or frequency of such testing is not determined.

Planning for labour and birth requires ongoing review of the woman’s antenatal progress and potential complications. Women with maternal obesity should have an informed discussion about a plan for labour and birth. Active management of the third stage is recommended to reduce the risk of postpartum hemorrhage. Maternal obesity is associated with an increased incidence of induction of labour, augmentation of labour, and intrapartum caesarean section. Women with a booking BMI greater than 35 kg/m2 should have planned labour and birth in an obstetric unit. Those with a BMI of between 30 kg/m2 and 35 kg/m2 should have individualised assessment of place of birth. Discussions about labour and birth should occur before 36 weeks of gestation.

Obese pregnant women are at increased risk of postpartum hemorrhage (PPH), even after adjusting for birth mode. Active management of the third stage of labor is recommended for women with maternal obesity. Prophylactic uterotonics can reduce PPH risk. 

Elective induction of labor at term in obese women may reduce the chance of caesarean birth without increasing the risk of adverse outcomes. This option should be discussed with each woman individually. A study found that elective induction of labor at 37 and 39 weeks of gestation was associated with lower odds of caesarean section and macrosomia.

Maternal obesity is associated with fetal overgrowth and macrosomia. The decision for a woman with maternal obesity to give birth by planned caesarean section should involve a multidisciplinary approach, considering the individual woman's comorbidities, antenatal complications, and wishes.

Women with a higher BMI have an increased risk of caesarean birth. However, the decision regarding birth mode should be individualized and consider the woman's comorbidities, circumstances, and wishes. A multidisciplinary approach is recommended.

Women with maternal obesity who require birth by emergency caesarean section are at increased risk of significant morbidity and mortality. This should be considered when planning labor and mode of birth.

Where macrosomia is suspected, induction of labor may be considered. A Cochrane review has shown a reduction in the risk of shoulder dystocia and fetal fractures, irrespective of maternal BMI. The findings also showed no change in the risk of caesarean section.

Boulvain et al. and Magro-Malosso et al. found that fetuses from the induction of labour group were at increased risk of raised bilirubin and phototherapy. Women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should have an individualised decision for VBAC following informed discussion and consideration of all relevant clinical factors. Obesity is a risk factor for unsuccessful VBAC. Class III obesity is associated with increased rates of uterine rupture during labour and neonatal injury. Emergency caesarean section in women with obesity is associated with an increased risk of serious maternal morbidity.

Class I and II maternal obesity is not a reason in itself for advising birth within a CLU. Women with obesity are at significantly higher risk of shoulder dystocia, emergency caesarean section and atonic PPH after vaginal but not caesarean birth.

The on-duty anaesthetist covering the labour ward should be informed of all women with class III obesity admitted to the labour ward for birth. Women with class III obesity who are in established labour should receive continuous midwifery care.

In the absence of current evidence, intrapartum care should be provided in accordance with NICE CG190. Women with a BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater should have venous access established early in labour and consideration should be given to the siting of a second cannula. Active management of the third stage of labour is advised for all women, the increased risk of PPH in those with a BMI greater than 30 kg/m2 makes this even more important.

There is a paucity of high-quality evidence to support the use of one surgical approach over another for caesarean section on the obese woman. Surgical approaches should therefore follow NICE CG132.

Women with class I obesity or greater undergoing a caesarean section are at increased risk of wound infection and should receive prophylactic antibiotics at the time of surgery. If they have more than 2 cm subcutaneous fat, suturing of the subcutaneous tissue space should be performed to reduce the risk of wound infection and wound separation. There is insufficient evidence to recommend the routine use of negative pressure dressing therapy, barrier retractors and insertion of subcutaneous drains to reduce the risk of wound infection in these women.

Obesity is associated with low breastfeeding initiation and maintenance rates. Women with a booking BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater should receive specialist advice and support regarding breastfeeding both antenatally and postnatally.

Maternal obesity should be considered when deciding on the most appropriate form of postnatal contraception. Women with class I obesity or greater should continue to receive nutritional advice following childbirth with a view to weight reduction. Women who have been diagnosed with gestational diabetes should have postnatal follow-up in line with NICE Guideline 3. Women with gestational diabetes mellitus have an increased risk of developing type II diabetes. Being overweight or obese before pregnancy is a significant risk factor for the development of type II diabetes.

Women should be supported to lose weight postpartum and offered referral to weight management services. Postpartum weight retention is associated with risk of adverse outcomes in subsequent pregnancies, such as hypertensive disease, diabetes and stillbirth. 

A minimum waiting period of 12-18 months after bariatric surgery is recommended before attempting pregnancy to allow stabilisation of body weight and treatment of any possible nutritional deficiencies. Women who have undergone bariatric surgery have lower odds of gestational diabetes, hypertensive disorders and macrosomia, but higher odds for small-for-gestational-age newborns.

Women with previous bariatric surgery have high-risk pregnancies and should have consultant-led antenatal care. They should have nutritional surveillance and screening for deficiencies during pregnancy and be referred to a dietician for advice with their specialised nutritional needs. Pregnancy can exacerbate nutritional deficiencies that predate pregnancy. Women, particularly those with malabsorptive procedures involving anatomical changes in the gastrointestinal tract, are at high risk of micronutritional deficiencies (including vitamin B12, iron, folate and fat-soluble vitamins) and macronutritional deficiencies (mainly fat and protein).

Recommendations for future research include studies to evaluate normal partogram for obese women, the safety and role of anti-obesity drugs during pregnancy, methods to improve antenatal fetal surveillance in obese women, surgical techniques at caesarean birth in obese women, methods to reduce postsurgical site infection, and the psychological needs of pregnant women who are obese. 

Auditable topics include proportion of women with class I obesity or greater at booking who commenced 5 mg folic acid supplementation daily prior to conception, proportion of pregnant women who have a record of maternal height, weight and BMI in their maternity records, and proportion of women with class III obesity who had an antenatal anaesthetic review.

This text contains references to various studies and reports related to obesity in pregnancy, its impact on maternity services, risk of complications, and associated costs. It also discusses the prevalence of obesity in different populations, the association of maternal obesity with gestational hypertensive disorders, and the risk of cesarean delivery. The text also mentions the impact of maternal obesity on intrapartum outcomes in otherwise low risk women, the association between pre-pregnancy body mass index and severe maternal morbidity, and the increased risk of first trimester and recurrent miscarriage associated with obesity. It also highlights the risk factors of venous thrombosis during pregnancy and the puerperium, and the difficulties in tracheal intubation in obese patients.

The text refers to various studies and guidelines related to maternal obesity and its impact on obstetric and anesthetic outcomes, postpartum hemorrhage, breastfeeding, neural tube defects, stillbirth, neonatal death, and other fetal-maternal outcomes. It also discusses the role of folic acid and vitamin D supplementation in pregnancy, especially in the context of maternal obesity. The text mentions the National Institute of Health and Care Excellence's clinical guidelines on obesity and antenatal care, as well as other guidelines from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, the NHS Litigation Authority, the Health and Safety Executive, and the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland. It also refers to a systematic review on the accuracy of self-reported pregnancy-related weight and a cross-sectional survey of maternal weight policies. The text highlights the need for weight management before, during, and after pregnancy, and the importance of routine care for all women of reproductive age.

This text contains references to various guidelines, studies, and clinical recommendations related to obstetric care, particularly for pregnant women with a high Body Mass Index (BMI). It includes information on the risks of obesity during pregnancy, such as congenital malformations, difficult intubation, pressure ulcers, diabetes, and pre-eclampsia. The text also mentions the use of antiobesity drugs, the impact of incorrect cuff size on blood pressure measurement in obese patients, and the role of low-dose aspirin in preventing pregnancy complications. It further discusses the risk of venous thromboembolism during pregnancy and postpartum.

Weight-adjusted LMWH prophylaxis provides more effective thrombin inhibition in morbidly obese pregnant women. Enoxaparin dosing after cesarean delivery in morbidly obese women has been studied. Obesity and mental disorders during pregnancy and postpartum have been systematically reviewed. The impact of socioeconomic deprivation on maternal perinatal mental illnesses has been investigated. Eating disorders and past depression may affect pregnancy and post-partum depression and anxiety. Body image during the first year postpartum has been studied. Antipsychotics during pregnancy may relate to fetal and maternal metabolic effects. Dietary and lifestyle interventions to limit weight gain during pregnancy for obese or overweight women have been systematically reviewed. Maternal overweight and obesity may increase the risk of congenital anomalies. Maternal obesity may impact the risk of fetal loss after amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling. Maternal obesity may limit the fetal anatomic survey via ultrasound. The investigation and management of the small-for-gestational-age fetus has been guided. Maternal obesity may impact labour complications following induction of labour in prolonged pregnancy. Management of late-term and postterm pregnancies has been discussed.

Healthy women with low-risk pregnancies have different outcomes based on planned place of birth. Postpartum haemorrhage prevention and management is crucial. Obesity is an independent risk factor for elective and emergency caesarean delivery in nulliparous women. Obese women with an unfavourable cervix are at risk of caesarean. In women with class III obesity, planned cesarean compared with induction of labor affects mode of delivery. Maternal obesity increases risk of postpartum hemorrhage. Obesity in nulliparous women impacts intrapartum management. Abdominal surgical incisions and perioperative morbidity are higher among morbidly obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. The type of skin incision during primary cesarean delivery can affect wound complications in women with morbid obesity. Supraumbilical and low transverse abdominal approaches can increase postoperative morbidity in the morbidly obese parturient woman. Obese parturients are at risk of wound complications with vertical skin incisions. Respiratory function is less impaired by transverse than by median vertical supraumbilical incisions. Obesity is a risk factor for wound complications in morbidly obese women undergoing primary cesarean delivery. Complications of cesarean delivery are higher in the massively obese parturient.

Obesity is an independent risk factor for infectious morbidity in patients who undergo cesarean delivery. Extreme obesity can lead to post-cesarean maternal complications. Antibiotics can prevent infection after cesarean section. Subcutaneous drain vs. suture in obese women undergoing cesarean delivery has been studied. Superficial wound disruption after cesarean delivery can be affected by the depth and closure of subcutaneous tissue. Prophylactic subcutaneous drainage can prevent wound complications after cesarean delivery. Obesity can predict delayed lactogenesis II. Maternal weight status, diet, and supplement use can affect breastfeeding and complementary feeding. Postpartum weight retention can be reduced through a structured diet and physical activity. Type 2 diabetes mellitus can occur after gestational diabetes. Maternal and fetal outcomes of pregnancy after bariatric surgery have been studied. Pregnancy after bariatric surgery can improve outcomes for mother and child. Body weight changes and outcome of pregnancy after gastroplasty for morbid obesity have been studied. Vitamin K1 monitoring in pregnancies after bariatric surgery is important.

The text provides a list of studies on pregnancy outcomes and nutritional indices after bariatric surgery. It also includes guidelines for perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient. An explanation of guidelines and evidence levels is provided, detailing how evidence was graded and recommendations were formulated. The text also presents an appendix of risks associated with maternal obesity, including gestational diabetes, hypertensive disorders, venous thromboembolism, slower labour progress, caesarean section, postpartum haemorrhage, wound infection, birth defects, prematurity, macrosomia, shoulder dystocia, admission to neonatal intensive care unit, stillbirth, and neonatal death.

33.0%e
aUnless otherwise stated.
b99% CI.
cMedian class I obesity or greater compared with normal weight.
dOR for class III obesity.
eMedian prevalence in obese women.
This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG. The guideline will be considered for update 3 years after publication, with an intermediate assessment of the need to update 2 years after publication. The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available. RCOG Guidelines are not intended to be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols or guidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.