External Cephalic Version (ECV) is the manipulation of the fetus to a cephalic presentation. The success rate of ECV is approximately 50%. After an unsuccessful ECV attempt at 36 weeks of gestation or later, few babies will spontaneously turn to cephalic presentation. Successful ECV reduces the chance of caesarean section. Labour after ECV is associated with a slightly increased rate of caesarean section and instrumental delivery. ECV should be offered at term from 37 weeks of gestation. Use of tocolysis with betamimetics improves ECV success rates. Regional analgesia is not routinely recommended but may be considered for women unable to tolerate ECV without analgesia. ECV should be performed by trained practitioners in facilities with monitoring and surgical delivery capabilities. Women may consider moxibustion for breech presentation at 33-35 weeks of gestation. There is no evidence to support any particular service model for ECV.

In women with breech presentation at term, External Cephalic Version (ECV) has been shown to reduce noncephalic presentation at birth but has no significant effect on caesarean section rates. ECV may increase preterm births. ECV is not recommended before 36 weeks of gestation. ECV can be considered in nulliparous women with a low chance of spontaneous version from 36 weeks. Intrapartum ECV may be done if informed consent is possible and no contraindications exist. ECV should be performed with caution in cases of unstable lie. There is limited evidence on contraindications for ECV. ECV after one caesarean delivery appears to have no greater risk. ECV has a very low complication rate, with rare cases of complications reported. ECV should be performed where facilities for monitoring and surgical delivery are available. Anti-D immunoglobulin is recommended for D-negative women undergoing ECV. ECV should be performed by trained practitioners. ECV may be painful and not universally acceptable to women. Methods to improve antenatal detection of breech presentation, uptake of ECV, and success rate of ECV are recommended for future research.

5. Beuckens A, Rijnders M, Verburgt-Doeleman GH, Rijninks-van Driel GC, Thorpe J, Hutton EK. An observational study of the success and complications of 2546 external cephalic versions in low-risk pregnant women performed by trained midwives. BJOG 2015;123:415 –23.
6. Tong Leung VK, Suen SS, Singh Sahota D, Lau TK, Yeung Leung T. External cephalic version does not increase the risk of intra-uterine death: a 17-year experience and literature review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2012;25:1774 –8.
10. Collins S, Ellaway P, Harrington D, Pandit M, Impey LW. The complications of external cephalic version: results from 805 consecutive attempts. BJOG 2007;114:636 –8.
11. de Hundt M, Velzel J, de Groot CJ, Mol BW, Kok M. Mode of delivery after successful external cephalic version: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2014;123:1327 –34.
12. Kabiri D, Elram T, Aboo-Dia M, Elami-Suzin M, Elchalal U, Ezra Y. Timing of delivery after external cephalic version and the risk for cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 2011;118:209 –13.
18. Cluver C, Gyte GM, Sinclair M, Dowswell T, Hofmeyr GJ. Interventions for helping to turn term breech babies to head first presentation when using external cephalic version. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;(2):CD000184.
30. Hutton EK, Hofmeyr GJ, Dowswell T. External cephalic version for breech presentation before term. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;(7):CD000084.

Case-control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias, or chance and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal. Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series. Expert opinion. Good practice point/recommended best practice based on clinical experience.