Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy
Transvaginal ultrasound is the diagnostic tool of choice for tubal ectopic pregnancy. Tubal ectopic pregnancies should be positively identified by visualizing an adnexal mass that moves separate to the ovary. A serum beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (b-hCG) level is useful for planning the management of an ultrasound visualized ectopic pregnancy. For cervical ectopic pregnancy, ultrasound criteria and a single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis. Ultrasound is the primary diagnostic modality for caesarean scar pregnancy. No biochemical investigations are needed routinely for caesarean scar pregnancy. For interstitial pregnancy, ultrasound criteria and a single serum b-hCG at diagnosis are recommended. Laparoscopic surgical approach is preferable for tubal pregnancy. Salpingectomy should be performed in the presence of a healthy contralateral tube. Expectant management is an option for clinically stable women with an ultrasound diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy and a decreasing b-hCG level initially less than 1500 iu/l. Medical management with methotrexate can be considered for cervical pregnancy. Laparoscopic cornual resection or salpingotomy is an effective option for interstitial pregnancy. Cornual pregnancies should be managed by excision of the rudimentary horn via laparoscopy or laparotomy. Surgical removal of the ectopic pregnancy is the method of choice for haemodynamically unstable women in heterotopic pregnancy. Anti-D prophylaxis should be offered to all RhD-negative women who have surgical removal of an ectopic pregnancy. Women should be advised on the long-term fertility prospects following an ectopic pregnancy. Women should be advised on support groups and counseling options. Providers of early pregnancy care should provide a 7-day early pregnancy assessment service with direct access for women referred by general practitioners and accident and emergency departments. Clinicians undertaking the surgical management of ectopic pregnancy must have received appropriate training. Clinicians undertaking ultrasound for the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy must have received appropriate training.

Clinicians must have appropriate training for ultrasound-guided needle techniques. If unable to perform full surgical procedures for ectopic pregnancy, experienced support must be available. Virtual reality simulators can be used for training. Ectopic pregnancies include tubal, cervical, caesarean scar, interstitial, cornual, ovarian, abdominal, and heterotopic. Risk factors include tubal damage, smoking, and IVF. Diagnosis is based on transvaginal ultrasound criteria for tubal, cervical, and caesarean scar pregnancies. Serum beta-hCG levels are useful for planning management. Caesarean scar pregnancy may require MRI for diagnosis. Interstitial pregnancy criteria include an empty uterine cavity and presence of the 'interstitial line sign'.

A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. At presentation, based on clinical symptoms and ultrasound scan, if there is suspicion of interstitial pregnancy, a single serum b-hCG should be carried out. The following ultrasound scan criteria may be used for the diagnosis of cornual pregnancy: visualization of a single interstitial portion of fallopian tube in the main uterine body, gestational sac/products of conception seen mobile and separate from the uterus and completely surrounded by myometrium, and a vascular pedicle adjoining the gestational sac to the unicornuate uterus. One of the initial reports defined cornual pregnancy as being ‘in one horn of a bicornuate uterus, or, by extension of meaning, in one lateral half of a uterus of bifid tendency’. A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. Ovarian ectopic pregnancy can be difficult to diagnose with certainty preoperatively, so the diagnosis should be considered whenever ultrasound findings are suspicious. A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. Deﬁned ultrasound criteria can be used to diagnose an abdominal pregnancy. A high index of suspicion is based upon an elevated serum b-hCG level in combination with ultrasound findings. A heterotopic pregnancy is diagnosed when the ultrasound findings demonstrate an intrauterine pregnancy and a coexisting ectopic pregnancy. A serum b-hCG level is of limited value in diagnosing heterotopic pregnancy. Methotrexate at a dose of 50 mg/m2 has been widely used as a single dose instead of a repeat surgical procedure, although, no formal comparative studies have been performed. Systemic methotrexate is the most commonly used drug for the pharmacological treatment of tubal ectopic pregnancy. A laparoscopic surgical approach is preferable to an open approach. In the presence of a healthy contralateral tube, salpingectomy should be performed in preference to salpingotomy. In women with a history of fertility-reducing factors, salpingotomy should be considered. Expectant management is an option for clinically stable women with an ultrasound diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy and a decreasing b-hCG level initially less than 1500 iu/l.

CG levels greater than 5000 iu/l are significant predictors of failure in ectopic pregnancies. A smaller increase in b-hCG levels prior to methotrexate administration increases the chance of successful medical management. Successful outcomes are associated with a decrease in b-hCG levels from day 1 to day 4 after methotrexate administration. Methotrexate should be considered as the first-line management for certain criteria, including low serum b-hCG levels and no fetal cardiac activity seen on ultrasound scan. Expectant management is a reasonable option for selected women with minimal pain and low or declining serum b-hCG levels. Serum b-hCG levels are inversely proportional to success rates, with lower levels associated with higher success rates. Conservative management of cervical and caesarean scar pregnancies should be based on gestational age, fetal cardiac activity, and serum b-hCG levels. Surgical interventions should be reserved for life-threatening situations. Expectant management is an option for stable interstitial pregnancies, while surgical or pharmacological approaches may also be effective.

Inic acid rescue regimen showed a 91% success rate. Various methods include transvaginal ultrasound-guided aspiration of exocoelomic fluid from the gestational sac, followed by intrasaccular injection of methotrexate. Endoscopic approaches such as electrocauterisation have been reported. Laparoscopic surgery with vasopressin for haemostasis has also been described. Hysteroscopic resection of interstitial pregnancies under laparoscopic vision and ultrasound guidance has been successful. Selective UAE with methotrexate has been used to reduce hemorrhage. In cases of failed systemic methotrexate, intra-amniotic injection of etoposide has been successful.

Cornual pregnancies should be managed by excision of the rudimentary horn via laparoscopy or laparotomy. Surgical removal is the method of choice for ovarian ectopic pregnancy. Laparoscopic removal is an option for early abdominal pregnancy, while advanced cases should be managed by laparotomy.

In heterotopic pregnancies, the intrauterine pregnancy must be considered in the management plan. Methotrexate should only be considered if the intrauterine pregnancy is nonviable. Expectant management is an option for stable women with heterotopic pregnancies.

Anti-D prophylaxis should be offered to RhD-negative women undergoing surgical removal of an ectopic pregnancy. Long-term fertility prospects following an ectopic pregnancy are generally good, with no difference in fertility rates between different management methods.

Women undergoing treatment for ectopic pregnancy should be fully informed of the advantages and disadvantages of each approach and have access to support services. Muscle relaxation training may be beneficial for women undergoing treatment with methotrexate. It is recommended that women treated with methotrexate wait at least 3 months before trying to conceive again. The psychological impact of early pregnancy loss should be addressed, and plans for follow-up should be clearly outlined.

The manufacturers of methotrexate recommend a 3-month window after use before conception due to the length of time that it may remain present in some organs and because of concern for subsequent pregnancy and fetal development. Conception within 3 months of methotrexate should not be considered an indication for termination. Providers of early pregnancy care should offer a 7-day early pregnancy assessment service with direct access for women referred by general practitioners and accident and emergency departments. Women with suspected ectopic pregnancy should be managed in dedicated early pregnancy clinics. Laparoscopic salpingotomy is not part of the core training of gynaecologists, and appropriate support should be available for surgical techniques. Clinicians managing women with ectopic pregnancy must have received appropriate training in surgical, ultrasound, and medical management. Virtual reality simulators can be used as a training tool for surgical procedures. Future research recommendations include the need for anti-D in women with nontubal ectopic pregnancies and understanding the psychological impact of ectopic pregnancy and its treatment. Useful links and support groups are available for further information and assistance.

kovic D, Hillaby K, Woelfer B, Lawrence A, Salim R, Elson CJ.
First-trimester diagnosis and management of pregnancies
implanted into the lower uterine segment Cesarean section scar. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003;21:220 –7.
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Santos R, Tsymbal T, Pineda G,
Arslan AA. The diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up of cesarean
scar pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2012;207:44.e1 –13.
Seow KM, Hwang JL, Tsai YL. Ultrasound diagnosis of a
pregnancy in a Cesarean section scar. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2001;18:547 –9.
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A. Unforeseen consequences of
the increasing rate of cesarean deliveries: early placenta accretaand cesarean scar pregnancy. A review. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2012;207:14 –29.
Vial Y, Petignat P, Hohlfeld P. Pregnancy in a cesarean scar.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;16:592 –3.
Osborn DA, Williams TR, Craig BM. Cesarean scar pregnancy:
sonographic and magnetic resonance imaging ﬁndings,
complications, and treatment. J Ultrasound Med 2012;31:1449 –56.
Peng P, Gui T, Liu X, Chen W, Liu Z. Comparative efﬁcacy and
safety of local and systemic methotrexate injection in cesarean
scar pregnancy. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2015;11:137 –42.

The use of methotrexate and arterial embolization to avoid surgery in cervical pregnancy. Strategies for conservative treatment of cervical ectopic pregnancy. Efficacy of methotrexate treatment in viable and nonviable cervical pregnancies. Uterine artery embolization in the management of vaginal bleeding from cervical pregnancy. Treatment of cervical pregnancy with cerclage, curettage, and balloon tamponade. Cervical pregnancy treated by uterine artery embolization combined with office hysteroscopy. Cesarean scar pregnancies: experience and outcomes. Management options for cesarean scar pregnancy. Diagnosis, management, and follow-up of cesarean scar pregnancy. Magnetic resonance imaging as an adjunct to ultrasound in evaluating cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. Hysteroscopic surgery of ectopic pregnancy in the cesarean section scar. Uterine-preserving emergency surgery for cesarean scar pregnancies. Laparoscopic management or laparoscopy combined with transvaginal management of type II cesarean scar pregnancy. Transvaginal removal of ectopic pregnancy tissue and repair of uterine defect for cesarean scar pregnancy. Transvaginal surgical treatment of cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. Surgical treatment of cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy: efficacy and safety of ultrasound-guided suction curettage. Sonographic diagnosis of cesarean scar pregnancy at 16 weeks. Cesarean scar pregnancy as a precursor of morbidly adherent placenta. Factors influencing the success of conservative treatment of interstitial pregnancy. Feasibility of expectant management of interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Conservative management of interstitial pregnancy. Medical management of interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Laparoscopic management of interstitial pregnancy. Laparoscopic management of rudimentary uterine horn pregnancy. Ovarian ectopic pregnancy: challenges in surgical management. Management of primary abdominal pregnancy. Heterotopic pregnancy: contemporary management options. Laparoscopic loop ligature for selective therapy in heterotopic interstitial and intrauterine pregnancy following in-vitro fertilization and embryo transfer. The role of laparoscopy in the diagnosis and management of heterotopic pregnancies. Laparoscopic treatment of heterotopic pregnancies. Nonsurgical treatment of heterotopic pregnancy. Use of Rh immune globulin for the prevention of hemolytic disease. Guideline for the use of anti-D immunoglobulin for the prevention of hemolytic disease.

tic
disease of the fetus and newborn. Transfus Med 2014;24:8 –20.
van Mello NM, Mol F. Salpingotomy versus salpingectomy in
women with tubal ectopic pregnancy, a randomised controlledtrial. Hum Reprod 2012;27 Suppl 2:ii73 –4.
Helmy S, Sawyer E, Oﬁli-Yebovi D, Yazbek J, Ben Nagi J,
Jurkovic D. Fertility outcomes following expectant managementof tubal ectopic pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2007;30:988 –93.
Elito Junior J, Han KK, Camano L. Tubal patency following
surgical and clinical treatment of ectopic pregnancy. Sao Paulo
Med J 2006;124:264 –6.
de Bennetot M, Rabischong B, Aublet-Cuvelier B, Belard F,
Fernandez H, Bouyer J, et al. Fertility after tubal ectopic
pregnancy: results of a population-based study. Fertil Steril
2012;98:1271 –6.e1–3.
Fernandez H, Capmas P, Lucot JP, Resch B, Panel P, Bouyer J;
GROG. Fertility after ectopic pregnancy: the DEMETERrandomized trial. Hum Reprod 2013;28:1247 –53.
Oriol B, Barrio A, Pacheco A, Serna J, Zuzuarregui JL,
Garcia-Velasco JA. Systemic methotrexate to treat ectopic
pregnancy does not affect ovarian reserve. Fertil Steril
2008;90:1579 –82.
Boots CE, Gustofson RL, Feinberg EC. Does methotrexate
administration for ectopic pregnancy after in vitro fertilization
impact ovarian reserve or ovarian responsiveness? Fertil Steril
2013;100:1590 –3.
Singer T, Koﬁnas J, Huang JY, Elias R, Schattman GL, Rosenwaks Z.
Anti mullerian hormone serum levels and reproductiveoutcome are not affected by neither methotrexate norlaparoscopic salpingectomy for the treatment of ectopic
pregnancy in IVF patients. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2011;18
Suppl 1:S46.
McLaren JF, Burney RO, Milki AA, Westphal LM, Dahan MH,
Lathi RB. Effect of methotrexate exposure on subsequent
fertility in women undergoing controlled ovarian stimulation.Fertil Steril 2009;92:515 –9.
Krissi H, Hiersch L, Stolovitch N, Nitke S, Wiznitzer A, Peled Y.
Outcome, complications and future fertility in women treated with
uterine artery embolization and methotrexate for non-tubalectopic pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2014;182:172 –6.
Sagiv R, Debby A, Keidar R, Kerner R, Golan A. Laparoscopic
conservative treatment of ovarian pregnancy and subsequentfertility outcome. J Gynecol Surg 2014;30:12 –14.

[27/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License