Prevention of Early-onset Neonatal Group B Streptococcal Disease
All pregnant women should be provided with appropriate information about GBS colonisation and the risk of neonatal infection. Universal bacteriological screening is not recommended. Clinicians should be aware of the clinical risk factors for GBS disease. IAP should be offered to women with a previous baby affected by GBS disease. Clinicians should offer IAP to women with GBS bacteriuria. Antenatal treatment is not recommended for GBS cultured from a vaginal or rectal swab. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not required for planned caesarean sections without labor. Immediate IAP should be offered to known GBS carriers at term. Women who are pyrexial in labor should be offered broad-spectrum antibiotics. Postnatal antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended for low-risk term babies. Babies with signs of EOGBS disease should be treated promptly. Breastfeeding should be encouraged regardless of GBS status. Parents should seek medical advice if their baby shows abnormal behavior or symptoms. Term babies of mothers who received IAP do not require special observation. Well babies at risk should be monitored closely. Membrane sweeping and vaginal cleansing are not recommended. Swabs for GBS testing should be transported promptly. Benzylpenicillin is recommended for IAP. Cephalosporins should be used in women with penicillin allergy. Clinicians should be aware of potential adverse effects of IAP. Birth in a pool is not contraindicated for known GBS carriers with appropriate IAP.

There is no clear evidence to show that routine screening for GBS in pregnancy would do more good than harm. Screening late in pregnancy cannot accurately predict which babies will develop GBS infection. The National Screening Committee does not recommend universal bacteriological screening for GBS. Women with clinical risk factors for GBS disease should be aware of their increased risk. IAP should be offered to women with GBS bacteriuria during pregnancy. Antenatal treatment is not recommended for GBS cultured from a vaginal or rectal swab. Women with known GBS carrier status should be offered immediate IAP and induction of labor. Intrapartum pyrexia is associated with an increased risk of EOGBS disease, and broad-spectrum antibiotics should be offered in this situation. For planned caesarean sections in women with known GBS colonization, antibiotic prophylaxis specific for GBS is not required.

IAP is recommended for women in confirmed preterm labor. IAP is not recommended for women not in labor and having a preterm planned caesarean section with intact membranes. The risk of EOGBS disease in infants of women who deliver preterm is higher, justifying the use of IAP. Polymerase chain reaction testing at the onset of labor is not recommended. Water birth is not contraindicated for GBS-positive women who have been offered appropriate IAP. Bacteriological testing for GBS carriage is not recommended for women with preterm rupture of membranes. IAP should be given once labor is confirmed or induced regardless of GBS status. Swabs for GBS carrier status testing should be transported to the lab promptly and placed in a non-nutrient transport medium. Enriched culture medium tests are recommended for GBS carriage testing. Benzylpenicillin should be used for IAP. Cephalosporin or vancomycin should be used in women with known or suspected penicillin allergy. Women with known GBS colonization who decline IAP should closely monitor their baby for 12 hours after birth. Clinicians should be aware of potential adverse effects of IAP. Vaginal cleansing in labor does not reduce the risk of neonatal GBS disease. Parents should seek medical advice if a newborn shows abnormal behavior or symptoms of infection. Term babies whose mothers received adequate IAP do not require special observation. Well babies at risk of EOGBS disease whose mothers did not receive adequate IAP should be monitored closely. Postnatal antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended for low-risk term babies.

The incidence of EOGBS disease in asymptomatic term infants without known antenatal risk factors in the UK is estimated at 0.2 cases/1000 births. Routine postnatal antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended. Babies with clinical signs of EOGBS disease should be treated with penicillin and gentamicin within an hour of the decision to treat. Breastfeeding should be encouraged irrespective of GBS status. Babies of mothers who have had a previous baby with GBS disease should be monitored closely for at least 12 hours. No evidence supports obtaining blood cultures and treating with intravenous penicillin unnecessarily.

Water birth, more than a trendy alternative: a prospective, observational study. Prenatal antibiotic treatment does not decrease group B streptococcus colonization at delivery. Late third-trimester treatment of rectovaginal group B streptococci with benzathine penicillin G. Persistence of penicillin G benzathine in pregnant group B streptococcus carriers. Immediate delivery compared with expectant management after preterm pre-labour rupture of the membranes close to term. Using vaginal Group B Streptococcus colonisation in women with preterm premature rupture of membranes to guide the decision for immediate delivery. Detection of Carriage of Group B Streptococci. Duration of intrapartum prophylaxis and concentration of penicillin G in fetal serum at delivery. The effectiveness of risk-based intrapartum chemoprophylaxis for the prevention of early-onset neonatal group B streptococcal disease. Timing of intrapartum ampicillin and prevention of vertical transmission of group B streptococcus. Effectiveness of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of early-onset group B streptococcal disease. Neonatal Infection (Early Onset): Antibiotics for Prevention and Treatment. Clinical guidelines are systematically developed statements that assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.

RCOG Guidelines are not prescriptive directions but should be considered in the context of clinical data and available treatment options. Departures from local protocols should be documented in the patient's case notes.