Management of Bladder Pain Syndrome
Initial presentation and assessment
Bladder pain syndrome (BPS) is a chronic pain syndrome and the principles of management of chronic pain should be used for the initial assessment of this condition. A thorough medical history should be taken and physical examination performed. A bladder diary should be completed. A food diary may be used to identify if specific foods cause a flare-up of symptoms. Urine should be tested to rule out a urinary tract infection. Investigations for urinary ureaplasma and chlamydia can be considered in symptomatic patients with negative urine cultures and pyuria. In those with a suspicion of urological malignancy, urine cytology should be tested. Cystoscopy and referral to urology should be initiated in accordance with local protocols.
Diagnosis of BPS
BPS is a diagnosis of exclusion and other conditions should be excluded. Bladder biopsies and hydrodistention are not recommended for the diagnosis of BPS. Cystoscopy does not confirm or exclude the diagnosis of BPS, but is required to diagnose/exclude other conditions that mimic BPS. Potassium sensitivity test, urodynamic assessment and urinary biomarkers should not be used in the diagnosis of BPS. Clinicians should use a validated symptom score to assess baseline severity of BPS and assess response to treatment. The use of visual analogue scales for pain should be considered to assess severity of pain in BPS.
Initial management
Conservative treatments include dietary modification, stress management, regular exercise, and analgesia. Oral amitriptyline or cimetidine may be considered when first-line conservative treatments have failed. Intravesical treatments such as lidocaine, hyaluronic acid, botulinum toxin A, dimethyl sulfoxide, heparin, and chondroitin sulfate may be added if conservative and oral treatments have been unsuccessful. Further treatment options should only be considered after referral to a pain clinic and discussion at a multidisciplinary team meeting. Cystoscopic fulguration and laser treatment, transurethral resection of lesions, neuromodulation, oral cyclosporin A, and major surgery may be considered in refractory BPS.
Treatments that are not recommended include oral hydroxyzine, oral pentosan polysulfate, long-term antibiotics, intravesical resiniferatoxin, intravesical Bacillus Calmette –Gu/C19erin, high-pressure long-duration hydrodistension, and long-term oral glucocorticoids.
Further management
Patients who fail to respond to conservative treatment should be referred to secondary care. Referral to a physiotherapist and consideration for psychological support or counselling may be beneficial for patients with refractory BPS. Patients should be given written information about patient organizations that provide evidence-based information.
Long-term management and prognosis
Patients should be followed up periodically in secondary care with consideration for shared care between the pain team and urogynaecology until symptoms become controlled. BPS and pregnancy may have variable effects on symptom severity, and treatment options considered safe in pregnancy include oral amitriptyline and intravesical heparin.

BPS is commonly associated with conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome, vulvodynia, endometriosis, fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome, and autoimmune diseases. Clinical history should include information on pain location, triggers, onset, and correlation with other events. Physical examination should rule out bladder distension, hernias, and painful trigger points. Baseline investigations include a bladder diary, food diary, and urine testing for UTI. Bladder biopsies and hydrodistention are not recommended for diagnosis. Conservative treatments include dietary modifications, stress management, regular exercise, and analgesia. Pharmacological treatments may include oral amitriptyline or cimetidine if conservative treatments fail. QoL can be impacted by BPS, and patients may benefit from support groups and cognitive behavioral therapy.

Cimetidine is not licensed for the treatment of BPS. Multimodal therapy may be considered if single drugs are unsuccessful, but should be commenced by consultants with special expertise. Intravesical treatments such as lidocaine, hyaluronic acid, botulinum toxin A, DMSO, heparin, and chondroitin sulfate may be considered if conservative and oral treatments fail. Neuromodulation and oral cyclosporin A may be options after other treatments have failed. Treatments not recommended include oral hydroxyzine, oral pentosan polysulfate, long-term antibiotics, intravesical resiniferatoxin, intravesical Bacillus Calmette-Guérin, high-pressure long-duration hydrodistension, and long-term oral glucocorticoids. Patients who fail to respond to conservative treatment should be referred to secondary care. Referral to a pain clinic or clinical psychologist may be considered if conservative and oral treatments have failed. Support groups can provide a platform for patients to share experiences and information. Follow-up should be periodic in secondary care until symptoms are controlled.

Individualized management plans should consider response to treatment, effects on quality of life, and existing comorbidities. Pregnancy can have variable effects on the severity of bladder pain syndrome (BPS) symptoms. Safe treatment options during pregnancy include oral amitriptyline and intravesical heparin. DMSO should be avoided in pregnancy due to its teratogenic effects. Limited data is available on changes in BPS symptoms during pregnancy. Patients with BPS may have a genetic predisposition, but the risk of passing it on to their child is low unless there is a family history of the condition. Further research is needed on standardized assessment tools, patient-related outcomes, and the effectiveness of various treatments for BPS. Support groups are available for individuals with BPS.

Interstitial cystitis patients use and rate complementary and alternative medicine therapies. Gynecological disorders in bladder pain syndrome patients. Management of painful bladder with various treatments such as amitriptyline, cimetidine, and botulinum toxin injections. Intravesical treatments for bladder pain syndrome. Long-term outcomes of reconstructive surgery in patients with bladder pain syndrome. Use of pentosan polysulfate sodium for treatment. Sequential oral antibiotics for interstitial cystitis treatment. Efficacy of intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guerin for refractory interstitial cystitis. Prolonged bladder distension for symptomatic treatment of interstitial cystitis. Nitric oxide as an objective marker for treatment response in classic interstitial cystitis. Efficacy of prednisone for severe refractory ulcerative interstitial cystitis. Myofascial physical therapy in women with interstitial cystitis and pelvic floor tenderness. Pregnancy outcomes and corticosteroid use in interstitial cystitis. Sacral nerve stimulation during pregnancy.

Clinical guidelines are developed statements to assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions. Each guideline is systematically developed using a standardized methodology. Recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment and must be evaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources, and limitations unique to the institution and variations in local populations. The evidence used in this guideline was graded using a standardized scheme. Recommendations were formulated in a similar fashion with a standardized grading scheme.