Management of Premenstrual Syndrome
When clinically reviewing women for PMS, symptoms should be recorded prospectively over two cycles using a symptom diary. Referral to a gynaecologist should be considered when simple measures have failed, and severe symptoms justify gynaecological intervention. Women with severe PMS may benefit from a multidisciplinary team approach. An integrated holistic approach should be used when treating women with PMS. Drospirenone-containing COCs may be effective as a first-line pharmaceutical intervention. Percutaneous estradiol combined with cyclical progestogens has been shown to be effective for managing physical and psychological symptoms of severe PMS. Cognitive behavioral therapy should be considered routinely as a treatment option for severe PMS. GnRH analogues are highly effective in treating severe PMS but should be reserved for the most severe cases. SSRIs can be considered as first-line pharmaceutical management options in severe PMS. Spironolactone can be used to treat physical symptoms in women with PMS. Hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy can be considered for severe cases when medical management has failed. A decision-making algorithm is provided for the treatment of PMS.

1. Purpose and scope
This guideline reviews the diagnosis, classification, and management of premenstrual syndrome (PMS), examining pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatments.

2. Introduction and background epidemiology
Considerable work has been done to achieve consensus on the recognition, diagnosis, classification, and management of PMS. PMS encompasses psychological and physical symptoms that impact daily activities during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle.

2.2 Classification of PMS
Core premenstrual disorders (PMDs) are the most common type of PMS, with symptoms present during the luteal phase and resolving with menstruation. Other PMDs include variant types that do not meet core criteria.

4. How is PMS diagnosed?
Symptoms should be recorded prospectively over two cycles using a symptom diary for an accurate diagnosis. Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues may be used for a definitive diagnosis if needed.

5. What aspects are involved in delivering a service to women with PMS?
Referral to a gynaecologist should be considered if simple measures fail to control symptoms. General practitioners manage most cases, with referral to secondary care for confirmed PMS.

6. How is PMS managed?
Complementary therapies may benefit some women with PMS, but evidence is conflicting. An integrated holistic approach should be used, considering interactions with conventional medicines. Some therapies, such as evening primrose oil and Vitex agnus castus, have shown potential benefits for PMS symptoms.

6.2 Is there a role for CBT and other psychological counselling techniques?
CBT should be considered as a treatment option for women with severe PMS. Evidence suggests that CBT can reduce depression, anxiety, and behavioral problems in patients with PMS.

6.3 Hormonal medical management of PMS
6.3.1 What is the role of cycle-modifying agents in managing PMS?
Drospirenone-containing COCs are effective for managing PMS and may be considered as a first-line treatment. Studies have shown that these contraceptives can reduce the severity of symptoms in women with PMDD.

6.3.2 What is the optimum COC pill regimen?
Continuous use of drospirenone-containing COCs may be more effective in reducing premenstrual-type symptoms compared to cyclic use. Studies have shown that extended continuous regimens can lead to significant improvements in mood, headache, and pelvic pain.

6.3.3 How efficacious is percutaneous estradiol?
Percutaneous estradiol combined with cyclical progestogens has been shown to be effective for managing physical and psychological symptoms of severe PMS. Implants and patches have been evaluated in controlled trials and found to be highly effective.

6.3.4 What is the optimum regimen for prevention of endometrial hyperplasia?
A cyclical course of oral or vaginal progesterone or long-term progestogen with the LNG-IUS 52 mg should be used to prevent endometrial hyperplasia when using percutaneous estradiol. Any suspicious symptoms should be investigated.

6.3.5 What is the safety of estradiol on the premenopausal endometrium and breast tissue?
There is insufficient data to advise on the long-term effects of estradiol on breast and endometrial tissue. Randomised placebo-controlled trial data are lacking in this area.

6.3.6 For how long can estradiol be used safely and what is the risk of recurrence?
Treatment of PMS with estradiol should be individualized based on the risks and benefits. Long-term treatment may be necessary to prevent the return of premenstrual symptoms.

6.3.7 What is the evidence for efficacy and adverse effects of danazol in the treatment of PMS?
Low dose danazol has been shown to be effective for treating breast symptoms in women with PMS, but it may have potential irreversible virilizing effects. Contraception should be used during treatment with danazol.

6.3.8 How effective are GnRH analogues for treating severe PMS?
GnRH analogues are highly effective in treating severe PMS.

PMS, GnRH analogues should be reserved for severe cases. Add-back therapy and BMD monitoring are recommended for long-term treatment. SSRIs are recommended as first-line treatment for severe PMS. Discontinuation of SSRIs should be gradual to avoid withdrawal symptoms. Spironolactone can be used for physical symptoms in PMS. Hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy may be beneficial for severe cases of PMS.

PMS, hysterectomy, and bilateral oophorectomy can be considered when medical management has failed or other gynaecological conditions indicate surgery. Hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy remove the ovarian cycle completely and allow for estrogen replacement without progestogen. Surgery should not be considered without preoperative use of GnRH analogues. Women undergoing surgical treatment for PMS should be advised to use HRT, especially if they are younger than 45 years of age. Endometrial ablation and hysterectomy with conservation of the ovaries are not recommended for severe PMS. Conservation of the ovaries will lead to persistence of PMS.

Phytomedicine has been shown to relieve premenstrual mood changes. Flavonoid supplements have improved leg health and reduced fluid retention in pre-menopausal women. Calcium supplementation has shown benefits in premenstrual syndrome. Vitex agnus castus has been effective in treating moderate to severe premenstrual syndrome in Chinese women. Acupuncture has also shown promise in treating premenstrual syndrome. Oral contraceptives containing drospirenone have been effective in treating premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Danazol has been used to manage premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual mastalgia. GnRH analogues have been effective in treating endometriosis and preventing bone loss in young women. Leuprolide acetate plus tibolone have been used to treat severe premenstrual syndrome. Smoking has been associated with an increased risk of fractures in women.

- Miner Res 2014;29:223 –33.
- Babatunde OO, Forsyth JJ, Gidlow CJ. A meta-analysis of brief high-impact exercises for enhancing bone health in premenopausal women. Osteoporos Int 2012;23:109 –19.
- Blake GM, Fogelman I. The role of DXA bone density scans in the diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis. Postgrad Med J 2007;83:509 –17.
- National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Osteoporosis: Assessing the Risk of Fragility Fracture. NICE clinical guideline 146. Manchester: NICE; 2012.
- Wyatt K, Dimmock P, Jones P, Obhrai M, O’Brien S. Efficacy of progesterone and progestogens in management of premenstrual syndrome: systematic review. BMJ 2001;323:776 –80.

day 15–28) low dose SSRIs, e.g. citalopram/escitalopram 10 mg
Second line Estradiol patches (100 micrograms) + micronised progesterone (100 mg or 200 mg [day 17–28],
orally or vaginally) or LNG-IUS 52 mg 
Higher dose SSRIs continuously or luteal phase, e.g. citalopram/escitalopram 20–40 mg
Third line GnRH analogues + add-back HRT (continuous combined estrogen + progesterone
[e.g. 50–100 micrograms estradiol patches or2–4 doses of estradiol gel combined with
micronised progesterone 100 mg/day] or tibolone 2.5 mg) 
Fourth line Surgical treatment ± HRT