→ BJOG
An International Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology
1 Check for updates
Royal College of
Obstetricians &
Gynaecologists
Management of Monochorionic Twin
Pregnancy
Green-top Guideline No. 51
November 2016
Please cite this paper as: Kilby MD, Bricker L on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.
Management of monochorionic twin pregnancy. BJOG 2016; 124:el-e45.
NICE accredited
www.nice.org.uk/accreditation
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.14188
Management of Monochorionic Twin Pregnancy
This is the second edition of this guideline, previously published under the same title in December 2008.
Executive summary of recommendations
Diagnosis of monochorionic twin pregnancy
How is monochorionicity diagnosed prenatally and what is the accuracy of prenatal ultrasound
chorionicity allocation?
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
+0
All women with a twin pregnancy should be offered an ultrasound examination between
11*0 weeks and 13+6 weeks of gestation (crown-rump length 45-84 mm) to assess fetal viability,
gestational age and chorionicity, and to exclude major congenital malformations.
Chorionicity should be determined at the time the twin pregnancy is detected by ultrasound based
upon the number of placental masses, the appearance of the membrane attachment to the
placenta and the membrane thickness. This scan is best performed before 14 weeks of gestation.
[New 2016]
A photographic (thermal copy) record should be taken and placed in the patient's notes
documenting the ultrasound appearance of the membrane attachment to the placenta and an
electronic copy stored (Appendix II).
If there is uncertainty about the diagnosis of chorionicity, a photographic record of the ultrasound
appearance of the membrane attachment to the placenta should be retained and a second opinion
should be sought.
B
D
If there is still doubt in the diagnosis of chorionicity, the woman should be referred to a specialist
without delay, as chorionicity is best determined before 14 weeks of gestation.
D
On ultrasound, the fetuses in twin pregnancies should be assigned nomenclature (i.e. upper and
lower, or left and right) and this should be clearly documented in the woman's case notes to ensure
consistency throughout pregnancy. [New 2016]
C
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e2 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Outcome of monochorionic twin pregnancy
What is the outcome of monochorionic compared with dichorionic twin pregnancies?
Clinicians and women should be aware that monochorionic twin pregnancies have higher fetal loss
rates than dichorionic twin pregnancies, mainly due to second trimester loss and, overall, may have
a higher risk of associated neurodevelopmental morbidity. This should form part of the parental
counselling.
Optimal screening for chromosomal abnormalities, structural abnormalities and other fetal
complications in monochorionic twin pregnancies
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
What is the optimum method of screening for chromosomal abnormalities in monochorionic twin pregnancies?
Women with monochorionic twins who wish to have aneuploidy screening should be offered nuchal
translucency measurements in conjunction with first trimester serum markers (combined screening
test) at 11+0 weeks to 136 weeks of gestation (crown-rump length 45–84 mm). [New 2016]
C
In women with monochorionic twin pregnancies who 'miss' or who have unsuccessful first trimester
screening for aneuploidy, second trimester screening by the quadruple test should be offered.
[New 2016]
D
Early data with noninvasive prenatal testing are encouraging, but results should be interpreted with
caution until larger studies have been carried out. [New 2016]
C
What is the optimum method of screening for structural abnormalities in monochorionic twin pregnancies?
All monochorionic twins should undergo a routine detailed ultrasound scan between 18 and
20+6 weeks of gestation which includes extended views of the fetal heart anatomy (as
recommended in the Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme screening of a singleton fetus).
C
What is the optimum ultrasound regimen for monochorionic twin pregnancies?
Fetal ultrasound assessment should take place every 2 weeks in uncomplicated monochorionic
pregnancies from 16+0 weeks onwards until delivery (Appendix III).
D
At every ultrasound examination, liquor volume in each of the amniotic sacs should be assessed
and a deepest vertical pocket (DVP) depth measured and recorded, as well as the umbilical artery
pulsatility index (UAPI). Fetal bladders should also be visualised. Although first presentation of
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is rare after 26+0 weeks of gestation, it can occur and
therefore, scans should be performed at 2-weekly intervals in uncomplicated monochorionic twins
until delivery (Appendix III). [New 2016]
From 16+0 weeks of gestation, fetal biometry should be used to calculate an estimated fetal weight (EFW)
and the difference in EFW calculated and documented. As the risk of selective growth restriction (sGR)
extends to delivery, this should be performed at 2-weekly intervals until delivery. [New 2016]
D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e3 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
C
What are the optimum methods of screening for specific complications of monochorionic twin pregnancies?
Screening for TTTS
Screening for TTTS by first trimester nuchal translucency measurements should not be offered.
[New 2016]
Women with monochorionic twin pregnancies should be asked to report sudden increases in
abdominal size or breathlessness to healthcare professionals in their secondary or tertiary centres as
this may be a manifestation of TTTS.
Screening for TTTS should be by ultrasound examination from 16+0 weeks onwards, at 2-weekly
intervals, noting and recording fetal biometry and liquor volumes (DVP). Fetal bladders should also
be visualised.
Screening for twin anaemia-polycythaemia sequence (TAPS)
TAPS should be screened for following fetoscopic laser ablation for TTTS and in other complicated
monochorionic pregnancies requiring referral to a fetal medicine centre (such as those complicated
by SGR) by serial middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity (MCA PSV). [New 2016]
Screening for SGR
At each scan from 20 weeks of gestation (at 2-weekly intervals) onwards, calculate EFW discordance
using two or more biometric parameters. Calculate percentage EFW discordance using the following
formula: ([larger twin EFW smaller twin EFW]/larger twin EFW) x 100. Liquor volumes as DVP should
be measured and recorded (to differentiate from TTTS). [New 2016]
-
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
C
An EFW discordance of more than 20% is associated with an increase in perinatal risk. Such
pregnancies should be referred for assessment and management in fetal medicine units with
recognised relevant expertise. [New 2016]
B
Umbilical artery Doppler evaluation in monochorionic twins with SGR allows definition of prognosis
and potential morbidity. In particular, those with absent or reversed end-diastolic velocities (AREDV)
and 'cyclical' umbilical artery Doppler waveforms (intermittent AREDV) are at increased risk of
perinatal mortality and morbidity (Appendix IV). [New 2016]
C
Management of complex pathologies associated with a monochorionic twin pregnancy
The management of TTTS
How useful are grading systems for severity of TTTS in establishing prognosis?
At diagnosis, TTTS should be staged using the Quintero system. In addition, measurement of
umbilical artery Doppler velocities, MCA PSV and ductus venosus Doppler studies should be
performed and documented.
D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e4 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
What is (are) the optimal treatment(s) of TTTS and their outcomes?
TTTS should be managed in conjunction with fetal medicine centres with recourse to specialist
expertise and treatment in supraregional centres.
TTTS presenting before 26 weeks of gestation should be treated by fetoscopic laser ablation rather
than amnioreduction or septostomy. There is evidence that the fetoscopic laser ablative method
should be the Solomon technique.
Centres performing fetoscopic laser ablation should perform at least 15 procedures per year (rolling
3-year average). [New 2016]
Weekly ultrasound assessment (including examination of the fetal brain, heart and limbs) and serial
measurements of UAPI, MCA PSV and ductus venosus Doppler velocities should be performed. After
2 weeks post treatment, the ultrasound interval can be increased to every 2 weeks (noting UAPI,
MCA PSV and DVP) with documentation of adequate fetal growth (by calculating EFW).
In treated TTTS pregnancies, ultrasound examination of the fetal heart should be performed by the
fetal medicine specialist to exclude functional heart anomalies.
When should the delivery of monochorionic twin pregnancies complicated by TTTS take place?
A
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Delivery of monochorionic twin pregnancies previously complicated by TTTS and treated should be
between 34+0 and 36+6 weeks of gestation. [New 2016]
D
The management of SGR
SGR in monochorionic twins requires evaluation in a fetal medicine centre with expertise in the
management of such pregnancies. [New 2016]
✓
In cases of early-onset SGR in association with poor fetal growth velocity and abnormal umbilical
artery Doppler assessments, selective reduction may be considered an option. [New 2016]
C
In SGR, surveillance of fetal growth should be undertaken at least every 2 weeks with fetal Doppler
assessment (by umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery pulsatility index, and peak systolic
velocity). If umbilical artery Doppler velocities are abnormal, the Doppler assessments should be
undertaken in line with national guidance, measuring ductus venosus waveforms. [New 2016]
D
Clinicians should be aware that there is a longer ‘latency period' between diagnosis and delivery in
monochorionic twins complicated by SGR compared with growth restriction in dichorionic twin
pregnancy or singleton pregnancy. [New 2016]
D
Abnormal ductus venosus Doppler waveforms (reversed flow during atrial contraction) or
computerised cardiotocography short-term variation should trigger consideration of delivery.
[New 2016]
B
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e5 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
In type I SGR, planned delivery should be considered by 34-36 weeks of gestation if there is
satisfactory fetal growth velocity and normal umbilical artery Doppler waveforms. [New 2016]
In type II and III SGR, delivery should be planned by 32 weeks of gestation, unless fetal growth
velocity is significantly abnormal or there is worsening of the fetal Doppler assessment. [New 2016]
It is important to prospectively inform parents that in SGR and TTTS (even after apparently
successful treatment) there can be acute transfusional events (which are neither predictable nor
preventable) and therefore, despite regular monitoring, there may still be adverse perinatal
outcomes. [New 2016]
Management of TAPS
Clinicians should be aware that the natural history, fetal and neonatal implications, and optimal
treatment and/or surveillance of monochorionic pregnancies diagnosed with TAPS are poorly
established. [New 2016]
The management of monochorionic twin pregnancies complicated by single twin demise
D
What are the consequences for the surviving twin after fetal death of the co-twin in a monochorionic pregnancy and
what is optimal clinical management?
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Clinicians should be aware that monochorionic pregnancies not complicated by TTTS, SGR or TAPS
are still at risk of fetal death and neurological abnormality.
D
After a single fetal death in a monochorionic pregnancy, clinicians should be aware that the risks to
the surviving twin of death or neurological abnormality are of the order of 15% and 26%,
respectively. [New 2016]
B
Single fetal death in a monochorionic pregnancy should be referred and assessed in a fetal medicine
centre, with multidisciplinary expertise to manage these cases.
Fetal magnetic resonance imaging of the brain may be performed 4 weeks after co-twin demise to
detect neurological morbidity if this information would be of value in planning management.
How should fetal anaemia be monitored after single twin intrauterine death?
Fetal anaemia may be assessed by measurement of the fetal MCA PSV using Doppler
ultrasonography.
D
D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e6 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Timing and mode of delivery in uncomplicated monochorionic pregnancies
What is the optimal timing and method of delivery for otherwise uncomplicated monochorionic pregnancies (without
TTTS, SGR or TAPS)?
Women with monochorionic twins should have timing of birth discussed and be offered elective
delivery from 36+0 weeks with the administration of antenatal steroids, unless there is an indication
to deliver earlier. [New 2016]
C
It is appropriate to aim for vaginal birth of monochorionic diamniotic twins unless there are other
specific clinical indications for caesarean section.
A
Monochorionic monoamniotic (MCMA) pregnancies
What are the specific problems of MCMA pregnancies and how should they be managed?
MCMA twins almost always have umbilical cord entanglement when visualised using colour flow
Doppler. Such a finding has not consistently been demonstrated to contribute to overall morbidity
and mortality. [New 2016]
D
MCMA twins have a high risk of fetal death and should be delivered by caesarean section between
32+0 and 34+0 weeks. [New 2016]
Higher order multiple pregnancies with reference to monochorionicity
What is the outcome of monochorionic and dichorionic compared with trichorionic triplet pregnancies?
Clinicians should be aware that monochorionic/dichorionic triplet pregnancies have higher fetal loss
rates than trichorionic triplet pregnancies and may be complicated by feto-fetal transfusion
syndrome, SGR and TAPS.
Selective reduction should be discussed in all higher order pregnancies including triplets. [New 2016]
D
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
C
Increased ultrasound surveillance is warranted in a fetal medicine centre with expertise to manage
such cases.
✓
Discordant abnormalities in monochorionic pregnancies
What is the incidence of and the therapeutic options for discordant abnormalities in monochorionic pregnancies,
including twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence?
Monochorionic twins that are discordant for fetal anomaly must be referred promptly for
assessment and counselling in a fetal medicine centre with consideration for treatment.
Karyotyping of monochorionic twins should be managed in a fetal medicine centre. [New 2016]
✓
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e7 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Meticulous mapping of the position of the twins within the uterus should be performed both at the
time of prenatal diagnostic tests and invasive treatments. [New 2016]
✓
During amniocentesis, both amniotic sacs should be sampled in monochorionic twin pregnancies,
unless monochorionicity is confirmed before 14 weeks and the fetuses appear concordant for
growth and anatomy. [New 2016]
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Prior to invasive testing or in the context of twins discordant for an abnormality, selective reduction
should be discussed and made available to those requesting the procedure after appropriate
counselling. [New 2016]
Monitoring for disseminated intravascular coagulopathy is not indicated in monochorionic twin
pregnancies undergoing selective reduction. [New 2016]
Selective feticide by intravascular injection of an abortifacient is not an option in monochorionic
pregnancies because of the presence of placental anastomoses. The potential risks of intrafetal/
umbilical cord ablative procedures should be discussed prospectively, including the risk of co-twin
loss and neurological morbidity. [New 2016]
Documentation and discussion of heterokaryotypic monozygotic karyotypic abnormalities should take
place. [New 2016]
Conjoined twins
How are conjoined twins diagnosed and what are the outcomes?
Conjoined twins are exceedingly rare and prenatal assessment is required in a tertiary fetal
medicine centre so that diagnosis can be confirmed and prognosis discussed in conjunction with a
multidisciplinary team. [New 2016]
What are the training competencies required for managing monochorionic pregnancies?
All sonographers who undertake routine ultrasound scans during pregnancy must be trained to
establish chorionicity and the correct labelling of twins.
All sonographers who undertake midtrimester (18 +0-20+6 weeks) and fetal growth scans of
monochorionic twins should be made aware of the appearances of TTTS, SGR and TAPS, and the
need to refer patients on to specialist centres if such features present.
Fetal medicine centres undertaking fetal therapy for relatively rare complications of monochorionic
twins should have a minimum of two experienced operators and more than 15 cases per year
(rolling 3-year average) to maximise perinatal outcomes and minimise long-term morbidity.
✓
✓
D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e8 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
1.
Purpose and scope
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The purpose of this guideline is to evaluate and provide recommendations on best practice for the management of
problems associated with monochorionic placentation and their effects upon multiple pregnancies. The use of
ultrasound to determine chorionicity and amnionicity is key to the management of multiple pregnancies and the potential
risks to the fetuses. This guideline will outline the best evidence to guide clinical care, including fetal surveillance and
treatment of complications for monochorionic multiple pregnancy. It is important to emphasise that this guideline is
focused upon the management of monochorionic multiple pregnancies rather than all multiple pregnancies.
It is also recognised that women carrying a monochorionic pregnancy (most commonly twins) may have concerns and
anxieties surrounding their pregnancy. This requires accurate information given in a sensitive manner by healthcare
professionals and support by a multidisciplinary team, ideally within a multiple pregnancy clinic.' Support is also often
given in conjunction with the Twins And Multiple Births Association and The Multiple Births Foundation within the UK.
2.
Introduction and background epidemiology
A monochorionic pregnancy is a multiple pregnancy, most commonly a twin pregnancy, in which babies are
dependent on a single, shared placenta. Approximately 30% of twin pregnancies in the UK are monochorionic.
Monochorionic placentation can also occur in rarer, higher order multiples, especially triplets (i.e. dichorionic or
monochorionic triplets).
There has been an increase in all types of multiple pregnancies with the increasing use of assisted
reproductive technology, sociodemographic changes in our population associated with migration and deferment
of pregnancy to a later maternal age. Assisted reproductive technology increases the prevalence of both
dichorionic and monochorionic twinning. However, using day 5 blastocyst transfers seems to have a significantly higher
rate of monozygotic twinning (adjusted OR 2.04, 95% CI 1.29-4.48) compared with cleavage stage day 3 transfers. 2,3
Monochorionic and dichorionic twin pregnancies have increased risks of preterm birth, fetal growth restriction
(FGR), pre-eclampsia, postpartum haemorrhage and postnatal complications, such as infant feeding difficulties and
adverse puerperal mood change.
1,4
The particular challenges of monochorionic pregnancies arise from the shared placenta and vascular placental
anastomoses that are almost universal and connect the fetal circulations of both twins.
Specific complications associated with inter-twin vascular anastomoses are listed in Table 1. Note that there
may occasionally be some challenging diagnostic overlap among these definitions (e.g. twin-to-twin transfusion
syndrome [TTTS] versus selective growth restriction [SGR] with reduced liquor around the smaller twin - see
section 6.4.3):
TTTS
SGR
twin anaemia-polycythaemia sequence (TAPS)
twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence
single intrauterine death; although not exclusive to monochorionic twin pregnancy, it is more common and has
global effects on the co-twin.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e9 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In addition, the consequences for single fetal death and the management of discordant fetal anomalies (i.e. structural
and chromosomal anomalies) in monochorionic twins is important.
Monochorionic diamniotic (MCDA) twin pregnancies carry a higher risk of overall fetal and perinatal loss compared
with dichorionic pregnancies. Furthermore, monochorionic monoamniotic (MCMA) pregnancies, where both twins
are in a single amniotic sac (1% of monochorionic twins), carry a very high risk of perinatal loss, most commonly
before 24 weeks.
1,4-7
Almost all monochorionic placentas contain vascular anastomoses running between the two fetal umbilical cords
within and on the surface of the placenta. These connect the fetal circulations. In 80% of cases, these are
bidirectional vascular anastomoses which rarely lead to haemodynamic imbalance between the fetal circulations, but
allow a direct vascular connection between the twins with an increased risk of fetal death.8,9
In TTTS, which complicates up to 15% of monochorionic pregnancies, the placentas have a predominance of
unidirectional artery-vein anastomoses. This may lead to a haemodynamic imbalance within the circulations of the
twins, directly adversely affecting fetal cardiac function, fetoplacental perfusion, but also adversely affecting fetal renal
function by discordant activation of the renin-angiotensin axis.
4,10
Postnatal perfusion studies have noted unequal placental ‘territory' shared by the fetuses with associated marginal or
'velamentous' cord insertions. Such findings are common both in TTTS and SGR (which is often associated with
TTTS). 9,11-13
Very rarely, TTTS complicates MCMA twin pregnancies, as well as both dichorionic and monochorionic triplet
pregnancies.
11,14
TAPS is an important association in complicated monochorionic pregnancies, especially TTTS, occurring in up to 13%
of cases post laser ablation. 15 It may relatively rarely be associated with apparently uncomplicated MCDA twins. The
pathogenesis of TAPS is evidenced by postnatal placental injection studies demonstrating 'miniscule' artery-vein
anastomoses (less than 1 mm) allowing the slow transfusion of blood from the donor to the recipient. This may be
associated with highly discordant haemoglobin levels at birth (80 g/l or greater). 15-18
Significant intrauterine fetal size discordance (difference in estimated fetal weight [EFW] of greater than 20%),
termed 'selective growth restriction' (SGR), occurs in up to 15% of monochorionic twins in the absence of TTTS
and in over 50% of monochorionic twins complicated by TTTS. 19 SGR is recognised as a specific monochorionic twin
pathological entity associated with a significant differing placental territory between each fetus, inter-fetal placental
anastomoses and abnormal fetoplacental blood flow. 13 The incidence of size discordance is as great in dichorionic
pregnancies in some series, 20 but management of discordant growth is more complex in monochorionic pregnancies
due to the associated placental anastomoses conjoining the fetal circulations.
It is recognised that in monochorionic twin pregnancies, because of these potential and specific complications, there
may be significant anxiety and concern in parents, even if such abnormalities are not present. Accurate information
presented in a sensitive manner during discussions is important so as to allay unnecessary fears, while imparting to
couples the importance of appropriate increased prenatal surveillance.
1,5,6
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e10 of e45 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Table 1. Complications associated with inter-twin vascular anastomoses
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
TTTS (Quintero staging)
Associated with 15% of monochorionic twins
TAPS
2% of uncomplicated monochorionic
diamniotic (MCDA) and up to 13% of
monochorionic twins post laser ablation
SGR
(growth discordance of >20%) Approximately
10-15% of monochorionic twins
TRAP sequence
Approximately 1% of monochorionic twins
||
A significant discordance in amniotic fluid volumes. This is defined
as oligohydramnios with deepest vertical pocket (DVP) < 2 cm in
donor sac and polyhydramnios in the recipient sac (DVP > 8 cm
before 20 weeks of gestation and > 10 cm after 20 weeks of
gestation). Donor bladder visible and Doppler normal.
Bladder of the donor twin not visible and severe oligohydramnios
due to anuria. Doppler studies are not critically abnormal.
III Doppler studies are critically abnormal in either the donor or
recipient, with typically abnormal umbilical arterial Doppler
velocities in the donor and/or abnormal venous Doppler velocities
in the recipient (reversed flow during atrial contraction within the
ductus venosus and/or pulsatile umbilical vein velocities).
IV Ascites, pericardial or pleural effusion, scalp oedema or overt
hydrops present usually in the recipient.
V One or both babies have died (not amenable to therapy).
||
Signs of fetal anaemia in the donor and polycythaemia in the
recipient without significant oligohydramnios/polyhydramnios being
present. Donor has increased middle cerebral artery peak systolic
velocity (MCA PSV) (> 1.5 multiples of the normal median) and recipient
has decreased MCA PSV (< 1.0 multiples of the normal median).
Growth discordance but positive diastolic velocities in both fetal
umbilical arteries.
Growth discordance with absent or reversed end-diastolic velocities
(AREDV) in one or both fetuses.
III Growth discordance with cyclical umbilical artery diastolic waveforms
(positive followed by absent then reversed end-diastolic flow in a
cyclical pattern over several minutes [intermittent AREDV; ¡AREDV]).
Acardiac twin (with usually no cardiac tissue) being perfused by the
anatomically 'normal' pump twin through a large artery-artery
anastomosis on the placental surface.
3.
Identification and assessment of evidence
This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists (RCOG) Green-top Guidelines. The Cochrane Library (including the Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews and the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects [DARE]), EMBASE, Trip, MEDLINE and PubMed (electronic
databases) were searched for relevant randomised controlled trials, systematic reviews and meta-analyses. The search
was restricted to articles published between 1966 and 2015. The databases were searched using the relevant Medical
Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, including all subheadings, and this was combined with a keyword search. Search words
included 'monochorionic twin', 'TTTS', ‘twin twin transfusion syndrome', 'TRAP syndrome', ‘amnioreduction', ‘laser
ablation', 'septostomy' and 'cord occlusion' and the search was limited to humans and the English language. The National
Library for Health and the National Guideline Clearinghouse were also searched for relevant guidelines and reviews. The
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e11 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
1.5
most important of these is the 2011 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) clinical guideline 129,'
which was based upon an extensive review of the evidence for the antenatal management of twin and triplet pregnancies.
An evidence update to this guideline was published in 2013.6 The proceedings of the 50th RCOG Study Group on
Multiple Pregnancy also gave important expert opinion used in this document.4
In addition, qualitative information and patient representation has been provided by Mr Keith Reed on behalf of the
Twins And Multiple Births Association and Ms Jane Denton on behalf of The Multiple Births Foundation.
Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. In the absence of published evidence, these have
been annotated as 'good practice points'. Further information about the assessment of evidence and the grading of
recommendations may be found in Appendix l.
4.
Diagnosis of monochorionic twin pregnancy
4.1
How is monochorionicity diagnosed prenatally and what is the accuracy of prenatal
ultrasound chorionicity allocation?
All women with a twin pregnancy should be offered an ultrasound examination between
11+0 weeks and 136 weeks of gestation (crown-rump length 45-84 mm) to assess fetal viability,
gestational age and chorionicity, and to exclude major congenital malformations.
B
Chorionicity should be determined at the time the twin pregnancy is detected by ultrasound based upon
the number of placental masses, the appearance of the membrane attachment to the placenta and the
membrane thickness. This scan is best performed before 14 weeks of gestation.
D
A photographic (thermal copy) record should be taken and placed in the patient's notes
documenting the ultrasound appearance of the membrane attachment to the placenta and an
electronic copy stored (Appendix II).
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If there is uncertainty about the diagnosis of chorionicity, a photographic record of the ultrasound
appearance of the membrane attachment to the placenta should be retained and a second opinion
should be sought.
✓
If there is still doubt in the diagnosis of chorionicity, the woman should be referred to a specialist
without delay, as chorionicity is best determined before 14 weeks of gestation.
D
On ultrasound, the fetuses in twin pregnancies should be assigned nomenclature (i.e. upper and
lower, or left and right) and this should be clearly documented in the woman's case notes to ensure
consistency throughout pregnancy.
C
First trimester ultrasound scanning is important in multiple pregnancies as it confirms viability, determines
gestational age, defines chorionicity (by denoting placental mass numbers and membrane thickness),
determines the number of amniotic sacs and may identify fetal anomalies (i.e. large cystic hygroma, Evidence
anencephaly). In monochorionic twins, it is also important to exclude ‘acardiac twinning', which is level 2++
associated with TRAP. At this ultrasound examination, screening for Down syndrome may also be offered
to couples (see below).
1,6
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e12 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In spontaneously conceived twins, gestational age can be determined at the first trimester scan by using the
crown-rump length of the larger fetus to avoid the risk of estimating it from a baby with early growth pathology.
The accurate assessment of chorionicity is more sensitive and specific in the first trimester and it is
1,5,6 indicates
important to assess and document chorionicity clearly at this gestational age. NICE guidance
'
that this should be performed at the time of the first trimester scan to screen for Down syndrome. There
is significant benefit in identifying women with monochorionic pregnancies early as these pregnancies will Evidence
require additional fetal surveillance. It also allows women to be fully counselled on the risks and level 4
appropriate management of monochorionicity to be implemented. Differentiating between monochorionic
and dichorionic pregnancies will result in a saving of time and emotional stress by avoiding unnecessary
additional interventions in dichorionic pregnancies.
Clinicians should be aware that, although ultrasound assessment of chorionicity is very accurate, it does
not have 100% sensitivity. The NICE guideline identified 14 studies investigating diagnostic accuracy of the
following characteristics (as determined by an ultrasound scan) for determining chorionicity: 1,5,6,21
Number of placental sites and the characteristics of the inter-twin membrane placental insertion
(so-called lambda/T-sign) in the first trimester. Approximately 3% of monochorionic placentas have
two placental masses (bilobed placenta), so these are not necessarily dichorionic.2
22
level |+
Inter-twin membrane thickness using two-dimensional ultrasound: i) with thickness usually subjectively Evidence
defined, but in the literature, this is less than 1.8 mm for monochorionic twins; and ii) 1.5-2.0 mm can
be inconclusive for monochorionic twins, but when used with other factors, chorionicity can usually be
defined in 99% of cases.
23,24
The number of membrane layers (subjectively noted).
25
• Composite measures based on the above characteristics and others (number of placental masses,
number of gestational sacs, concordant fetal sex [in monochorionic twins] and number of fetal
poles).
1,4 6
The strongest likelihood ratios were reported for a composite method involving presence of a lambda or
T-sign, and noting the number of placental masses identified using ultrasound in the first trimester. Using
such criteria, sensitivity and specificity were greater than 95%.2
24
Monochorionic twin pregnancies have a single placental mass and a thin inter-twin membrane that inserts
into the placenta at a perpendicular plane (T-sign). In contrast, dichorionic twin pregnancies have
two placental masses (or adjacent placental masses forming a ‘lambda sign' as placental tissue is present
where the thick inter-twin membrane inserts onto the placenta [Appendix II]).
1,5,6
This assessment should be followed up with noting concordant fetal sex at the midtrimester ultrasound
scan.4
Evidence
level 2+
Evidence
level 2++
Evidence
level 4
It is sometimes necessary to review the assigned chorionicity of multiple pregnancies in the second or even third
trimester. A retained photographic record (either in the patient's handheld notes or stored in the hospital notes)
will allow this to be easily reviewed. An archived image should also be stored.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e13 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
1,23,24
The sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound to define chorionicity is highest before 14 weeks of
gestation. If a trained sonographer, as part of routine first trimester screening, cannot define with
confidence the chorionicity of the pregnancy, then a second opinion must be sought from a senior
sonographer or the woman should be offered referral to a healthcare professional who is competent in Evidence
determining chorionicity by ultrasound scan as soon as possible.
If it is difficult to determine chorionicity, even after referral (for example, because the woman has booked
late in pregnancy), then the pregnancy should be managed as monochorionic until proved otherwise.'
Accuracy in labelling monochorionic twins is important so that serial growth scan measurements can be
consistently applied to the same twin throughout pregnancy and that any intrauterine or neonatal
management can be directed towards the correct twin. A retrospective study 24 found that ascribing labels
based on lateral or vertical orientation was a reliable method of twin labelling. This study, based
on 416 twin pregnancies, labelled the twin whose gestational sac was closest to the cervix at the
11-14-week scan as 'twin l' and recorded the twins' orientation as lateral or vertical given their relative
positions to each other (left/right or top/bottom, respectively). Approximately 90% of twins were oriented
laterally and 10% vertically. The presenting order of 8.5% of the laterally oriented twins changed between
the first and last scans; there were no such changes in the vertically oriented pregnancies. Based on a
subset of mixed-sex twins (n = 108), the presenting order in a third trimester scan was different to the
subsequent birth order in 5.9% of pregnancies delivered vaginally and 20.3% of pregnancies delivered by
caesarean section.
level 3
Evidence
level 2+
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The authors concluded that recording the twins' relative position to each other was a reliable method of
labelling twin pregnancies compared with designating the babies as 'twin l' and 'twin 2', and was
conceptually more open to the possibility that the anticipated birth order of the twins might change,
especially where delivery is by caesarean section. 24
5.
5.1
Outcome of monochorionic twin pregnancy
What is the outcome of monochorionic compared with dichorionic twin pregnancies?
Clinicians and women should be aware that monochorionic twin pregnancies have higher fetal loss
rates than dichorionic twin pregnancies, mainly due to second trimester loss and, overall, may have
a higher risk of associated neurodevelopmental morbidity. This should form part of the parental
counselling.
A prospective Scandinavian study 26 of 495 pregnancies diagnosed before 15 weeks found fetal loss at less
than 24 weeks of gestation to be 14.2% in monochorionic compared with 2.6% in dichorionic pregnancies
(P<0.05). The number of babies alive at 8 months of age (percentage of fetuses at inclusion) was 82.4%
monochorionic compared with 96.3% dichorionic (P < 0.01). Mean birthweight (both twins) and mean
gestational age at delivery was lower in monochorionic twins (P < 0.01). A retrospective study of 1407 twin
pregnancies in the Netherlands over a 10-year period found the perinatal mortality rate to be 11.6% in
monochorionic twins compared with 5.0% in dichorionic twins. Monochorionic twins continued to be at
greater risk even after 32+0 weeks. 27 A retrospective study of all twin pregnancies of known chorion-
icity from a large regional cohort of nine hospitals over a 10-year period in south London has indicated an
Evidence
level 2+
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e14 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
+0
increased fetal loss rate prior to 24*0 weeks in monochorionic twins (60.3/1000 fetuses) compared with
dichorionic twins (6.6/1000 fetuses) and that this risk continues through pregnancy as risk of stillbirth after
26 weeks. This has been confirmed by several studies in different parts of the world.³
+0
28,29
30,31
In addition, neurological morbidity may be up to seven-fold higher in preterm monochorionic infants
compared with dichorionic infants due to associated complications of TTTS, SGR and single twin death in
utero.
32,33
Evidence
level 2+
6.
6.1
Optimal screening for chromosomal abnormalities, structural abnormalities and other fetal
complications in monochorionic twin pregnancies
What is the optimum method of screening for chromosomal abnormalities in monochorionic
twin pregnancies?
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Women with monochorionic twins who wish to have aneuploidy screening should be offered nuchal
translucency measurements in conjunction with first trimester serum markers (combined screening
test) at 11+0 weeks to 136 weeks of gestation (crown-rump length 45-84 mm).
C
In women with monochorionic twin pregnancies who 'miss' or who have unsuccessful first trimester
screening for aneuploidy, second trimester screening by the quadruple test should be offered.
D
Early data with noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) are encouraging, but results should be
interpreted with caution until larger studies have been carried out.
C
Monochorionic twins are not at increased risk of chromosomal abnormalities over dichorionic twins, but
the prevalence of aneuploidy is slightly increased overall in multiple pregnancies because of an indirect
association with increased maternal age."
1,4
I
First trimester combined screening using nuchal translucency and the serum analytes of free beta-human
chorionic gonadotrophin and pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (combined test screening) should be
offered to pregnant women with monochorionic twins at a crown-rump length of between 45 and 84 mm.'
This screening test has good sensitivity for detecting aneuploidy (90%), but the false-positive rate (up to 10%)
is higher than in singletons (2.5%) and dichorionic twins (5%).'
When screening is performed by nuchal translucency, first trimester serum screening and maternal age, a
pregnancy-specific risk is calculated in monochorionic twins. This is in contrast to dichorionic twins in whom
a fetus-specific risk is calculated. 1,34
Approximately 10% of pregnant women do not have their first antenatal booking appointment in the first
trimester. If the gestation at first visit is after 14 weeks, then second trimester serum screening should be
offered using the quadruple screen test (with an 80% detection rate and a false-positive rate of 3%) so as
to not disadvantage these women. This screening test in monochorionic twins provides a pregnancy-
specific risk.
1,35
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2+
Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e15 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
37,38
NIPT for fetal trisomy 21 risk assessment is now available and is rapidly replacing other screening tests. In
singleton pregnancy, it has a much higher detection rate and lower false-positive rate than the current best
screening tests (i.e. combined nuchal translucency screening). In a 2014 meta-analysis, the weighted pooled
detection rate for trisomy 21 in singleton pregnancies was 99% for a false-positive rate of 0.8%. The
corresponding values in twin pregnancies were 94.4% and 0%. However, the reported number of trisomy
21 cases in the twin pregnancies included was small (three studies; 18 cases). Since this meta-analysis, two
more publications have reported promising detection rates. The largest published study 38 comparing
NIPT in twins versus singletons (515 twin pregnancies versus 1847 singletons) demonstrated that failed
test rates (failure to get a result) were higher compared with singletons (5.6% versus 1.7%). The studies
do not differentiate detection rates and failed test rates according to chorionicity. As in monochorionic
twinning the fetuses share the same genetic material in the vast majority of cases (i.e. are genetically
identical), the performance of NIPT should be similar to that in singletons. Clinicians should be aware of
the latest guidance from the National Screening Committee.
Please see section II for invasive diagnostic testing in twin pregnancy.
6.2
Evidence
level 1+
What is the optimum method of screening for structural abnormalities in monochorionic
twin pregnancies?
All monochorionic twins should undergo a routine detailed ultrasound scan between 18 and
20+6 weeks of gestation which includes extended views of the fetal heart anatomy (as
recommended in the Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme screening of a singleton fetus).
Structural abnormalities, particularly cardiac abnormalities, are more common in twin and higher order
pregnancies than in singleton pregnancies. This is mainly because of the higher incidence of abnormalities in
monozygotic twins (owing to the unusual nature of the cleavage of the conceptus) compared with
dizygotic twins.
39
39
C
Monozygotic twins are monochorionic in 70% of cases; hence the higher rates of Evidence
abnormality in monochorionic twins. Abnormalities specific to monozygotic twins are often midline (such | level 4
as holoprosencephaly, neural tube defects and cardiac abnormalities).3
As one cannot determine
monozygosity using ultrasound, both monochorionic and dichorionic twins have the same recommended
second trimester ultrasound screening regimen, which is in line with the NICE guideline. 1,6
26
A Scandinavian study of twin pregnancies where women had a package of scans (nuchal translucency |
scan, anomaly scan at 19 weeks of gestation, fetal echocardiography at 21 weeks of gestation and a
cervical length scan at 23 weeks of gestation) found that 0.5% of the fetuses had cardiac anomalies, 80% of
which were detected at the 19-20-week anomaly scan (i.e. before fetal echocardiography) and therefore,
concluded that formal fetal echocardiography by a cardiologist is not justified.
Limited published evidence suggests that detection rates of fetal anomalies on ultrasound scan for twin
pregnancies are similar to published data for singletons. 26,40-42 Therefore, routine anomaly screening by a
trained screening sonographer between 18 and 20 +6 weeks of gestation is appropriate 1,43 and should
include extended cardiac views as per the NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme current screening
protocols.4
43
Evidence
level 2+
Evidence
level 4
The management of monochorionic pregnancies where one fetus has a congenital abnormality is complex because of
shared circulations within the placenta. Timely diagnosis facilitates management by allowing time to prepare,
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e16 of e45 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
optimisation of fetal surveillance depending on the anomaly, involvement of multidisciplinary specialists (e.g. genetics
team, paediatric cardiologist, paediatric surgeons) and appropriate birth planning (place, timing and mode), including
access to intrauterine management where it is possible. Management of discordant abnormalities is addressed in
section II.
Selective termination of a single fetus in a monochorionic pregnancy should be assessed and carried out in a centre
with expertise and experience in performing such prenatal procedures. In addition, increased prenatal surveillance,
the potential for referral to a tertiary specialist centre and the adverse risks to the pregnancy must be discussed in a
timely fashion.
6.3
What is the optimum ultrasound regimen for monochorionic twin pregnancies?
Fetal ultrasound assessment should take place every 2 weeks in uncomplicated monochorionic
pregnancies from 16+0 weeks onwards until delivery (Appendix III).
At every ultrasound examination, liquor volume in each of the amniotic sacs should be assessed
and a deepest vertical pocket (DVP) depth measured and recorded, as well as the umbilical artery
pulsatility index (UAPI). Fetal bladders should also be visualised. Although first presentation of TTTS
is rare after 26+0 weeks of gestation, it can occur and therefore, scans should be performed at
2-weekly intervals in uncomplicated monochorionic twins until delivery (Appendix III).
From 16+0 weeks of gestation, fetal biometry should be used to calculate an EFW and the difference
in EFW calculated and documented. As the risk of SGR extends to delivery, this should be performed
at 2-weekly intervals until delivery.
D
D
There are a number of serious pathologies in monochorionic twin pregnancy that need to be screened for
routinely. Ultrasound is required to make these diagnoses and therefore, serial ultrasound is required at regular
intervals.
Ultrasound examinations between 16 and 26 weeks of gestation focus primarily on the detection of
TTTS.' After 26 weeks, when first presentation of TTTS is relatively uncommon (but may occur), the
main purpose is to detect sGR or concordant growth restriction, and more rarely TAPS or late-onset
TTTS. The 2011 NICE guideline suggested that surveillance of uncomplicated monochorionic twins should
occur at intervals of every 2 weeks from 16+0 weeks of gestation until delivery.' One of the prime
reasons for performing serial ultrasound scans in monochorionic twins between 16 and 26 weeks is to
detect TTTS. Thus, the development of discordance in liquor volumes within the amniotic sacs is pivotal
to the process of detection and diagnosis. 44 After 26 weeks, TTTS may still occur and in addition, sGR
may also be associated with discordant liquor volumes. For this reason, this guideline has been modified to
include the recommendation that ultrasound surveillance is performed from 16 weeks until delivery at
2-weekly intervals. This is different from the NICE guidance published in 2011 (but undergoing revision).
Evidence
level 2+
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e17 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
There are no comparative studies of assessment techniques or regimens to assess fetal growth and
wellbeing, and to detect late-onset TTTS (after 26 weeks). Few twin pregnancies were included in the
randomised trials of umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry to detect FGR and these were not specifically
monochorionic.
45
Since 2011, the international research community has evaluated the risk of other complications, especially
SGR, and it is now recommended that, in addition to screening for TTTS, from 20 weeks of gestation,
screening for SGR should be included. 19
Evidence
level 2-
This ultrasound screening should include, as a minimum, fetal biometry measurements (head, abdominal and femur
measurements), measurement and recording of DVP depth of both sacs, and evaluation of fetal bladders (i.e. size
and visibility). From 160 weeks of gestation, EFW should be calculated and documented (Appendix III). In
addition, if at any point in time there is evidence of significant growth discordance or a suspicion of TTTS, then
UAPI, middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity (MCA PSV) and pulsatility index, and ductus venosus Dopplers
should be performed. From 16 weeks of gestation, umbilical artery Doppler velocities should be evaluated, and
the presentation of positive, absent or reversed velocities noted and documented. From 20 weeks of gestation,
UAPI should be performed even in the absence of signs of TTTS or growth discordance (uncomplicated
monochorionic twins) and plotted on standard charts. This may be best performed in a multiple pregnancy clinic.
The STORK population-based data set was analysed to evaluate fetal biometry in the second and third
trimesters of 323 monochorionic twin pregnancies. It was found that ultrasound biometry showed 'a small
but statistically significant reduction in fetal growth in twin pregnancies relative to that in singletons,
particularly in the third trimester, with a more marked difference for MCDA than for dichorionic
diamniotic (DCDA) pregnancies'. 46 For each variable, the mean value for DCDA twins was close to the
reported value in singletons at 20-30 weeks of gestation and showed a decrease relative to singletons | level 2+
beyond 30 weeks. Fetuses in MCDA twin pregnancies displayed lower mean measurements than those in
DCDA pregnancies throughout the gestational age range considered. In addition, this group found that
algorithm formulas for calculation of EFW that include a combination of head, abdomen and femur
measurements perform best in both singleton and twin pregnancies (Hadlock 2 formula).*/
6.4
47
Evidence
What are the optimum methods of screening for specific complications of monochorionic
twin pregnancies?
6.4.1
Screening for TTTS
Screening for TTTS by first trimester nuchal translucency measurements should not be
offered.
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Women with monochorionic twin pregnancies should be asked to report sudden increases in
abdominal size or breathlessness to healthcare professionals in their secondary or tertiary centres as
this may be a manifestation of TTTS.
Screening for TTTS should be by ultrasound examination from 16 +0 weeks onwards, at 2-weekly
intervals, noting and recording fetal biometry and liquor volumes (DVP). Fetal bladders should also
be visualised.
C
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e18 of e45 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
A large, prospective, Scandinavian, five-centre study that reported on 74 monochorionic pregnancies
diagnosed before 15 weeks of gestation 26 did not find that measurement of nuchal translucency predicted
the development of TTTS. Women with monochorionic pregnancies were scanned every 2 weeks Evidence
between 12 and 23 weeks of gestation to detect TTTS. DNA testing was used to assess zygosity after level 2++
delivery. TTTS was diagnosed in 23% of monochorionic pregnancies. Nuchal translucency measurements
were not helpful in predicting TTTS.
Unfortunately, common symptoms of twin pregnancy overlap with those associated with pathological conditions,
such as TTTS. Many women with TTTS indicate that several weeks before presentation they note an increase in
symptoms of breathlessness and abdominal distension. Pregnant women with monochorionic twins should have a low
threshold for presenting to healthcare professionals with concerns. This should be discussed by healthcare
professionals at their first booking visit.
The ultrasound diagnosis of TTTS is based on the following criteria (see Table I):
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Significant amniotic fluid discordance. This is the key to the diagnosis: there must be oligohydramnios
with DVP less than 2 cm in one sac (the donor) and polyhydramnios in the other sac (DVP more than
8 cm before 20 weeks of gestation and more than 10 cm after 20 weeks of gestation) (the
recipient).
48-50
Discordant bladder appearances with no urine in the 'donor' fetal bladder in severe TTTS
(presenting before 26 weeks of gestation).
• Haemodynamic and cardiac compromise – both in the ‘recipient' and/or ‘donor' twins.
In most centres, treatment for TTTS would not start until 16 weeks of gestation and therefore, first
trimester screening was evaluated as having little benefit over initiating ultrasound scans at 16 weeks of
gestation in apparently uncomplicated monochorionic twins. 1,6
19,44,48
For ultrasound screening in the second trimester, several studies reported that inter-twin membrane
folding (usually with less severe amniotic fluid discordance) predicted TTTS later in gestation." Twins
below 20 weeks of gestation with an amniotic fluid discordance (from DVP depth) of 3.1 cm or more had
a risk of TTTS of 85.7%. Sensitivity for diagnosis of TTTS was 55%. An inter-twin EFW discordance of 25%
or more had 63% sensitivity and 76% specificity for SGR without TTTS. 48 If there is liquor volume
discordance in monochorionic twins that does not reach the 'threshold' for the diagnosis of TTTS,
management should be individualised with a high degree of vigilance.
Evidence
level 2-
Evidence
level 4
Evidence
level 2-
No studies were identified in relation to using femur length, abdominal circumference, EFW, ultrasonography of
placental anastomoses, tricuspid regurgitation or absent visualisation of a donor bladder to predict the development
of TTTS.
6.4.2
Screening for TAPS
TAPS should be screened for following fetoscopic laser ablation for TTTS and in other complicated
monochorionic pregnancies requiring referral to a fetal medicine centre (such as those complicated
by SGR) by serial MCA PSV.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e19 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
TAPS is a form of TTTS characterised by a significant discordance in haemoglobin level between twins
without significant amniotic fluid discordance. 16-18 This can be diagnosed by the presence of increased
MCA PSV in the donor, suggestive of fetal anaemia (greater than 1.5 multiples of the normal median), and
a decreased MCA PSV in the recipient twin, suggestive of polycythaemia (less than 1.0 multiples of the
normal median), with the absence of significant oligohydramnios/polyhydramnios sequence.'
TAPS may
occur spontaneously in up to 2% 17,18 of monochorionic twins and in up to 13% following fetoscopic laser
for TTTS. 15,51
18
The placentas in monochorionic pregnancies complicated by TAPS are characterised by the presence of only
a few minuscule artery-vein vascular anastomoses. These small anastomoses allow a slow transfusion of
blood from the donor to the recipient, leading progressively to a significant discordance in haemoglobin
levels. The absence of severe amniotic fluid discordances in TAPS may be related to the very slow inter-twin
blood transfusion, allowing more time for haemodynamic compensatory mechanisms to take place.'
16-18
Evidence
level 2-
Evidence
level 3
Because TAPS mainly occurs in complicated cases and because there is little evidence to guide management (see
section 7.3), screening of monochorionic twins for TAPS using serial MCA PSV measurements is not routine and
should be confined to complicated monochorionic twin pregnancy where the risk of TAPS is high (those with TTTS
or SGR). Further prospective research evaluating the role of undertaking MCA PSV screening in monochorionic twin
pregnancies routinely to detect TAPS and to improve pregnancy outcome is required.
Postnatal diagnosis of TAPS is based on the presence of (chronic) anaemia in the donor (including
reticulocytosis) and polycythaemia in the recipient. Postnatal haematological criteria include an inter-twin
haemoglobin difference greater than 80 g/l and a reticulocyte count ratio greater than 1.7.18,52
6.4.3 Screening for SGR
At each scan from 20 weeks of gestation (at 2-weekly intervals) onwards, calculate EFW discordance
using two or more biometric parameters. Calculate percentage EFW discordance using the following
formula: ([larger twin EFW smaller twin EFW]/larger twin EFW) x 100. Liquor volumes as DVP
should be measured and recorded (to differentiate from TTTS).
Evidence
level 3
C
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
An EFW discordance of greater than 20% is associated with an increase in perinatal risk. Such
pregnancies should be referred for assessment and management in fetal medicine units with
recognised relevant expertise.
B
Umbilical artery Doppler evaluation in monochorionic twins with SGR allows definition of prognosis
and potential morbidity. In particular, those with absent or reversed end-diastolic velocities (AREDV)
and 'cyclical' umbilical artery Doppler waveforms (intermittent AREDV [¡AREDV]) are at increased
risk of perinatal mortality and morbidity (Appendix IV).
C
Unequal placental sharing, and marginal or velamentous cord insertions are common in monochorionic twins
and can result in discordant fetal growth, where one fetus is usually normal size and the other small for Evidence
gestational age (defined as EFW less than the tenth centile). However, even if both fetuses have an EFW level 2+
greater than the tenth centile there may be significant size discordance. This is termed sGR.
53-56
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e20 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
SGR is encountered in approximately 10-15% of all monochorionic multiple pregnancies. The
pathophysiology and natural history of this condition is different to growth discordance in dichorionic
multiple pregnancy. The prospective diagnosis initially may be difficult as there may be diagnostic ‘overlap'
between mild TTTS and SGR. Amniotic liquor volumes (DVP) in TTTS may differ between the fetuses
because of polyhydramnios in one of the amniotic sacs and oligohydramnios in the other amniotic sac (but
SGR may also be present). However, in isolated sGR this will differ as there is commonly oligohydramnios
in one of the amniotic sacs and normal liquor in the other amniotic sac.
53,57
Poor in utero growth of both twins may reflect multifactorial causes, such as maternal factors resulting in
global uteroplacental dysfunction, whereas discordant twin growth may be attributed to differences in
genetic potential between co-twins, placental dysfunction confined to one placenta only or one placental
territory within a shared placenta. In addition, TTTS represents a distinct entity of which discordant
growth is a common feature. 53,57
53
53.58
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2+
Discordant growth is recognised as an independent risk factor for adverse perinatal outcome in monochorionic
twins and is associated with a substantial increase in perinatal mortality and morbidity for both twins. Clinical
evolution depends on the combination of the effects of placental insufficiency in the growth-restricted twin with
inter-twin blood transfer through placental anastomoses.
53,57
It appears that a calculated difference in EFW is a sensitive method of defining sGR and appears to be
linked with adverse outcome when this is significantly different (see below). The ultrasonic methods used
to estimate fetal weight appear to be equally accurate, but one study favoured formulas that include a
combination of head, abdomen and femur measurements.
47,54,55
A prospective study from Ireland noted that perinatal mortality, individual morbidity and composite
perinatal morbidity are all seen to increase with birthweight discordance exceeding 18% for
monochorionic twins without TTTS (hazard ratio 2.6, 95% CI 1.6-4.3; P < 0.001); a minimum two-fold
increase in risk of perinatal morbidity exists even when both twin birthweights are appropriate for
gestational age.
However, others have studied monochorionic and dichorionic twins and noted that
56
prenatal risk does not increase until the difference in EFW is greater than 25%.
1,54
A 2013 review, performed by leading international researchers in this area, has advocated a compromise
Evidence
level 2+
'cut-off' of a difference in EFW of greater than 20% for monochorionic twins. 19 This is the pragmatic Evidence
definition used by this guideline (recognising data of increasing perinatal loss at a percentage EFW level 2++
difference of 18% from the Irish Consortium).
45,59
Umbilical artery waveforms in monochorionic twins with SGR may reflect adverse prognosis for the
pregnancy. For this reason, the guideline recommends that umbilical artery Doppler pulsatility index Evidence
measurements are taken from 20 weeks of gestation and plotted on gestational nomogram charts level 2+
(with umbilical artery Doppler velocities noted to have positive or AREDV from 16 weeks). Doppler
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e21 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
waveforms may demonstrate positive diastolic velocities (type I), AREDV (type II) or cyclical diastolic
waveforms (type III), with an attendant worsening of prognosis for perinatal mortality and morbidity.
¡AREDV on umbilical artery Doppler velocity assessment are more common in MCDA SGR (45%) than
uncomplicated (5%) pregnancies or those complicated by severe TTTS (2%).5 This condition appears to
result from large artery-artery anastomoses.
57,59
SGR type I (Table I) is associated with a relatively good outcome (more than 90% perinatal survival). Type II
SGR is associated with a high risk (up to 29%) of intrauterine demise of the growth-restricted twin and/or
preterm delivery. Type III SGR is associated with a 10-20% risk of unexpected fetal demise of the smaller
twin (even if stable ultrasound features and/or normal computerised cardiotocography [CTG] hours or days
before) and a 10-20% risk of neurological injury in the larger twin.³
7.
7.1
53,57,59
Management of complex pathologies associated with a monochorionic twin pregnancy
The management of TTTS
7.1.1 How useful are grading systems for severity of TTTS in establishing prognosis?
At diagnosis, TTTS should be staged using the Quintero system. In addition, measurement of
umbilical artery Doppler velocities, MCA PSV and ductus venosus Doppler studies should be
performed and documented.
The Quintero system of staging TTTS (Table I) has some prognostic value, but the course of the condition is
unpredictable and may involve improvement or rapid deterioration within a short time span.
60-62
In a series of 173 pregnancies complicated by TTTS from three centres in the USA and Australia, where
treatment was either by amnioreduction or selective laser ablation, the outcome of at least one neonatal
survivor was 91% (stage 1), 88% (stage II), 67% (stage III) and 50% (stage IV)."
50,60 Similar findings were
reported from Germany in a series of 200 TTTS pregnancies treated by laser ablation: at least one neonatal
survivor in 93% (stage 1), 83% (stage II), 83% (stage III) and 70% (stage IV). 63
Many reports of TTTS are difficult to interpret because of referral bias. A study from western Australia is
Evidence
level 2+
D
valuable because it is population based, coming from the sole perinatal tertiary service in this Australian Evidence
60
state. A prospective cohort of 71 women with TTTS was treated with amnioreduction or septostomy. level 2+
There was a relationship between Quintero stage at diagnosis and mean gestational age at delivery and
perinatal survival: stage I, 32 weeks of gestation, 77% survival; stage II, 31 weeks of gestation, 70% survival;
stage III, 28 weeks of gestation, 54% survival; and stage IV, 27 weeks of gestation, 44% survival. However,
disease progression was often unpredictable, with 28% of pregnancies improving, 35% worsening and
37% remaining in the same grade throughout gestation. Pregnancies appeared, for example, to progress
from stage | to stage III without obviously passing through stage II. Very similar findings came from
a smaller cohort study in the USA (n = 18).61 There were similar rates of regression and progression.
Another study found a change of stage with time to be of greater prognostic significance than the
stage itself 62 and others in a research setting have found recipient cardiac diastolic function to be
important in long-term prognosis.
64,65
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e22 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Amniotic fluid discordance, without fulfilling the 8 cm/2 cm criteria (i.e. within the ‘normal range'), |
together with normal umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry is associated with good outcome (93% overall
survival) and low risks of progression to severe TTTS (14%).*
48,66
There is controversy about the Quintero staging of TTTS, since stage I disease may not necessarily be
associated with the best outcome and indeed recipient twins within stage | TTTS may have evidence of
cardiac dysfunction.67
To emphasise this, a cross-sectional study from a single centre in the USA has indicated that monochorionic twin
pregnancies complicated by TTTS as mild as Quintero stages I and II have a significant proportion of recipient
twins with ventricular hypertrophy (17/28; 61%), atrioventricular valve regurgitation (6/28; 21%) and objective
abnormalities in either right (12/24; 50%) or left (14/24; 58%) ventricular function 64 at fetal echocardiography. The
suggestion that structural and/or functional assessment of the fetal heart (especially in the recipient) by
echocardiography of monochorionic pregnancies at risk of or with TTTS may be useful in defining the prognostic
risk of severe TTTS and treatment modalities, such as fetoscopic laser ablation, are of interest.
64,65
7.1.2 What is (are) the optimal treatment(s) of TTTS and their outcomes?
Evidence
level 2+
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
TTTS should be managed in conjunction with fetal medicine centres with recourse to specialist
expertise and treatment in supraregional centres.
✓
TTTS presenting before 26 weeks of gestation should be treated by fetoscopic laser ablation rather
than amnioreduction or septostomy. There is evidence that the fetoscopic laser ablative method
should be the Solomon technique.
A
Centres performing fetoscopic laser ablation should perform at least 15 procedures per year (rolling
3-year average).
✓
✓
Weekly ultrasound assessment (including examination of the fetal brain, heart and limbs) and serial
measurements of UAPI, MCA PSV and ductus venosus Doppler velocities should be performed. After
2 weeks post treatment, the ultrasound interval can be increased to every 2 weeks (noting UAPI,
MCA PSV and DVP) with documentation of adequate fetal growth (by calculating EFW).
In treated TTTS pregnancies, ultrasound examination of the fetal heart should be performed by the
fetal medicine specialist to exclude functional heart anomalies.
4
TTTS is a morbid complication of monochorionic twin pregnancies. * Once there is a suspicion of the
disease or the diagnosis has been prospectively made using ultrasound, the pregnancy should be managed
in conjunction with a fetal medicine centre, with specialists that perform treatment of the condition,
including fetoscopic laser ablation. This is in concordance with the national commissioning guidance for the
management of this condition in England.6
68
There are supraregional centres in the UK that will offer fetoscopic laser ablation for TTTS. Each case
should be managed on an individual basis, but commonly, this treatment is for Quintero stage II or more
and many will treat this condition if there is Quintero stage I with significant polyhydramnios (8 cm or
more) or cervical shortening (less than 25 mm).4
Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e23 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
69
The Eurofetus consortium trial randomised women with TTTS to either laser ablation or amnioreduction.
The planned sample size of 172 women aimed to demonstrate a 15% difference in survival. The large majority
of women had Quintero stage II or III TTTS. Three women in the laser group did not undergo the procedure.
Two women in the amnioreduction group did not undergo the procedure and seven underwent laser
ablation, six following amnioreduction. As compared with the amnioreduction group, the laser group had a
significantly higher likelihood of the survival of at least one twin to 28 days of age and 6 months of age. Infants
in the laser group also had a lower incidence of cystic periventricular leukomalacia and were more likely to be
free of neurological complications at 6 months of age. The authors' conclusion was that fetoscopic laser
coagulation of anastomoses is a more effective first-line treatment than serial amnioreduction for severe
TTTS diagnosed before 26 weeks of gestation.
Another randomised trial compared amnioreduction with septostomy (the deliberate creation of a hole in the
dividing septum with the intention of improving amniotic fluid volume in the donor sac). 70 The trial included
73 women with TTTS (of all stages). The primary outcome was at least one infant surviving until hospital
discharge. The trial was stopped after an interim analysis because no significant differences were seen in the
primary outcome.
71
72
level |+
The results of a third study, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development trial of
amnioreduction versus laser ablation,' have been added to the Cochrane review on the topic. In this
randomised controlled trial, pregnancies with severe TTTS were only entered into the study after a 'test'
amnioreduction. This may have produced bias in the study. This trial noted that there was no statistically
significant difference in 30-day postnatal survival between laser ablation and amnioreduction treatment for
donors at 55% (11/20) versus 55% (11/20) (P = 1.0; OR 1, 95% CI 0.242–4.14) or recipients at 30% (6/20) Evidence
versus 45% (9/20) (P = 0.51; OR 1.88, 95% CI 0.44–8.64). There was no difference in 30-day survival of
one or both twins on a per pregnancy basis between amnioreduction at 75% (15/20) and laser ablation at
65% (13/20) (P = 0.73; OR 1.62, 95% CI 0.34–8.09). Overall survival (newborns divided by the number of
fetuses treated) was not statistically significant for amnioreduction at 60% (24/40) versus laser ablation at
45% (18/40) (P = 0.18; OR 2.01, 95% CI 0.76–5.44). There was a statistically significant increase in fetal
recipient mortality in the laser ablation arm at 70% (14/20) versus the amnioreduction arm at 35% (7/20)
(P = 0.25; OR 5.31, 95% CI 1.19-27.6). This was offset by an increased recipient neonatal mortality of
30% (6/20) in the amnioreduction arm.
The results of the three studies have been reanalysed in a Cochrane review, adjusting where possible for
clustering, recognising the nonindependence of twin fetuses within a pair.'
72
The conclusion of the Cochrane review was that endoscopic laser coagulation of anastomotic vessels
should continue to be considered in the treatment of all stages of TTTS to improve neurodevelopmental
outcomes in the child. When compared with amnioreduction, treatment with laser coagulation does not
appear to increase or reduce the risk of overall death (stillbirth, neonatal and postneonatal) in this
condition, but it appears to result in more children being alive without neurological abnormality.72
Amnioreduction can be retained as a treatment option for those situations where the expertise for laser
coagulation is not available, pending transfer to a unit where such treatment can be obtained or when the
condition is diagnosed after 26 weeks of pregnancy. However, this may complicate future treatment if
associated with inadvertent septostomy.'
72
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e24 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Evidence
Randomised evaluation of interventions, such as septostomy, serial amniocentesis and placental laser ablation,
with regard to their respective effect on relatively mild forms of TTTS (Quintero stage I) and more severe
forms (Quintero stage IV) are required. 72 However, there is some evidence that fetoscopic laser ablation is level 3
the best treatment of TTTS in early-onset (less than 17 weeks) and late-onset (after 26 weeks) disease. 73,74
9,15
Anastomoses may be missed at fetoscopic laser ablation and this is the most common cause of recurrence
and morbidity." Recurrent TTTS can occur in up to 14% of pregnancies treated with fetoscopic laser
ablation and be associated with or without TAPS. 15,51 Such outcomes are associated with a worsening of Evidence
neonatal morbidity. There is randomised controlled trial evidence that modification of the primary level 1+
fetoscopic laser technique by ‘equatorial laser dichorionization' (or the Solomon technique) significantly
reduces these complications of recurrent TTTS and TAPS.15
Fetoscopic laser ablation can be performed in monochorionic and dichorionic (triamniotic) triplet |
pregnancies, but the placental angioarchitecture is usually more complex and the perinatal outcomes are in
general poorer than in the treatment of twins.
75,76
Some women request termination of pregnancy when severe TTTS is diagnosed and this should be
discussed as an option. Another option is to offer selective termination of pregnancy using bipolar
diathermy of one of the umbilical cords or using radiofrequency ablation, with inevitable sacrifice of that
baby.' This may be appropriate, for example, if there is evidence of cerebral damage in either twin."
77,78
15
79
There are few data to inform how frequently ultrasound surveillance is required after fetoscopic laser
ablation (or amnioreduction). Following laser treatment, the recurrence rate is up to 14%, which is likely
to be secondary to missed anastomoses at the time of initial laser treatment. However, most experts
advocate that ultrasound examination (with brain imaging, fetal measurement and Doppler assessment,
especially of the MCA PSV) should be performed every week for the first 2 weeks and then every other
week following clinical resolution. TAPS may complicate post fetoscopic laser ablation in up to 13% of
cases (the most common complication after fetal demise). Therefore, at these ultrasound examinations,
MCA PSV should be performed and the result recorded.
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2+
However, some have indicated that functional cardiac studies may add to the prognosis of MCDA twins
complicated by TTTS. 64,65,67 In a case series of 89 survivors from 73 pregnancies treated by laser ablation Evidence
for severe TTTS, 11% of fetuses had secondary, structural heart disease, primarily right-sided cardiac level 2-
lesions, predominantly pulmonary stenosis.
63
7.1.3
When should the delivery of monochorionic twin pregnancies complicated by TTTS take place?
Delivery of monochorionic twin pregnancies previously complicated by TTTS and treated should be
between 34+0 and 36+6 weeks of gestation.
D
19,80
International expert opinion has indicated that, even after successful treatment, regular ultrasound
surveillance should be routine and good practice.' Consideration should be given to delivery of the
surviving twin(s) between 34+0 and 36+6 weeks, 4,80,81 or earlier if there are concerns. As with previous
RCOG and NICE guidance, prophylactic maternal steroids should be given if possible prior to delivery.
Mode of delivery can be individualised, but often this is by caesarean section.
82
Evidence
level 2-
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e25 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
7.2
The management of sGR
SGR in monochorionic twins requires evaluation in a fetal medicine centre with expertise in the
management of such pregnancies.
In cases of early-onset SGR in association with poor fetal growth velocity and abnormal umbilical
artery Doppler assessments, selective reduction may be considered an option.
C
In sGR, surveillance of fetal growth should be undertaken at least every 2 weeks with fetal Doppler
assessment (by umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery pulsatility index, and peak systolic velocity).
If umbilical artery Doppler velocities are abnormal, the Doppler assessments should be undertaken in
line with national guidance, measuring ductus venosus waveforms.
D
Clinicians should be aware that there is a longer ‘latency perioď between diagnosis and delivery in
monochorionic twins complicated by SGR compared with growth restriction in dichorionic twin
pregnancy or singleton pregnancy.
D
Abnormal ductus venosus Doppler waveforms (reversed flow during atrial contraction) or
computerised CTG short-term variation should trigger consideration of delivery.
B
In type I SGR, planned delivery should be considered by 34-36 weeks of gestation if there is
satisfactory fetal growth velocity and normal umbilical artery Doppler waveforms.
In type II and III SGR, delivery should be planned by 32 weeks of gestation, unless fetal growth velocity
is significantly abnormal or there is worsening of the fetal Doppler assessment.
It is important to prospectively inform parents that in SGR and TTTS (even after apparently
successful treatment) there can be acute transfusional events (which are neither predictable nor
preventable) and therefore, despite regular monitoring, there may still be adverse perinatal
outcomes.
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Once there is a suspicion of SGR or the diagnosis has been prospectively made using ultrasound, the
pregnancy should be managed in conjunction with a regional fetal medicine centre with specialist expertise
in managing this condition. There is a need to measure amniotic sac liquor volumes and to assess Doppler
velocities within the fetal arterial and venous circulations.
53,57,59
Umbilical artery Doppler evaluation in monochorionic twins with SGR allows the prospective definition of
three subtypes (see Table 1) 53,57,59 and the consequences are dependent upon this evaluation and
gestational age.
19,56
Evidence
level 4
Evidence
level 3
When SGR is diagnosed such that the difference in EFW is greater than 20%, fetal and perinatal loss is
increased. Prior to viability (24 weeks), if the small twin has a significantly reduced fetal growth Evidence
velocity (change in measured abdominal circumference of less than I SD over 14 days) in the presence of level 2+
umbilical artery Doppler abnormalities, there is a significant risk of single fetal demise.59
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e26 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
In such circumstances, to protect the appropriately grown co-twin, selective termination of pregnancy
using vaso-occlusive techniques, such as bipolar cord occlusion or radiofrequency ablation may be Evidence
considered. This should be assessed and performed in a tertiary centre with expertise. Again, informed level 2+
but sensitive discussion with patients is mandatory.
79,83
There is limited evidence to guide clinical care in these complex cases. However, there is international
consensus that such monochorionic twin pregnancies require regular review with interval ultrasound
biometry to monitor fetal growth velocity, and placental and fetal circulation assessment by umbilical Evidence
artery, middle cerebral artery and ductus venosus Doppler waveform measurements.
The aim is level 2-
to prolong pregnancy to at least viability and to achieve appropriate gestation for delivery (32-34 weeks),
but to avoid the complication of single fetal death and the consequences for the surviving fetus.53
53,57,59,84
Timing of delivery (less than 32 weeks of gestation) is dependent upon assessment by computerised CTG and/
or ductus venosus waveform velocimetry. For monochorionic twin SGR where there is umbilical Doppler
abnormality, delivery should be undertaken at 32 weeks (in line with singleton FGR with AREDV).85
The placental anastomoses in monochorionic twins paradoxically may be beneficial for the smaller twin as
transfusion from the larger twin may compensate for the placental insufficiency, thus interfering with the natural
history in comparison with singleton and dichorionic twin pregnancies. This is also associated with the presence of
artery-artery anastomoses. This prolongs survival in the growth-restricted fetus, resulting in a longer latency
period to deterioration and delivery (up to 10 weeks versus 3-4 weeks from diagnosis of FGR).³
8
In monochorionic twins, where the placental vascular anastomoses remain intact, there is a risk of acute inter-
twin' transfusional events causing fetal death and morbidity in the form of neurological morbidity. This is true of
apparently uncomplicated monochorionic twins, but more prevalent in monochorionic twins complicated by SGR
and even treated TTTS.1,4
Evidence
level 2++
Evidence
level 3
7.3
Management of TAPS
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Clinicians should be aware that the natural history, fetal and neonatal implications, and optimal
treatment and/or surveillance of monochorionic pregnancies diagnosed with TAPS are poorly
established.
86
Fetoscopic laser ablation for the treatment of TTTS, using the Solomon technique, significantly reduces the
risk of recurrent disease and TAPS. 15 The optimal management of TAPS, once it occurs, is not clear from
the literature, but possible options include expectant management, delivery, intrauterine blood transfusion
(intravenous and/or intraperitoneal, with or without partial exchange transfusion), selective feticide or
fetoscopic laser surgery. There is little evidence relating to the outcome and optimal management of
TAPS. Fetoscopic laser surgery is the only treatment for the cause of this disease (in analogy with TTTS),
but is technically challenging due to the absence of polyhydramnios and the presence of only minuscule
anastomoses. If detected prenatally, management options need to be individualised and uncertainty
discussed with the parents.
15
D
Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e27 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
52,86
Evidence
Perinatal outcome in TAPS is not well described (with or without treatment) and appears to vary
according to the severity. Outcome may range from double intrauterine fetal demise to the birth of
two healthy neonates with a significant inter-twin haemoglobin discordance. Knowledge on the neonatal
and long-term morbidity in TAPS is scarce and based on case reports and small series. Neonatal
morbidity in TAPS appears to be mainly limited to haematological problems at birth. Donor twins may be level 3
severely anaemic and require blood transfusions, whereas recipient twins may be severely polycythaemic
and require partial exchange transfusion. 52 There have been cases of severe cerebral injury in TAPS
described.87
7.4 The management of monochorionic twin pregnancies complicated by single twin
demise
7.4.1
What are the consequences for the surviving twin after fetal death of the co-twin in a
monochorionic pregnancy and what is optimal clinical management?
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Clinicians should be aware that monochorionic pregnancies not complicated by TTTS, SGR or TAPS
are still at risk of fetal death and neurological abnormality.
D
After a single fetal death in a monochorionic pregnancy, clinicians should be aware that the risks to
the surviving twin of death or neurological abnormality are of the order of 15% and 26%,
respectively.
Single fetal death in a monochorionic pregnancy should be referred and assessed in a fetal medicine
centre, with multidisciplinary expertise to manage these cases.
Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain may be performed 4 weeks after co-twin
demise to detect neurological morbidity if this information would be of value in planning
management.
In monochorionic twins, where the placental vascular anastomoses remain intact, there is a risk of acute
‘inter-twin' transfusional events causing fetal death and morbidity in the form of neurological morbidity.
This is true of apparently uncomplicated monochorionic twins, but more prevalent in monochorionic twins
complicated by SGR and even treated TTTS.
1,4
B
D
Evidence
Damage to the surviving monochorionic twin after the death of its co-twin is believed to be caused by level 3
acute haemodynamic changes around the time of death, with the survivor losing part of its circulating
volume into the circulation of the dying twin. This may cause transient or persistent hypotension and low
perfusion, leading to the risk of ischaemic organ damage, notably but not exclusively, to the watershed
areas of the brain.
88
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e28 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
89,90
Systematic reviews have identified 22 full manuscripts considered of high enough quality of evidence
to include in the review and meta-analysis. Twenty manuscripts were used to calculate overall summary
statistics for monochorionic and dichorionic twins showing rates of co-twin death after single fetal death
(15% compared with 3%), rates of preterm delivery after single fetal death (68% compared with 54%),
the rate of abnormal postnatal cranial imaging after single fetal death (34% compared with 16%) and the
rate of neurodevelopmental impairment after single fetal death (26% compared with 2%). Odds ratios
were calculated from 16 manuscripts. There was no significant difference reported between preterm
delivery of monochorionic and dichorionic twins (OR 1.1, 95% CI 0.34–3.51; P = 0.9). After single fetal
death, monochorionic twins had higher odds of abnormal cranial imaging after delivery, although, this
was not significant (OR 3.25, 95% CI 0.66–16.1; P = 0.12). After single fetal death, monochorionic twins
were 4.81 times more likely to have neurodevelopmental morbidity (95% CI 1.39–16.6; P < 0.05).
Clinical management is complex and should be overseen by fetal medicine experts with the knowledge and
experience to advise parents about the advantages and disadvantages of different approaches." Rapid
delivery is usually unwise, unless at term, as fetal brain injury of the surviving twin occurs at the time of
demise of the co-twin. Therefore, immediate delivery only adds prematurity to the possible hypotensive
cerebral injury the surviving twin may have already sustained. Serious compromise of the surviving fetus
may be anticipated and this should be discussed with parents, including the significant risk of long-term
morbidity. Evidence of fetal compromise (such as significant cardiotocographic abnormality and/or evidence
of anaemia in the survivor if single fetal death occurs late in pregnancy) could represent continuing and/or
established damage to the brain. Fetal anaemia in the surviving twin may be or have been associated with
cerebral hypoperfusion and therefore, may be associated with future development of neurological
morbidity.
89-91
90,91
A conservative management policy is often appropriate, with serial fetal brain ultrasound imaging and a
fetal cranial MRI scan planned, commonly 4 weeks after the 'sentinel event'. The appearances of
intracranial neurological morbidity on ultrasound are variable and may take up to 4 weeks to develop.
Fetal MRI provides earlier and more detailed information about brain lesions (haemorrhagic or ischaemic)
in the surviving fetus than ultrasound and its use should be considered.
92,93
Evidence
level |-
Evidence
level 4
Evidence
level 3
In cases of single intrauterine demise with MRI or ultrasound findings of neurological morbidity, late termination of
pregnancy would be an option. The gestational age at the time of diagnosis is relevant and the views of the parents
will be of paramount importance.
7.4.2 How should fetal anaemia be monitored after single twin intrauterine death?
Fetal anaemia may be assessed by measurement of the fetal MCA PSV using Doppler
ultrasonography.
In a prospective series of 20 monochorionic pregnancies complicated by single fetal death, there was a
strong correlation between fetal anaemia (assessed by cordocentesis) and fetal MCA PSV.94
D
Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e29 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
95
In a small series (n = 26) of pregnancies complicated by TTTS and single fetal death, the prognosis was
worse for donor twins following the death of the recipient twin than vice versa. This is in keeping with the
concept of enhanced blood loss through a unidirectional anastomosis. There are a few reports of
intrauterine transfusion of anaemic surviving co-twins, but the value of this intervention is not established
within the context of preventing perinatal and long-term neurological morbidity.
96,97
Evidence
level 3
The presence of an increased MCA PSV in the surviving twin would suggest fetal anaemia and therefore, a
significant inter-twin transfusion. This would increase the risk of hypotensive neurological injury and thus, would be
helpful information in the counselling of parents and timing of fetal brain MRI. Treatment by intrauterine
transfusion is controversial, as this may improve fetal survival without reducing the long-term risks of neurological
morbidity.
8.
8.1
Timing and mode of delivery in uncomplicated monochorionic pregnancies
What is the optimal timing and method of delivery for otherwise uncomplicated
monochorionic pregnancies (without TTTS, SGR or TAPS)?
Women with monochorionic twins should have timing of birth discussed and be offered elective
delivery from 36+0 weeks with the administration of antenatal steroids, unless there is an indication
to deliver earlier.
C
It is appropriate to aim for vaginal birth of MCDA twins unless there are other specific clinical
indications for caesarean section.
A
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
For uncomplicated monochorionic pregnancies there may be a higher risk of unexplained fetal demise
despite intensive fetal surveillance.98 The 2011 NICE guideline examined this topic. Gestational age profile
for spontaneous birth in twin and triplet pregnancies was assessed in one cross-sectional study which
suggested that the majority (58%) of women with uncomplicated twin pregnancies give birth spontaneously
before 37+0 weeks.21
Furthermore, a 2013 systematic review concluded that even uncomplicated monochorionic twin
pregnancies are at substantial risk of stillbirth throughout the third trimester, which is several-fold higher
Evidence
level 2-
than in dichorionic twin pregnancies. Given the risk of fetal death to the co-twin, these data should inform Evidence
decisions around timing of delivery in seemingly normal monochorionic twin pregnancies; women with level 2+
monochorionic twins should be offered elective birth from 36+0 weeks with the administration of antenatal
steroids.
1,98
99
The Twin Birth Study," a multicentre, international randomised controlled trial of planned vaginal birth
versus planned caesarean section for delivery of twins, included a subcohort of uncomplicated MCDA twins
(600 of 1398 randomised). The study concluded that in twin pregnancies between 32*0 and 38+6 weeks of
gestation (when the first twin is a cephalic presentation), planned caesarean section delivery did not Evidence
significantly decrease (or increase) the risks of fetal or neonatal death, or serious newborn morbidity as level 1+
compared with vaginal delivery. Furthermore, post hoc subgroup analysis demonstrated no significant
interaction of chorionicity with the primary outcomes. It was concluded that there was no significant benefit
from planned caesarean section for any subgroup, including monochorionic twins.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e30 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
As with all pregnancies, parental views will also be important in reaching a conclusion about the best, individualised
method of monochorionic twin delivery, including opting for caesarean section.
In addition to the complexities of twin delivery (i.e. malpresentation) there is a small risk of acute feto-fetal
transfusional events during labour and this is one of the reasons why continuous electronic fetal monitoring during
labour is recommended.
9.
MCMA pregnancies
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
9.1
What are the specific problems of MCMA pregnancies and how should they be managed?
MCMA twins almost always have umbilical cord entanglement when visualised using colour flow
Doppler. Such a finding has not consistently been demonstrated to contribute to overall morbidity
and mortality.
MCMA twins have a high risk of fetal death and should be delivered by caesarean section between
32+0 and 34+0 weeks.
MCMA twins have classically been thought to be at risk from cord entanglement (almost always visualised)
and fetal demise. A retrospective study of 30 MCMA twin pairs reported a total survival of 60%.
Two pairs died after 32 weeks. Of the ten twin pairs that died in utero, cord entanglement was
documented in eight. The authors recommended elective delivery at 32 weeks of gestation.
However, a study of 32 MCMA twin pregnancies has suggested that cord entanglement is a feature of all
MCMA twin pregnancies and most deaths occur prior to 20 weeks due to other causes (TRAP or
discordant fetal anomaly). 100 MCMA twins are, therefore, probably not as dangerous as previously thought,
although, surveillance and management should always be individualised.101 Management by using sulindac to
reduce amniotic fluid volumes has been advocated, but evidence for this treatment is scanty. The authors,
therefore, recommended re-evaluating the very early timing of delivery for MCMA twins. 100,101
A retrospective multicentre cohort study of 193 MCMA twin sets found that fetal deaths occurred in
18.1% of fetuses. The prospective risk of a nonrespiratory neonatal complication was significantly lower
than the prospective risk of fetal death after 32+4 weeks. This consortium's recommendation was to
deliver MCMA twins at approximately 33 weeks of gestation. All such cases should be managed in fetal
medicine centres with specialist expertise and decisions on delivery made on an individual basis.
102
D
D
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2-
10.
Higher order multiple pregnancies with reference to monochorionicity
10.1
What is the outcome of monochorionic and dichorionic compared with trichorionic triplet
pregnancies?
Clinicians should be aware that monochorionic/dichorionic triplet pregnancies have higher fetal loss C
rates than trichorionic triplet pregnancies and may be complicated by feto-fetal transfusion
syndrome, SGR and TAPS.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e31 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Selective reduction should be discussed in all higher order pregnancies including triplets.
Increased ultrasound surveillance is warranted in a fetal medicine centre with expertise to manage
such cases.
A retrospective study of 88 naturally conceived triplet pregnancies managed in three tertiary referral units in
the UK found a 5.5-fold increased risk of perinatal death in dichorionic triamniotic pregnancies (that is,
containing monochorionic twins) than trichorionic triamniotic pregnancies (OR 5.5, 95% CI 2.5-12.2).103
Referral bias may have influenced the findings. A similar retrospective study from two tertiary centres in
Germany described 84% survival in fetuses of monochorionic and dichorionic triplet pregnancies combined
compared with 92% in fetuses of trichorionic triplet pregnancies. This difference did not reach statistical
significance.
105
104
The consensus views arising from the 50th RCOG Study Group * recommend that selective reduction should
be discussed in all higher order pregnancies. A systematic review provides information on the risks of this
procedure in trichorionic triplets and on the alternative option of conservative management (from
six cohort studies)." In the reduction group (n = 482 pregnancies) compared with the expectantly
managed group (n = 411), the rate of miscarriage (before 24 weeks) was higher (8.1% versus 4.4%; relative
risk [RR] 1.83, 95% CI 1.08–3.16; P = 0.036) and the rate of early preterm delivery was lower (10.4% versus
26.7%; RR 0.37, 95% CI 0.27-0.51; P < 0.0001). It was calculated that seven (95% CI 5-9) reductions needed
to be performed to prevent one early preterm delivery, while the number of reductions that would cause
one miscarriage was 26 (95% CI 14–193)."
105
In monochorionic or dichorionic triamniotic triplets (because of shared placental vasculature), this would
mean either a procedure to reduce the fetal numbers to one or to consider intrafetal ablative therapy to
reduce dichorionic triplets to dichorionic twins. Such options are associated with an increase in total
pregnancy loss.
106
If TTTS does occur, then it is most appropriately treated by laser ablation and the overall prognosis is
better for dichorionic versus monochorionic triamniotic triplet pregnancies.
76
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 2+
Evidence
level 3
11.
Discordant abnormalities in monochorionic pregnancies
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
11.1
What is the incidence of and the therapeutic options for discordant abnormalities in
monochorionic pregnancies, including TRAP sequence?
Monochorionic twins that are discordant for fetal anomaly must be referred promptly for
assessment and counselling in a fetal medicine centre with consideration for treatment.
Karyotyping of monochorionic twins should be managed in a fetal medicine centre.
Meticulous mapping of the position of the twins within the uterus should be performed both at the
time of prenatal diagnostic tests and invasive treatments.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e32 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
During amniocentesis, both amniotic sacs should be sampled in monochorionic twin pregnancies,
unless monochorionicity is confirmed before 14 weeks and the fetuses appear concordant for
growth and anatomy.
Prior to invasive testing or in the context of twins discordant for an abnormality, selective reduction
should be discussed and made available to those requesting the procedure after appropriate
counselling.
Monitoring for disseminated intravascular coagulopathy is not indicated in monochorionic twin
pregnancies undergoing selective reduction.
Selective feticide by intravascular injection of an abortifacient is not an option in monochorionic
pregnancies because of the presence of placental anastomoses. The potential risks of intrafetal/
umbilical cord ablative procedures should be discussed prospectively, including the risk of co-twin
loss and neurological morbidity.
Documentation and discussion of heterokaryotypic monozygotic karyotypic abnormalities should
take place.
26,39
A higher rate of structural anomalies is observed in twins compared with singletons.² Approximately
1-2% of twin pregnancies face the dilemma of expectant management versus selective termination
following diagnosis of an anomaly affecting only one fetus.
In a structurally or size discordant monochorionic pair, discordant aneuploidy is exceedingly rare,
although, not impossible. Structural anomalies in monochorionic pregnancies are twice that expected in
dichorionic pairs, given the monozygosity.³ Detailed ultrasound assessment, fetal karyotyping and a
discussion of prognosis is required with reference both to the abnormal and normal twin.
39
78,79
Selective termination in a monochorionic pregnancy is an option,' but as the fetal circulations are
not independent, it cannot be performed with injection of medical therapeutics because of the effect on
the co-twin. More invasive and higher risk procedures, such as cord coagulation, and intrafetal ablative
procedures, such as radiofrequency ablation, are necessary to induce termination of one twin without
causing morbidity or death in its co-twin.79
It is essential that at the time of prenatal diagnostic tests, the pregnancy is mapped carefully, noting the
position and site of the fetuses in relation to the placenta and amniotic sac, and documented. This is
ideally performed by the operator who would perform the technique of selective termination of
pregnancy if required. It is mandatory to discuss selective termination of pregnancy and complicating
factors in monochorionic twins, including the potential risk to the normal twin.
1,34
✓
✓
Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e33 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Twin and triplet pregnancies in which the abnormal fetus underwent umbilical cord coagulation by bipolar
diathermy or intrafetal laser ablation for indications that included severe discordant abnormalities or TRAP
sequence have been described. 107,108 Overall, up to 82% of co-twins survived. Preterm rupture of
membranes (10-15%) and chorioamnionitis remain significant complications. Fetal loss rates are 15-18%
and some series have recorded transfusional neurological sequelae in up to 15%. Similar experience is
reported using radiofrequency ablation. 83,109
Monochorionic twins complicated with an acardiac twin and TRAP sequence do not always require
invasive treatment. Selection for treatment appears to be dependent on:
the relative size of the ‘acardiac' twin to the 'pump' twin (the larger the acardiac twin, the greater the
risk and need for therapy) and
the presence of any cardiovascular impairment in the ‘pump' twin.'
110
If treatment is considered, then there is some evidence that treatment should take place before 16 weeks
of gestation (but evidence is not strong) and it should be performed in centres with expertise in such
treatment modalities. Careful monitoring and ultrasound surveillance are required.83
Rarely, monozygous twins can have different chromosome make-ups. This is known as heterokaryotypic
monozygous twinning. When anomalies are identified in the first or early second trimester in one of a
monochorionic twin pair which may be markers of aneuploidy, a discussion should take place as to the
merits and risks of chorionic villus sampling versus waiting for a double amniocentesis at 15-16 weeks
when both sacs are sampled and the individual karyotype of each twin can be determined with certainty.3
12.
Conjoined twins
34
Evidence
level 3
Evidence
level 4
12.1
How are conjoined twins diagnosed and what are the outcomes?
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Conjoined twins are exceedingly rare and prenatal assessment is required in a tertiary fetal
medicine centre so that diagnosis can be confirmed and prognosis discussed in conjunction with a
multidisciplinary team.
Conjoined twins are very rare and by definition are MCMA twin pregnancies. The prevalence is one in
90 000 to 100 000 pregnancies. The underlying pathogenic mechanism remains uncertain. Such MCMA
twins are complex and require careful detailed expert ultrasound imaging (usually including MRI) and
multidisciplinary discussion. In one series of 14 cases of prenatally diagnosed conjoined twins at a single
referral centre, 20% of parents opted for termination of pregnancy, 10% of fetuses died in utero and the
overall individual survival rate to discharge of those attempting pregnancy continuation was about 25%, the
majority of whom have significant morbidity." Most cases are now prenatally diagnosed and delivered by
elective caesarean section, but vaginal deliveries of conjoined twins are reported.
112 Risk of dystocia and
uterine rupture has been reported in association with cases undiagnosed prenatally.
|||
Evidence
level 2-
Prenatal diagnosis of conjoined twins with ultrasound is now well reported from the first trimester, with detailed
assessment of cardiovascular anatomy important for determining prognosis and planning management.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e34 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
13.
What are the training competencies required for managing monochorionic pregnancies?
All sonographers who undertake routine ultrasound scans during pregnancy must be trained to
establish chorionicity and the correct labelling of twins.
All sonographers who undertake midtrimester (18+0-20+6 weeks) and fetal growth scans of
monochorionic twins should be made aware of the appearances of TTTS, SGR and TAPS, and the
need to refer patients on to specialist centres if such features present.
Fetal medicine centres undertaking fetal therapy for relatively rare complications of monochorionic
twins should have a minimum of two experienced operators and more than 15 cases per year
(rolling 3-year average) to maximise perinatal outcomes and minimise long-term morbidity.
✓
D
Fetal medicine centres should follow the NHS England Specialised Services Clinical Reference Group for | Evidence
Fetal Medicine recommendations for experience.08
68
level 4
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
14.
•
Recommendations for future research
The use of serial MCA PSV in screening for TAPS in women with monochorionic twins and its evaluation in a
diagnostic accuracy study, with relevance to pregnancy outcomes.
Research evaluating early versus late treatment for monochorionic twins complicated by TRAP sequence and
its assessment in terms of pregnancy outcomes.
15.
Auditable topics
• Prospective outcome (primary outcomes: perinatal mortality and long-term paediatric morbidity) after
fetoscopic laser ablation for TTTS corrected for stage, experience of operators and severity of disease at
presentation. At least one survivor in 85% of twins.
Offer women who present in the first trimester with monochorionic twins screening for trisomy 21 (100%).
The proportion of neurological morbidity post laser ablation for the treatment of TTTS in each fetus (less than 10%).
• Labelling of twins undertaken at first scan and followed consistently with serial scans (100%).
.
16.
The proportion of monochorionic twins who have extended fetal heart views undertaken at the midtrimester
anomaly scan (more than 85%).
The proportion of monochorionic twins who have 2-weekly ultrasound from 16 weeks of gestation (more than 95%).
Useful links and support groups
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Multiple pregnancy. The management of twin and triplet
pregnancies in the antenatal period. NICE clinical guideline 129. Manchester: NICE; 2011 [https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/cg|29].
• Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Multiple pregnancy: having more than one baby. Information for
you. London: RCOG; 2016 [https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/multiple-pregnancy-having-more-
than-one-baby/].
The Multiple Births Foundation [http://www.multiplebirths.org.uk/].
• Twins And Multiple Births Association [https://www.tamba.org.uk/].
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e35 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
References
1. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Multiple
pregnancy. The management of twin and triplet pregnancies in the
antenatal period. NICE clinical guideline 129. Manchester: NICE;
2011.
2. Nakasuji T, Saito H, Araki R, Nakaza A, Nakashima A, Kuwahara A,
et al. The incidence of monozygotic twinning in assisted
reproductive technology: analysis based on results from the 2010
Japanese ART national registry. J Assist Reprod Genet 2014;31:
803-7.
3. Kawachiya S, Bodri D, Shimada N, Kato K, Takehara Y, Kato O.
Blastocyst culture is associated with an elevated incidence of
monozygotic twinning after single embryo transfer. Fertil Steril
2011;95:2140-2.
4. Kilby MD, Baker PN, Critchley HO, Field DJ, editors. Consensus
views arising from the 50th Study Group: Multiple Pregnancy. In:
Multiple Pregnancy. London: RCOG Press; 2006. p. 283–6.
5. Visintin C, Mugglestone MA, James D, Kilby MD; Guideline
Development Group. Antenatal care for twin and
triplet pregnancies: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ 2011;343:
d5714.
6. NHS Evidence. Multiple pregnancy: Evidence Update March 2013. A
summary of selected new evidence relevant to NICE clinical guideline
129 The management of twin and triplet pregnancies in the
antenatal period' (2011). Evidence Update 37. Manchester: NICE;
2013.
7. Ezra Y, Shveiky D, Ophir E, Nadjari M, Eisenberg VH, Samueloff A,
et al. Intensive management and early delivery reduce antenatal
mortality in monoamniotic twin pregnancies. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 2005;84:432-5.
8. Denbow ML, Cox P, Taylor M, Hammal DM, Fisk NM. Placental
angioarchitecture in monochorionic twin pregnancies:
relationship to fetal growth, fetofetal transfusion syndrome, and
pregnancy outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;182:417–26.
9. de Villiers SF, Slaghekke F, Middeldorp JM, Walther FJ, Oepkes D,
Lopriore E. Arterio-arterial vascular anastomoses in
monochorionic placentas with and without twin-twin transfusion
syndrome. Placenta 2012;33:652-4.
10. Kilby MD, Platt C, Whittle MJ, Oxley J, Lindop GB. Renin
gene expression in fetal kidneys of pregnancies complicated
by twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Pediatr Dev Pathol
2001;4:175-9.
II. Umur A, van Gemert MJ, Nikkels PG. Monoamniotic-versus
diamniotic-monochorionic twin placentas: anastomoses and twin-
twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;189:1325-9.
12. Zhao DP, de Villiers SF, Slaghekke F, Walther FJ, Middeldorp JM,
Oepkes D, et al. Prevalence, size, number and localization of
vascular anastomoses in monochorionic placentas. Placenta
2013;34:589-93.
13. Chang YL, Chang SD, Chao AS, Hsieh PC, Wang CN, Wang TH.
Clinical outcome and placental territory ratio of monochorionic
twin pregnancies and selective intrauterine growth restriction
with different types of umbilical artery Doppler. Prenat Diagn
2009;29:253-6.
14. Gallot D, Saulnier JP, Savary D, Laurichesse-Delmas H, Lemery D.
Ultrasonographic signs of twin-twin transfusion syndrome in a
monoamniotic twin pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2005;25:308–9.
15. Slaghekke F, Lopriore E, Lewi L, Middeldorp JM, van Zwet EW,
Weingertner AS, et al. Fetoscopic laser coagulation of the
vascular equator versus selective coagulation for twin-to-twin
transfusion syndrome: an open-label randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2014;383:2144-51.
16. Lopriore E, Deprest J, Slaghekke F, Oepkes D, Middeldorp JM,
Vandenbussche FP, et al. Placental characteristics in
monochorionic twins with and without twin anemia-polycythemia
sequence. Obstet Gynecol 2008; 112:753-8.
17. Lopriore E₁ Slaghekke F, Oepkes D, Middeldorp JM,
Vandenbussche FP, Walther FJ. Hematological characteristics in
neonates with twin anemia-polycythemia sequence (TAPS).
Prenat Diagn 2010;30:251-5.
18. Slaghekke F, Kist WJ, Oepkes D, Pasman SA, Middeldorp JM,
Klumper FJ, et al. Twin anemia-polycythemia sequence: diagnostic
criteria, classification, perinatal management and outcome. Fetal
Diagn Ther 2010;27:181–90.
19. Lewi L, Deprest J. Management of twin pregnancies: where do
we go from here? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2013;41:601-4.
20. Sebire NJ, D'Ercole C, Soares W, Nayar R, Nicolaides KH.
Intertwin disparity in fetal size in monochorionic and dichorionic
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1998;91:82–5.
21. National Collaborating Centre for Women's and Children's
Health. Multiple pregnancy: The management of twin and triplet
pregnancies in the antenatal period. NICE Clinical Guideline.
London: RCOG Press; 2011.
22. Lopriore E, Sueters M, Middeldorp JM, Klumper F, Oepkes D,
Vandenbussche FP. Twin pregnancies with two separate placental
masses can still be monochorionic and have vascular
anastomoses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006; 194:804–8.
23. Senat MV, Quarello E, Levaillant JM, Buonumano A, Boulvain M,
Frydman R. Determining chorionicity in twin gestations: three-
dimensional (3D) multiplanar sonographic measurement of intra-
amniotic membrane thickness. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2006;28:665–9.
24. Carroll SG, Soothill PW, Abdel-Fattah SA, Porter H, Montague I,
Kyle PM. Prediction of chorionicity in twin pregnancies at
10-14 weeks of gestation. BJOG 2002;109:182–6.
25. D'Alton ME, Dudley DK. The ultrasonographic prediction
of chorionicity in twin gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989; 160:
557-61.
26. Sperling L, Kiil C, Larsen LU, Brocks V, Wojdemann KR, Qvist I,
et al. Detection of chromosomal abnormalities, congenital
abnormalities and transfusion syndrome in twins. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 2007;29:517-26.
27. Hack KE, Derks JB, Elias SG, Franx A, Roos EJ, Voerman SK,
et al. Increased perinatal mortality and morbidity in
monochorionic versus dichorionic twin pregnancies: clinical
implications of a large Dutch cohort study. BJOG 2008;115:58–67.
28. Southwest Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK).
Prospective risk of late stillbirth in monochorionic twins: a
regional cohort study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2012;39:500-4.
29. D'Antonio F, Khalil A, Dias T, Thilaganathan B; Southwest Thames
Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK). Crown-rump length
discordance and adverse perinatal outcome in twins: analysis
of the Southwest Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative
(STORK) multiple pregnancy cohort. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2013;41:621-6.
30. Sebire NJ, Snijders RJ, Hughes K, Sepulveda W, Nicolaides KH.
The hidden mortality of monochorionic twin pregnancies. Br J
Obstet Gynaecol 1997;104:1203–7.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e36 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
31. Lewi L, Jani J, Blickstein I, Huber A, Gucciardo L, Van Mieghem T,
et al. The outcome of monochorionic diamniotic twin gestations
in the era of invasive fetal therapy: a prospective cohort study. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 2008; 199:514.el-8.
32. Barigye O, Pasquini L, Galea P, Chambers H, Chappell L, Fisk NM.
High risk of unexpected late fetal death in monochorionic twins
despite intensive ultrasound surveillance: a cohort study. PLoS Med
2005;2:e172.
33. Adegbite AL, Castille S, Ward S, Bajoria R. Neuromorbidity in
preterm twins in relation to chorionicity and discordant birth
weight. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004;190:156–63.
34. Audibert F, Gagnon A; Genetics Committee of the Society of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada; Prenatal Diagnosis
Committee of the Canadian College of Medical Geneticists.
Prenatal screening for and diagnosis of aneuploidy in twin
pregnancies. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2011;33:754-67.
35. Garchet-Beaudron A, Dreux S, Leporrier N, Oury JF, Muller F;
ABA Study Group; Clinical Study Group. Second-trimester Down
syndrome maternal serum marker screening: a prospective study
of 11 040 twin pregnancies. Prenat Diagn 2008;28:1105–9.
36. Gil MM, Akolekar R, Quezada MS, Bregant B, Nicolaides KH.
Analysis of cell-free DNA in maternal blood in screening for
aneuploidies: meta-analysis. Fetal Diagn Ther 2014;35:156–73.
37. Huang X, Zheng J, Chen M, Zhao Y, Zhang C, Liu L, et al.
Noninvasive prenatal testing of trisomies 21 and 18 by massively
parallel sequencing of maternal plasma DNA in twin pregnancies.
Prenat Diagn 2014;34:335-40.
38. Bevilacqua E, Gil MM, Nicolaides KH, Ordoñez E, Cirigliano V,
Dierickx H, et al. Performance of screening for aneuploidies by
cell-free DNA analysis of maternal blood in twin pregnancies.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2015;45:61-6.
39. Hall JG. Twinning. Lancet 2003;362:735-43.
40. Chang YL, Chao AS, Cheng PJ, Chung CL, Chueh HY, Chang SD,
et al. Presence of a single fetal major anomaly in a twin
pregnancy does not increase the preterm rate. Aust NZJ Obstet
Gynaecol 2004;44:332–6.
41. Li H, Meng T, Shang T, Guan YP, Zhou WW, Yang G, et al.
Fetal echocardiographic screening in twins for congenital heart
diseases. Chin Med J (Engl) 2007;120:1391-4.
42. Anderson BL, Sherman FS, Mancini F, Simhan HN. Fetal
echocardiographic findings are not predictive of death in twin-
twin transfusion syndrome. J Ultrasound Med 2006;25:455–9.
43. NHS fetal anomaly screening programme (FASP). [www.gov.uk/
topic/population-screening-programmes/fetal-anomaly]. Accessed
2015 Nov 5.
44. Lewi L, Lewi P, Diemert A, Jani J, Gucciardo L, Van Mieghem T,
et al. The role of ultrasound examination in the first trimester
and at 16 weeks' gestation to predict fetal complications in
monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2008;199:493.el-7.
45. Giles WB. Doppler ultrasound in multiple pregnancies. Baillieres
Clin Obstet Gynaecol 1998;12:77–89.
46. Stirrup OT, Khalil A, D'Antonio F, Thilaganathan B; Southwest
Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK). Fetal
growth reference ranges in twin pregnancy: analysis of the
Southwest Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK)
multiple pregnancy cohort. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2015;45:301-7.
47. Khalil A, D'Antonio F, Dias T, Cooper D, Thilaganathan B;
Southwest Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK).
Ultrasound estimation of birth weight in twin pregnancy:
comparison of biometry algorithms in the STORK multiple
pregnancy cohort. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2014;44:210–20.
48. Van Mieghem T, Eixarch E, Gucciardo L, Done E, Gonzales I,
Van Schoubroeck D, et al. Outcome prediction in monochorionic
diamniotic twin pregnancies with moderately discordant amniotic
fluid. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2011;37:15–21.
49. Quintero RA, Morales WJ, Allen MH, Bornick PW, Johnson PK,
Kruger M. Staging of twin-twin transfusion syndrome. J Perinatol
1999;19:550-5.
50. Quintero RA, Dickinson JE, Morales WJ, Bornick PW, Bermúdez C,
Cincotta R, et al. Stage-based treatment of twin-twin transfusion
syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;188:1333-40.
51. Robyr R, Lewi L, Salomon LJ, Yamamoto M, Bernard JP, Deprest J,
et al. Prevalence and management of late fetal complications
following successful selective laser coagulation of chorionic plate
anastomoses in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2006;194:796–803.
52. Lopriore E, Slaghekke F, Oepkes D, Middeldorp JM,
Vandenbussche FP, Walther FJ. Clinical outcome in neonates
with twin anemia-polycythemia sequence. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2010;203:54.el-5.
53. Valsky DV, Eixarch E, Martinez JM, Crispi F, Gratacós E.
Selective intrauterine growth restriction in monochorionic twins:
pathophysiology, diagnostic approach and management dilemmas.
Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 2010;15:342-8.
54. D'Antonio F, Khalil A, Dias T, Thilaganathan B; Southwest
Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK). Weight
discordance and perinatal mortality in twins: analysis of the
Southwest Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK)
multiple pregnancy cohort. Ultrasound Obstet
2013;41:643-8.
Gynecol
55. Harper LM, Roehl KA, Tuuli MG, Odibo AO, Cahill AG.
Sonographic accuracy of estimated fetal weight in twins.
J Ultrasound Med 2013;32:625-30.
56. Breathnach FM, McAuliffe FM, Geary M, Daly S, Higgins JR,
Dornan J, et al; Perinatal Ireland Research Consortium.
Definition of intertwin birth weight discordance. Obstet Gynecol
2011;118:94-103.
57. Gratacós E, Lewi L, Muñoz B, Acosta-Rojas R, Hernandez-Andrade E,
Martinez JM, et al. A classification system for selective intrauterine
growth restriction in monochorionic pregnancies according to
umbilical artery Doppler flow in the smaller twin. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 2007;30:28–34.
58. D'Antonio F, Khalil A, Thilaganathan B; Southwest Thames
Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK). Second-trimester
discordance and adverse perinatal outcome in twins: the STORK
multiple pregnancy cohort. BJOG 2014;121:422-9.
59. Gratacós E, Lewi L, Carreras E, Becker J, Higueras T, Deprest J,
et al. Incidence and characteristics of umbilical artery
intermittent absent and/or reversed end-diastolic flow in
complicated and uncomplicated monochorionic twin pregnancies.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004;23:456–60.
60. Dickinson JE, Evans SF. The progression of disease stage in twin-
twin transfusion syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
2004;16:95–101.
61. Luks Fl, Carr SR, Plevyak M, Craigo SD, Athanassiou A, Ralston SJ,
et al. Limited prognostic value of a staging system for twin-to-twin
transfusion syndrome. Fetal Diagn Ther 2004;19:301-4.
62. Taylor MJ, Govender L, Jolly M, Wee L, Fisk NM. Validation of
the Quintero staging system for twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
Obstet Gynecol 2002;100:1257-65.
63. Huber A, Diehl W, Bregenzer T, Hackelöer BJ, Hecher K.
Stage-related outcome in twin-twin transfusion syndrome
treated by fetoscopic laser coagulation. Obstet Gynecol
2006;108:333–7.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e37 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
64. Michelfelder E, Gottliebson W, Border W, Kinsel M, Polzin W,
Livingston J, et al. Early manifestations and spectrum of
recipient twin cardiomyopathy in twin-twin transfusion
syndrome: relation to Quintero stage. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2007;30:965-71.
65. Raboisson MJ, Fouron JC, Lamoureux J, Leduc L, Grignon A,
Proulx F, et al. Early intertwin differences in myocardial
performance during the twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome.
Circulation 2004;110:3043-8.
66. Huber A, Diehl W, Zikulnig L, Bregenzer T, Hackelöer BJ,
Hecher K. Perinatal outcome in monochorionic twin pregnancies
complicated by amniotic fluid discordance without severe
twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2006;27:48-52.
67. Ville Y. Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: time to forget the
Quintero staging system? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2007;30:924-7.
68. NHS England Specialised Services Clinical Reference Group for
Fetal Medicine. Clinical Commissioning Policy: Management of Twin to
Twin Syndrome by fetoscopic laser ablation. NHS England E12/P/b.
London: NHS England; 2015. [https://www.england.nhs.uk/
commissioning/wp-content/uploads/sites/12/2015/01/e12-mgmnt-
twin-twin.pdf]. Accessed 2015 Nov 5.
69. Senat MV, Deprest J, Boulvain M, Paupe A, Winer N, Ville Y.
Endoscopic laser surgery versus serial amnioreduction for severe
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. N Engl J Med 2004;351:136–44.
70. Moise KJ Jr, Dorman K, Lamvu G, Saade GR, Fisk NM, Dickinson JE,
et al. A randomized trial of amnioreduction versus septostomy in
the treatment of twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2005;193:701-7.
71. Crombleholme TM, Shera D, Lee H, Johnson M, D'Alton M,
Porter F, et al. A prospective, randomized, multicenter trial of
amnioreduction vs selective fetoscopic laser photocoagulation for
the treatment of severe twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2007;197:396.el-9.
72. Roberts D, Neilson JP, Kilby MD, Gates S. Interventions for the
treatment of twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2014;(1):CD002073.
73. Baud D, Windrim R, Keunen J, Kelly EN, Shah P, van Mieghem T,
et al. Fetoscopic laser therapy for twin-twin transfusion syndrome
before 17 and after 26 weeks' gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2013;208:197.el-7.
74. Middeldorp JM, Lopriore E, Sueters M, Klumper FJ, Kanhai HH,
Vandenbussche FP, et al. Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome
after 26 weeks of gestation: is there a role for fetoscopic laser
surgery? BJOG 2007;114:694–8.
75. Van Schoubroeck D, Lewi L, Ryan G, Carreras E, Jani J, Higueras T,
et al. Fetoscopic surgery in triplet pregnancies: a multicenter case
series. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004; 191:1529–32.
76. Sepulveda W, Surerus E, Vandecruys H, Nicolaides KH. Fetofetal
transfusion syndrome in triplet pregnancies: outcome after
endoscopic laser surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;192:161–4.
77. Taylor MJ, Shalev E, Tanawattanacharoen S, Jolly M, Kumar S,
Weiner E, et al. Ultrasound-guided umbilical cord occlusion using
bipolar diathermy for Stage III/IV twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
Prenat Diagn 2002;22:70–6.
78. Paramasivam G, Wimalasundera R, Wiechec M, Zhang E, Saeed F,
Kumar S. Radiofrequency ablation for selective reduction in
complex monochorionic pregnancies. BJOG 2010;117:1294–8.
79. Wimalasundera RC. Selective reduction and termination of
multiple pregnancies. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 2010;15:327–35.
80. Cavicchioni O, Yamamoto M, Robyr R, Takahashi Y, Ville Y.
Intrauterine fetal demise following laser treatment in twin-to-
twin transfusion syndrome. BJOG 2006;113:590-4.
81. Blickstein I, Arabin B, Chervenak FA, Kavak ZN, Keith LG,
Shinwell ES, et al. The Istanbul international consensus statement
on the perinatal care of multiple pregnancy. J Perinat Med
2007;35:465-7.
82. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Antenatal
Corticosteroids to Reduce Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality. Green-
top Guideline No. 7. London: RCOG; 2010.
83. Kumar S, Paramasivam G, Zhang E, Jones B, Noori M, Prior T,
et al. Perinatal- and procedure-related outcomes following
radiofrequency ablation in monochorionic pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2014;210:454.e1-6.
84. Gratacós E, Carreras E, Becker J, Lewi L, Enríquez G, Perapoch J,
et al. Prevalence of neurological damage in monochorionic twins
with selective intrauterine growth restriction and intermittent
absent or reversed end-diastolic umbilical artery flow. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 2004;24:159–63.
85. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The
Investigation and Management of the Small-for-Gestational-Age Fetus.
Green-top Guideline No. 31. London: RCOG; 2013.
86. Genova L, Slaghekke F, Klumper FJ, Middeldorp JM, Steggerda SJ,
Oepkes D, et al. Management of twin anemia-polycythemia
sequence using intrauterine blood transfusion for the donor and
partial exchange transfusion for the recipient. Fetal Diagn Ther
2013;34:121-6.
87. Lopriore E, Slaghekke F, Kersbergen KJ, de Vries LS, Drogtrop AP,
Middeldorp JM, et al. Severe cerebral injury in a recipient with
twin anemia-polycythemia sequence. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2013;41:702-6.
88. Simões T, Amaral N, Lerman R, Ribeiro F, Dias E, Blickstein I.
Prospective risk of intrauterine death of monochorionic-
diamniotic twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006;195:134–9.
89. Ong SS, Zamora J, Khan KS, Kilby MD. Prognosis for the co-twin
following single-twin death: a systematic review. BJOG
2006;113:992–8.
90. Hillman SC, Morris RK, Kilby MD. Co-twin prognosis after single
fetal death: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol
2011;118:928-40.
91. Shek NW, Hillman SC, Kilby MD. Single-twin demise: pregnancy
outcome. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2014;28:
249-63.
92. Righini A, Salmona S, Bianchini E, Zirpoli S, Moschetta M,
Kustermann A, et al. Prenatal magnetic resonance imaging
evaluation of ischemic brain lesions in the survivors of
monochorionic twin pregnancies: report of 3 cases. J Comput
Assist Tomogr 2004;28:87-92.
93. Weisz B, Hoffmann C, Ben-Baruch S, Yinon Y, Gindes L, Katorza E,
et al. Early detection by diffusion-weighted sequence magnetic
resonance imaging of severe brain lesions after fetoscopic laser
coagulation for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 2014;44:44–9.
94. Senat MV, Loizeau S, Couderc S, Bernard JP, Ville Y. The value
of middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity in the diagnosis
of fetal anemia after intrauterine death of one monochorionic
twin. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;189:1320-4.
95. Nicolini U, Pisoni MP, Cela E, Roberts A. Fetal blood sampling
immediately before and within 24 hours of death in
monochorionic twin pregnancies complicated by single
intrauterine death. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998; 179:800–3.
96. Senat MV, Bernard JP, Loizeau S, Ville Y. Management of single
fetal death in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: a role for fetal
blood sampling. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002;20:360–3.
97. Nakata M, Sumie M, Murata S, Miwa I, Kusaka E, Sugino N. A
case of monochorionic twin pregnancy complicated with
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e38 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
intrauterine single fetal death with successful treatment of
intrauterine blood transfusion in the surviving fetus. Fetal Diagn
Ther 2007;22:7–9.
98. Danon D, Sekar R, Hack KE, Fisk NM. Increased stillbirth in
uncomplicated monochorionic twin pregnancies: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2013;121:1318-26.
99. Barrett JF, Hannah ME, Hutton EK, Willan AR, Allen AC,
Armson BA, et al.; Twin Birth Study Corroborative Group. A
randomized trial of planned cesarean or vaginal delivery for twin
pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1295–305.
100. Dias T, Mahsud-Dornan S, Bhide A, Papageorghiou AT,
Thilaganathan B. Cord entanglement and perinatal outcome in
monoamniotic twin pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2010;35:201-4.
101. Hack KE, Derks JB, Schaap AH, Lopriore E, Elias SG, Arabin B,
et al. Perinatal outcome of monoamniotic twin pregnancies.
Obstet Gynecol 2009;113:353–60.
102. Van Mieghem T, De Heus R, Lewi L, Klaritsch P, Kollmann M,
Baud D, et al. Prenatal management of monoamniotic twin
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 2014;124:498–506.
103. Adegbite AL, Ward SB, Bajoria R. Perinatal outcome of
spontaneously conceived triplet pregnancies in relation to
chorionicity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;193:1463-71.
104. Geipel A, Berg C, Katalinic A, Plath H, Hansmann M, Germer U,
et al. Prenatal diagnosis and obstetric outcomes in triplet
pregnancies in relation to chorionicity. BJOG 2005;112:554–8.
105. Papageorghiou AT, Avgidou K, Bakoulas V, Sebire NJ,
Nicolaides KH. Risks of miscarriage and early preterm birth in
trichorionic triplet pregnancies with embryo reduction versus
expectant management: new data and systematic review. Hum
Reprod 2006;21:1912-7.
106. Chaveeva P, Kosinski P, Birdir C, Orosz L, Nicolaides KH.
Embryo reduction in dichorionic triplets to dichorionic twins by
intrafetal laser. Fetal Diagn Ther 2014;35:83-6.
107. Lewi L, Gratacos E, Ortibus E, Van Schoubroeck D, Carreras E,
Higueras T, et al. Pregnancy and infant outcome of
80 consecutive cord coagulations in complicated monochorionic
multiple pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006;194:782-9.
108. Pagani G, D'Antonio F, Khalil A, Papageorghiou A, Bhide A,
Thilaganathan B. Intrafetal laser treatment for twin reversed
arterial perfusion sequence: cohort study and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2013;42:6–14.
109. Roman A, Papanna R, Johnson A, Hassan SS, Moldenhauer J,
Molina S, et al. Selective reduction in complicated
monochorionic pregnancies: radiofrequency ablation
bipolar cord coagulation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2010;36:
37-41.
VS.
110. Weisz B, Peltz R, Chayen B, Oren M, Zalel Y, Achiron R, et al.
Tailored management of twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP)
sequence. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004;23:451-5.
III. Mackenzie TC, Crombleholme TM, Johnson MP, Schnaufer L,
Flake AW, Hedrick HL, et al. The natural history of prenatally
diagnosed conjoined twins. J Pediatr Surg 2002;37:303–9.
112. Agarwal U, Dahiya P, Khosla A. Vaginal birth of
conjoined thoracopagus a rare event. Arch Gynecol Obstet
2003;269:66-7.
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e39 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Appendix I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: 'systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in making decisions
about appropriate treatment for specific conditions'. Each guideline is systematically developed using a standardised
methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical Governance Advice No. 1 Development of RCOG
Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development). These
recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must be
evaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variations
in local populations. It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines into
routine practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations formulated in a
similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Classification of evidence levels
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic
|+
reviews of randomised controlled trials or
randomised controlled trials with a very low
risk of bias
Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trials
or randomised controlled trials with
a low risk of bias
|-
Grades of recommendations
A
Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of
B
randomised controlled trials or randomised
controlled trials with a high risk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case-
2+
2-
control or cohort studies or high-quality case-
control or cohort studies with a very low risk of
confounding, bias or chance and a high probability
that the relationship is causal
Well-conducted case-control or cohort studies
with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance
and a moderate probability that the relationship
is causal
Case-control or cohort studies with a high risk
of confounding, bias or chance and a significant
risk that the relationship is not causal
Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case
3
series
4
Expert opinion
C
D
At least one meta-analysis, systematic reviews
or RCT rated as 1++, and directly applicable to
the target population; or
A systematic review of RCTs or a body of
evidence consisting principally of studies rated
as I+, directly applicable to the target
population and demonstrating overall
consistency of results
A body of evidence including studies rated
as 2++ directly applicable to the target
population, and demonstrating overall
consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies
rated as ++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated
as 2+ directly applicable to the target
population, and demonstrating overall
consistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies
rated as 2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good practice point
Recommended best practice based on the
clinical experience of the guideline
development group
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e40 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Appendix II: Ultrasound appearance of the membrane attachment to the placenta
Lambda sign
T sign
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Reference: Khalil A, Rodgers M, Baschat A, Bhide A, Gratacos E, Hecher K, et al. ISUOG Practice Guidelines: role
of ultrasound in twin pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2016;47:247–63.
Copyright © 2015 ISUOG. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e41 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Appendix III: Assessment in uncomplicated monochorionic twin pregnancy
11-14 weeks
16 weeks
18 weeks
20 weeksa
22 weeks
Dating, labelling, chorionicity &
screening for trisomy 21
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & positive
or AREDV in UA
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & positive
or AREDV in UA
Detailed
anatomy scan
biometry (EFW), DVP & UAPI
(FASP),
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & UAPI
24 weeks
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & UAPI
26 weeks
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & UAPI
28 weeks
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & UAPI
30 weeks
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & UAPI
32 weeks
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & UAPI
34 weeks
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & UAPI
36 weeks
Fetal growth (EFW), DVP & UAPI
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
All routine antenatal assessment as in the NICE guidelines' should be followed.
At the 20-24-week scan, routine cervical length measurement is not advocated' outside a randomised controlled
trial.
Abbreviations: AREDV absent or reversed end-diastolic velocities; DVP deepest vertical pocket; EFW estimated
fetal weight; FASP Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme; UA umbilical artery; UAPI umbilical artery pulsatility
index.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e42 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Appendix IV: Types of selective growth restriction
Type 1
Туре 3
Gcm/s
Type 2
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Reference: Khalil A, Rodgers M, Baschat A, Bhide A, Gratacos E, Hecher K, et al. ISUOG Practice Guidelines: role
of ultrasound in twin pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2016;47:247–63.
Copyright © 2015 ISUOG. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e43 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Appendix V: Glossary of terms
Monochorionic; MC
Dichorionic; DC
Monoamniotic; MA
Diamniotic; DA
Triamniotic; TA
Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome; TTTS
Twin anaemia-polycythaemia sequence;
TAPS
Middle cerebral artery peak systolic
velocity; MCA PSV
Selective growth restriction; SGR
Twin reversed arterial perfusion
sequence; TRAP sequence
Multiple pregnancy with single placenta.
Multiple pregnancy with two placentas.
Single amniotic sac.
Two amniotic sacs.
Three amniotic sacs (in triplets).
A morbid condition affecting monochorionic twin pregnancies
where there is significant discordance in inter-twin liquor
volumes and cardiovascular measurements.
An antenatal or postnatal diagnosis of significant haemoglobin
difference between monochorionic twins (see text).
The peak systolic velocity measured using Doppler insonation
of the middle cerebral artery. The higher the MCA PSV, the
lower the fetal haemoglobin.
A difference of estimated fetal weight of more than 20%
between twins.
This is a monochorionic twin pregnancy where one twin, the
‘pump' twin, is perfusing its co-twin, which has no cardiac activity
and often is associated with major and lethal fetal anomalies.
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e44 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
This guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by:
Professor MD Kilby FRCOG, Birmingham; and Dr L Bricker FRCOG, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
and peer reviewed by:
Dr F Audibert, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada;
Dr JFR Barrett FRCOG, Toronto, Canada; Professor FM Breathnach FRCOG, Dublin; Dr ACG Breeze MRCOG, Leeds;
British Maternal and Fetal Medicine Society; Mrs AHD Diyaf MRCOG, Barnstaple; Professor Y Ezra, Hadassah Hebrew
University Medical Centre, Jerusalem, Israel; Dr JL Gibson MRCOG, Glasgow; Dr JG Hall, Professor Emerita of Pediatrics
and Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia and Children's & Women's Health Centre of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada; Mr DT Howe FRCOG, Southampton; Mr B Kumar FRCOG, Wrexham; Dr L Lewi, University
Hospitals Leuven, Belgium; Dr WL Martin FRCOG, Birmingham; Mrs G Masson FRCOG, Stoke-on-Trent, RCOG
Ultrasound Officer; Dr SS Ong MRCOG, Belfast; RCOG Women's Network; Dr D Roberts MRCOG, Liverpool;
Mr RPP Smith MRCOG, Norwich; Society and College of Radiographers; Dr SN Sturgiss MRCOG, Newcastle upon Tyne;
The Multiple Births Foundation; Professor MJC van Gemert, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Committee lead reviewers were: Dr PS Arunakumari FRCOG, Basildon; Dr P Owen' FRCOG, Glasgow; and
Mr RC Wimalasundera FRCOG, London.
The chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr M Gupta² MRCOG, London; Dr P Owen' FRCOG, Glasgow, Scotland;
and Dr AJ Thomson² MRCOG, Paisley.
'until May 2014 2 co-chairs from June 2014.
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conflicts of interest. A statement summarising any conflicts of
interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/guidelines/gtg51/.
The final version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.
14710528, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1471-0528.14188 by Cochrane France, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The review process will commence in 2019, unless otherwise indicated.
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice.
They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration by
obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular
clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented
by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to be
prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols or
guidelines should be fully documented in the patient's case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 51
e45 of e45 © 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
