BJOG . 2024;131:e31–e80.  wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bjo    | e31
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.RCOG GREEN-  TOP GUIDELINES
Investigation and Care of a Small-  for- Gestational-  Age Fetus and a 
Growth Restricted Fetus (Green-top Guideline No. 31)
R. Katie Morris |   Edward Johnstone  |   Christoph Lees |   Victoria Morton |    
Gordon Smith |   on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsPublished online: 13 May 2024
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.17814  
Key recommendations
• All women should be assessed at booking (by 14 weeks) for risk factors for fetal 
growth restriction (FGR) to identify those who require increased surveillance 
using an agreed pathway [Grade GPP]. Findings at the midtrimester anomaly 
scan should be incorporated into the fetal growth risk assessment and the risk 
assessment updated throughout pregnancy. [Grade GPP]
• Reduce smoking in pregnancy by identifying women who smoke with the assistance 
of carbon monoxide (CO) testing and ensuring in-  house treatment from a trained 
tobacco dependence advisor is offered to all pregnant women who smoke, using an 
opt- out referral process. [Grade GPP]
• Women at risk of pre-eclampsia and/or placental dysfunction should take as -
pirin 150 mg once daily at night from 12+0–36+0 weeks of pregnancy to reduce 
their chance of small-for-gestational-age (SGA) and FGR. [Grade A]
• Uterine artery Dopplers should be carried out between 18+0 and 23+6 weeks for 
women at high risk of fetal growth disorders [Grade B]. In a woman with normal 
uterine artery Doppler and normal fetal biometry at the midtrimester scan, serial 
ultrasound scans for fetal biometry can commence at 32 weeks. Women with an 
abnormal uterine artery Doppler (mean pulsatility index > 95th centile) should 
commence ultrasound scans at 24+0–28+6 weeks based on individual history. 
[Grade B]
• Women who are at low risk of FGR should have serial measurement of symphysis 
fundal height (SFH) at each antenatal appointment after 24+0 weeks of pregnancy 
(no more frequently than every 2 weeks). The first measurement should be carried 
out by 28+6 weeks. [Grade C]
• Women in the moderate risk category are at risk of late onset FGR so require 
serial ultrasound scan assessment of fetal growth commencing at 32+0 weeks. 
For the majority of women, a scan interval of four weeks until birth is appro -
priate. [Grade B]
• Maternity providers should ensure that they clearly identify the reference charts 
to plot SFH, individual biometry and estimated fetal weight (EFW) measure -
ments to calculate centiles. For individual biometry measurements the method 
used for measurement should be the same as those used in the development of the 
individual biometry and fetal growth chart [Grade GPP]. For EFW the Hadlock 
three parameter model should be used. [Grade C]
• Maternity providers should ensure that they have guidance that promotes the 
use of standard planes of acquisition and calliper placement when performing 
ultrasound scanning for fetal growth assessment. Quality control of images 
and measurements should be undertaken. [Grade C]
1 | PURPOSE AND SCOPE
The purpose of this guideline is to provide advice, based on 
the best evidence available, to guide clinicians regarding the 
investigation and care of the small-for-gestational-age (SGA) 
fetus and growth restricted fetus. The guideline reviews the risk 
factors for these conditions and provides recommendations 
regarding surveillance, diagnosis, and management, including 
recommendations for fetal monitoring and birth. Large for ges-
tational age (LGA) is outside the scope of this guidance.
This guideline is for healthcare professionals who care for 
women, non- binary and trans people with a SGA fetus or with 
fetal growth restriction (FGR). Within this document we use 
the terms woman and women's health. However, it is import-
ant to acknowledge that it is not only women for whom it is 
necessary to access women's health and reproductive services 
in order to maintain their gynaecological health and repro-
ductive wellbeing. Gynaecological and obstetric services and 
delivery of care must therefore be appropriate, inclusive and 
sensitive to the needs of those individuals whose gender iden-
tity does not align with the sex

Fetal growth is a dynamic process requiring multiple assessments and at least two assessments of fetal size. Growth charts are essential for interpretation. An appropriate for gestational age (AGA) fetus falls between the 10th and 90th centiles. Small for gestational age (SGA) fetuses have measurements below set parameters. Fetal growth restriction (FGR) implies a pathological restriction of genetic growth potential, with some fetuses showing evidence of compromise. Defining FGR is challenging, with varying parameters used for diagnosis. FGR can be early or late onset. Suboptimal fetal growth may indicate FGR. Low birthweight is no longer used clinically. Small fetuses can be constitutionally small, have non-placenta mediated growth restriction, or placenta mediated growth restriction. Maternal factors and medical conditions can affect placental transfer of nutrients. Early onset FGR is associated with significant adverse outcomes, while late onset FGR is more common but harder to detect. Surveillance methods include serial symphysis fundal height measurements.

Low sensitivity for detecting SGA/FGR fetuses. Suspicion of a fetal growth disorder usually relies on ultrasound measurement of fetal AC or estimation of fetal weight. Care of the SGA/FGR fetus is directed at timely birth. Several surveillance tests are available, including cardiotocography (CTG), Doppler, and USS to assess biophysical activity, but there is controversy about which test or combination of tests should be used to time birth in late onset FGR and SGA. The NHS England SBLCB (a care bundle for reducing perinatal mortality) was first published in 2016 and focused on detection and management of SGA (rather than FGR) and recommended birth at 37+0 to 37+6 weeks for SGA, as did the 2013 version of this RCOG guidance. The SpiRE evaluation of the SBLCB version 1 demonstrated a measurable difference in antenatal detection of SGA babies across England. The evaluation also demonstrated an increase in USS and inductions of labor at early term (37+0–38+6 weeks). Thus, by seeking to capture all babies at risk, interventions increased in women who were only marginally at increased risk of FGR-related stillbirth, with risks to the babies of early term induction (namely increased risk of admission to the neonatal unit and potential long-term adverse effects, e.g. increased risk of special educational needs). This was partly addressed in version 2 of the bundle (2019), with different management strategies for SGA and FGR to try and reduce unnecessary intervention in SGA babies not at risk of adverse outcome. SBLCBv3, and this guideline, addresses this further with a focus on detecting FGR and targeting intervention (i.e. birth) for those at increased risk of perinatal death. The Cochrane Library and electronic databases (DARE, EMBASE, Trip, MEDLINE, and PubMed) were searched using the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, including all subheadings and synonyms, and this was combined with a keyword search and was limited to humans and English language; search terms included ‘fetal growth retardation’, ‘fetal growth restriction’ and ‘infant, small for gestational age’. The search was restricted to articles published from 2011 until December 2022. Risk assessment is a fundamental part of care in the maternity pathway and should be a dynamic process with continual assessment throughout the pregnancy. Risk assessment must always consider previous medical history, obstetric history, and current pregnancy history with information obtained from the woman, review of medical notes, and contact with previous care providers as necessary. All pregnant women should have a risk assessment for FGR carried out by 14 weeks of gestation using an agreed pathway. Women must also be assessed at booking for conditions where SFH measurements are not appropriate (e.g. raised body mass index [BMI] of 35 kg/m2 or above at booking; presence of fibroids in uterus [based on clinical judgment]). All women should be assessed at booking (by 14 weeks) for risk factors for FGR to identify those who require increased surveillance using an agreed pathway.

- Birthweight, gestation, and birthweight centiles of previous pregnancies should be recorded at the booking appointment for accurate risk assessment.
- Plans for assessment should be adjusted based on specific risk factors to inform further targeted tests and surveillance.
- Women with evidence of placental dysfunction in previous pregnancies have an increased risk of recurrence and subsequent affected pregnancies.
- Previous stillbirth is associated with an increased risk of SGA in subsequent pregnancies, especially with evidence of FGR.
- Women with previous preterm birth have an increased risk of SGA/FGR, especially after extreme preterm birth.
- Recurrent miscarriage does not show a consistent increased risk of SGA.
- Women with previous placenta-mediated complications are at greater risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancies.
- NICE recommends aspirin to reduce the risk of hypertensive disorders related to placental dysfunction.
- Maternal medical conditions associated with an increased risk of fetal growth disorders include diabetes with vascular disease, renal impairment, antiphospholipid syndrome, chronic hypertension, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
- Maternal congenital heart disease is associated with SGA, especially in women with complex CHD and symptomatic patients.
- Women with cardiac disease in pregnancy taking multiple medications, especially beta-blockers, should consider medication use when assessing the need for growth scans.
- Associations with asthma, anaemia, inflammatory bowel disease, and depression show weak or no associations with SGA.

Advanced maternal age of 40 years or more is associated with increased risk of SGA and FGR. Maternal pre-pregnancy BMI and gestational weight gain are also risk factors for SGA. Bariatric surgery and ethnicity, specifically Southeast Asian, African, and Black African Caribbean, are associated with an increased risk of SGA. Maternity services should provide risk assessment for fetal growth disorders. Nulliparity, social deprivation, unmarried status, maternal SGA, and inter-pregnancy interval length are minor risk factors for SGA. Physical activity and congenital uterine anomalies are not associated with SGA risk. Maternal alcohol consumption, drug misuse, and smoking increase the risk of SGA.

Women who are able to stop smoking can reduce their risk of SGA. If able to stop by 15 weeks of gestation, they can return to the pregnancy risk status of similar non-smoking women of preterm and term SGA. Less is known about the impact of secondhand smoke on SGA rates. The relationship between use of e-cigarettes and the risk of fetal growth disorders is complex. Women may completely or partially substitute cigarettes in pregnancy for e-cigarettes. For women who use nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), the evidence suggests that any risk from using NRT are much lower than those of smoking. Evidence shows that e-cigarettes were more effective than NRT for smoking cessation and infants born to women in the e-cigarette group were less likely to be of low birth weight than those in the NRT group. Maternal caffeine consumption of 300 mg/day or more in the third trimester has been associated with SGA. A systematic review assessing IVF and ICSI has shown an association with these techniques and SGA. Paternal factors may also influence adverse pregnancy outcomes. Low PAPP-A levels are an independent risk factor for SGA, with the odds of SGA decreasing as PAPP-A increases. Additional surveillance for SGA/FGR should be offered if abnormal levels of certain biochemical markers are detected.

Low PAPP-A, raised AFP, or inhibin A should prompt uterine artery Doppler screening and serial growth scans. Although these biomarkers are associated with SGA and FGR, they are not recommended as primary detection tools. Uterine artery Dopplers should be performed for women at high risk of fetal growth disorders. Fetal echogenic bowel and single umbilical artery on midtrimester anomaly scan warrant uterine artery Doppler to assess the risk of early onset FGR. Fetal biometry should be assessed, and if EFW is <10th centile, uterine artery Doppler should be performed. Women should be reassessed for fetal growth disorders throughout pregnancy and after any antenatal admission. Women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy should be assessed for fetal growth disorders. Women who have been seriously ill from COVID-19 should be offered ultrasound scans to assess fetal biometry.

In the first trimester, bleeding is associated with threatened miscarriage and growth restriction. In the second half of pregnancy, bleeding's association with fetal growth disorders is conflicting. Following antepartum hemorrhage, serial ultrasounds for fetal growth are recommended. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy increase the risk of small for gestational age newborns. Maternal COVID-19 infection likely increases the risk of low birth weight. Prediction models for fetal growth restriction should not be the sole method for ultrasound surveillance. Smoking cessation and vitamin supplementation can reduce the risk of small for gestational age. Balanced energy/protein supplementation has been associated with a reduction in small for gestational age and an increase in birth weight.

High protein supplementation is not recommended due to low-quality evidence. Structured interventions based on a Mediterranean diet or mindfulness-based stress reduction in high-risk pregnancies did not show significant benefits. Omega-3 supplementation does not reduce SGA, while multiple micronutrient supplementation may reduce the risk. High dose folic acid, calcium, and magnesium supplementation did not show consistent benefits. Vitamin D supplementation benefits remain uncertain. Smoking cessation reduces the risk of SGA. Aspirin at 150 mg daily from 12+0–36+6 weeks can reduce the chance of SGA and FGR in women at risk. LMWH is not recommended for reducing the risk of SGA or FGR. Antiplatelet agents, specifically aspirin, have shown benefits in reducing SGA and FGR when initiated between 11+0 and 16+6 weeks of gestation.

Doses below 100 mg of aspirin should only be considered with other contraindications. Aspirin is more effective when taken in the evening or at night for lowering blood pressure and reducing the risk of pre-eclampsia. Guidelines recommend continuing aspirin until birth for preventing hypertensive disorders, although some suggest stopping at 36 weeks due to a potential risk of postpartum hemorrhage. Aspirin should ideally be started at 12-16 weeks and continued until at least 36 weeks. Evidence does not support the use of LMWH to prevent SGA or FGR. Progesterone does not affect the risk of pre-eclampsia or FGR. Hydroxychloroquine has not shown significant benefit in preventing FGR. Antihypertensive drug therapy does not increase the risk of having an SGA newborn. The risk of FGR in pregnant women is linked to pregnancy risk factors, and surveillance methods vary based on risk level. Serial assessment of fetal growth using SFH measurements is recommended for women at low risk of FGR. Abdominal palpation is not accurate for predicting SGA newborns, and SFH measurements should be done at each antenatal appointment after 24 weeks. Abnormal SFH measurements should prompt ultrasound measurement of fetal size. Women with factors affecting SFH accuracy should have serial ultrasound assessments. Staff should be trained in using appropriate charts for recording SFH.

Maternal obesity, abnormal fetal lie, large fibroids, hydramnios, and fetal head engagement contribute to the limited predictive accuracy of SFH measurement. There is insufficient evidence to recommend a particular chart for recording SFH. Studies have shown that abdominal palpation has limited accuracy in detecting SGA newborns, with SFH measurement appearing superior. SFH should be measured routinely from 26+0 to 28+6 weeks. Maternal BMI, abnormal fetal lie, large fibroids, hydramnios, and fetal head engagement affect the accuracy of SFH measurement. SFH should be measured from the fundus to the symphysis pubis, and women with SFH below the 10th centile should be referred for further investigation. Customised SFH charts may improve detection of SGA. Routine ultrasound measurement in the third trimester does not reduce the incidence of SGA newborns or improve perinatal outcomes.

Perinatal mortality rates are higher for AC compared to EFW, especially when the scan is done near term to detect FGR. Routine third trimester ultrasound is not recommended due to moderate to low quality evidence. There is a risk of iatrogenic preterm birth for false positive ultrasound results. Universal late pregnancy ultrasound is not cost-effective for predicting adverse outcomes. Maternity providers should use standard planes and calliper placement for fetal growth assessment. Serial ultrasound assessments should begin at 32 weeks for women at moderate risk of FGR. The interval between scans should be at least 4 weeks to minimize false positive rates. AC measurements can help identify fetuses at risk of neonatal morbidity. The Hadlock formula should be used for fetal size assessment. Maternity providers should use reference charts based on sonographic EFW and monitor the number of fetuses below the 3rd centile. High-quality measurements and reports are essential for accurate diagnosis and management of fetal growth disorders. Surveillance for late FGR and SGA should start at 32 weeks with scans no more frequent than every 14 days. Optimum assessment for growth velocity is every 21-28 days.

False positive rates for diagnosing FGR were higher when the first scan was carried out at 36 weeks of gestation. To minimize false positive rates, two measurements to estimate velocity should be a minimum of 3 weeks apart. AC is comparable to EFW in predicting SGA, with AC growth velocity being the only biometric measure to identify babies at increased risk of neonatal morbidity. The Hadlock equation is recommended for estimating fetal weight. Quality control of images and measurements is important for accuracy. Interpretation of EFW results should consider the imprecision caused by equation accuracy and image quality. Customized fetal growth charts may better predict adverse outcomes, but concerns exist regarding normalizing pathology at an individual level. Individual trajectories for the fetus can be developed for further analysis.

The DESiGN trial found no effect of the GAP programme on antenatal detection of SGA compared to standard care. Concerns were raised about the trial methodology and execution. Local population characteristics should be considered when using growth charts to avoid under or over detection of SGA. Maternity providers should ensure clear guidance for fetal biometry measurements and EFW calculation. High risk populations should undergo uterine artery Doppler at 20+0-24+6 weeks to assess for early onset SGA. Uterine artery Doppler can help identify women at risk for early-onset pre-eclampsia.

Uterine artery Doppler in the second trimester can help detect very preterm SGA and assess risk of placental dysfunction. Serial scans are recommended for high-risk women. Doppler may not be effective in the third trimester for unselected pregnancies. Fetal size alone is not enough to identify FGR, and Doppler can help distinguish between SGA and FGR in the third trimester. Individualized management is crucial for fetal growth disorders. Further research is needed to optimize fetal growth assessment methods.

Recommendation: When fetal growth disorder is suspected or diagnosed, assess fetal biometry measurements and risk factors for FGR. Pay attention to a downward trend in AC growth velocity. Assess fetal wellbeing, maternal blood pressure, and proteinuria. Use uterine artery Dopplers for placental dysfunction in third-trimester FGR. Placental morphology and biometry can predict FGR, but MRI is costly. Biomarkers like PlGF and s-flt1 can aid in diagnosing pre-eclampsia. PlGF/s-flt1 testing may help predict FGR in non-hypertensive women. PlGF/s-flt1 levels near disease in the third trimester may be useful in combination with other indicators of FGR. PlGF/s-flt1 testing may identify early and late onset FGR within SGA cohorts. Placental biomarkers in the second trimester can predict SGA neonates.

Offer referral to fetal medicine if EFW is below the 3rd centile or below the 10th centile with abnormal uterine artery Doppler at the midtrimester anomaly scan. Invasive diagnostic testing should be offered in severely SGA fetuses with structural anomalies and considered in non-anomalous fetuses detected before 23 weeks of gestation, especially if uterine artery Doppler is normal. Serological screening for congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV) and toxoplasmosis infection should be offered in severe SGA. Testing for malaria and Zika should be considered in high-risk populations. Invasive testing should be considered in the context of severe SGA due to the possibility of other chromosomal abnormalities. Follow-up scans should be arranged given the association with subsequent birth of an SGA infant. LMWH should not be prescribed to women in whom fetal growth disorders have been diagnosed. Women should not be prescribed phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) inhibitors to treat FGR outside of RCTs.

PDE5 inhibitors have shown some benefit in improving outcomes in FGR pregnancies, but negative results from the STRIDER collaboration do not support their use outside of clinical trials. LMWH is not effective in preventing SGA or FGR and should only be used in women at risk of thromboembolic disease. There is insufficient evidence to support the use of LMWH in pregnancies with FGR. 

For SGA fetuses, ultrasound biometry should be done every 2 weeks, and umbilical artery Doppler should be used for surveillance. Birth should be considered at 39 weeks for fetuses with an EFW or AC less than the 10th centile, and IOL is not contraindicated in SGA fetuses. Abnormal MCA, CPR, or UCR after 37 weeks can guide timing of birth. Amniotic fluid assessment should not be used in isolation for management decisions.

For SGA fetuses, birth recommendations are based on the DIGITAT study findings and data related to morbidity. Induction at 38 weeks showed lower costs compared to earlier. IOL between 37-38 weeks should only be considered for fetuses at significantly increased risk of perinatal mortality. For FGR fetuses, monitoring and management should involve input from tertiary level units with multidisciplinary care. Biometry in FGR should be repeated every 2 weeks. Assessment of fetal wellbeing in early FGR should be based on severity and UA Doppler assessment, with a minimum of weekly monitoring. Maternity providers should ensure consistency in Doppler charts used across departments.

Fetal Doppler assessment using cCTG analysis with STV is recommended. High variability in Doppler reference ranges impacts prenatal diagnosis and timing of birth. Ductus venosus and cCTG changes are discriminatory for timing of birth. MCA CPR/UCR can inform monitoring strategy. Birth decisions should be based on fetal wellbeing assessment or maternal indication. Management of early FGR should involve input from tertiary level units. Assessment of fetal heart rate variability is important. TRUFFLE study findings inform management of early FGR. Umbilical artery Doppler changes can prompt assessment. Monitoring frequency in early FGR is important.

In pregnancies with late FGR, birth should be based on fetal wellbeing assessments or maternal indication. Birth should occur if any of the following are present: spontaneous repeated persistent unprovoked fetal heart rate decelerations, cCTG STV less than 3.5 ms at 32+0 to 33+6 weeks and less than 4.5 ms at 34+0 weeks or above, or abnormal UA Doppler. In pregnancies with FGR, birth should be initiated from 37+0 weeks to be completed by 37+6 weeks. Cerebral Doppler abnormalities can inform monitoring strategy and timing of birth, but should not be used to determine birth decisions prior to 37 weeks. An abnormal MCA, CPR, or UCR after 37+0 weeks can guide timing of birth. In late FGR, a woman's subjective assessment of reduced fetal movements should prompt an assessment with cCTG. Antenatal corticosteroids should be offered.

Antenatal corticosteroids should be offered to women between 24+0 and 34+6 weeks of gestation who are at high risk of imminent preterm birth. The optimal timing of steroids is key to ensure their effectiveness. Women undergoing a preterm birth should be offered transfer to a unit with appropriate neonatal facilities. Magnesium sulphate for neuroprotection should be offered between 24+0 and 29+6 weeks and considered up to 33+6 weeks. Caesarean birth is recommended for fetuses with certain abnormalities, while induction of labor can be considered for others. Continuous fetal heart rate monitoring is recommended for SGA and FGR fetuses in labor. Studies suggest mechanical methods for induction of labor may be associated with better outcomes in these cases.

Placental histopathological examination may be useful in cases of FGR to guide future pregnancy management. Postnatal counselling and review of placental histology should be offered to women who have given birth to a growth-restricted infant. Testing for acquired thrombophilias may be considered. A plan for future pregnancies and preventative strategies should be discussed and recorded. Modifiable risk factors should be addressed, and investigations should be offered to determine underlying causes and discuss risk of recurrence. Further research is needed on maternal risk factors, prediction models for FGR, optimal timing of ultrasounds, and biomarkers for predicting adverse outcomes. Audit topics include detection rates of SGA babies and risk assessment for FGR. Useful links and support groups are provided for additional information.

PPROVA L
None.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
None.
RCOG GREEN-TOP GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
1. Alberry M, Soothill P. Management of fetal growth restriction. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed Jan 2007;92(1):F62-7.
2. Lees CC, Marlow N, van Wassenaer- Leemhuis A, et al. 2 year neuro-developmental and intermediate perinatal outcomes in infants with very preterm fetal growth restriction (TRUFFLE): a randomised trial. The Lancet. 2015;385(9983):2162–72.
3. McIntire DD, Bloom SL, Casey BM, Leveno KJ. Birth weight in relation to morbidity and mortality among newborn infants. N Engl J Med. Apr 22 1999;340(16):1234–8.
4. Molina LCG, Odibo L, Zientara S, et al. Validation of Delphi procedure consensus criteria for defining fetal growth restriction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 07 2020;56(1):61–6.
5. Gordijn SJ, Beune IM, Thilaganathan B, et al. Consensus definition of fetal growth restriction: a Delphi procedure. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Sep 2016;48(3):333–9.
6. NHS England. Saving babies lives version 3: a care bundle for reducing perinatal mortality. 2023.
7. Gómez O, Figueras F, Fernández S, et al. Reference ranges for uterine artery mean pulsatility index at 11-41 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Aug 2008;32(2):128–32.
8. Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Lucas MJ, Leveno KJ. Effects of symmetric and asymmetric fetal growth on pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol Sep 2000;96(3):321–7.
9. Nardozza LM, Caetano AC, Zamarian AC, et al. Fetal growth restriction: current knowledge. Arch Gynecol Obstet May 2017;295(5):1061–77.
10. Pels A, Beune IM, van Wassenaer-Leemhuis AG, Limpens J, Ganzevoort W. Early-onset fetal growth restriction: A systematic review on mortality and morbidity. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Feb 2020;99(2):153–66.
11. Pay AS, Wiik J, Backe B, Jacobsson B, Strandell A, Klovning A. Symphysis-fundus height measurement to predict small-for-gestational-age status at birth: a systematic review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. Feb 10 2015;15:22.
12. NHS England. Saving babies lives: A care bundle for reducing stillbirth. Accessed 21st June. 2023.
13. Widdows K, Reid HE, Roberts SA, Camacho EM, Heazell AEP. Saving babies' lives project impact and results evaluation (SPiRE): a mixed methodology study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth Jan 30 2018;18(1):43.
14. MacKay DF, Smith GC, Dobbie R, Pell JP. Gestational age at delivery and special educational need: retrospective cohort study of 407,503 schoolchildren. PLoS Med. Jun 08 2010;7(6):e1000289.
15. Stock SJ, Ferguson E, Duffy A, Ford I, Chalmers J, Norman JE. Outcomes of elective induction of labour compared with expectant management: population based study. BMJ. May 10 2012;344:e2838.
16. NHS England. Saving babies lives: A care bundle for reducing perinatal mortality version 2.
17. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Development of RCOG Green-top Guidelines. Clinical Governance Advice No. 1. London: RCOG; 2015.
18. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Antenatal care. NICE Guideline [NG201]. London: NICE; 2021.
19. Tan MY, Poon LC, Rolnik DL, et al. Prediction and prevention of small-for-gestational-age neonates: evidence from SPREE and ASPRE. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 07 2018;52(1):52–9.
20. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Tommy's pathway. Accessed 21st June. 2023.
21. Bhamid

Analysis of first and subsequent singleton pregnancies in The Netherlands. Risk of stillbirth, preterm delivery, and fetal growth restriction following exposure in a previous birth. Outcome of pregnancy following second- or third-trimester intrauterine fetal death. Adverse Perinatal Outcome in Subsequent Pregnancy after Stillbirth by Placental Vascular Disorders. Previous preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and delivery of a small for gestational age infant and the risk of unexplained stillbirth in the second pregnancy. Perinatal outcomes in a subsequent pregnancy among women who have experienced recurrent miscarriage. Miscarriage matters: the epidemiological, physical, psychological, and economic costs of early pregnancy loss. Do women with recurrent miscarriage constitute a high-risk obstetric population? Medical termination of pregnancy during the second versus the first trimester and its effects on subsequent pregnancy. Recurrent Placenta-Mediated Complications in Women With Three Consecutive Deliveries. Hypertension in pregnancy: diagnosis and management. Aspirin versus Placebo in Pregnancies at High Risk for Preterm Preeclampsia. Chronotherapy with low-dose aspirin for prevention of complications in pregnancy. Associations of Type 1 diabetes mellitus, maternal vascular disease, and complications of pregnancy. Increased risk of adverse maternal and infant outcomes among women with renal disease. Prospective studies of the association between anticardiolipin antibody and outcome of pregnancy. Prehypertension during pregnancy and risk of small for gestational age. Pregnancy outcomes in women with systemic lupus erythematosus. Incidence and predictors of obstetric and fetal complications in women with structural heart disease. Prevalence of pre-eclampsia and adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with pre-existing cardiomyopathy.

43. Murphy VE, Namazy JA, Powell H, et al. A meta-analysis of adverse perinatal outcomes in women with asthma. BJOG Oct 2011;118(11):1314–23.
44. Bartha JL, Martinez-Sanchez N, Hueso-Zalvide E. Pregnancy outcome in women with inflammatory bowel disease with or without biological medication.
45. Badfar G, Shohani M, Soleymani A, Azami M. Maternal anemia during pregnancy and small for gestational age: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
46. Loret de Mola C, de França GV, Quevedo LeA, Horta BL. Low birth weight, preterm birth and small for gestational age association with adult depression: systematic review and meta-analysis.
47. Zhao X, Liu Q, Cao S, et al. A meta-analysis of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) use during prenatal depression and risk of low birth weight and small for gestational age.
48. McCowan L, Horgan RP. Risk factors for small for gestational age infants.
49. Grote NK, Bridge JA, Gavin AR, Melville JL, Iyengar S, Katon WJ. A meta-analysis of depression during pregnancy and the risk of preterm birth, low birth weight, and intrauterine growth restriction.
50. Lean SC, Derricott H, Jones RL, Heazell AEP. Advanced maternal age and adverse pregnancy outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

S, Knowledge Synthesis Group on Determinants of LBW/PT births. Maternal marital status and birth outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analyses. Matern Child Health J Oct 2011;15(7):1097–109.

Shah PS, Shah V, Knowledge Synthesis Group on Determinants of LBW/PT births. Influence of maternal birth status on offspring: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2009;88(12):1307–18.

Conde-Agudelo A, Rosas-Bermúdez A, Kafury-Goeta AC. Birth spacing and risk of adverse perinatal outcomes: a meta-analysis. JAMA. Apr 19 2006;295(15):1809–23.

Pastorino S, Bishop T, Crozier SR, et al. Associations between maternal physical activity in early and late pregnancy and offspring birth size: remote federated individual level meta-analysis from eight cohort studies. BJOG Mar 2019;126(4):459–70.

Panagiotopoulos M, Tseke P, Michala L. Obstetric Complications in Women With Congenital Uterine Anomalies According to the 2013 European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology and the European Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy Classification: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol Jan 1 2022;139(1):138–48.

Patra J, Bakker R, Irving H, Jaddoe VW, Malini S, Rehm J. Dose-response relationship between alcohol consumption before and during pregnancy and the risks of low birthweight, preterm birth and small for gestational age (SGA)- a systematic review and meta-analyses. BJOG Nov 2011;118(12):1411–21.

Mamluk L, Edwards HB, Savović J, et al. Low alcohol consumption and pregnancy and childhood outcomes: time to change guidelines indicating apparently 'safe' levels of alcohol during pregnancy? A systematic review and meta-analyses. BMJ Open Aug 03 2017;7(7):e015410.

Gouin K, Murphy K, Shah PS, Knowledge Synthesis Group on Determinants of LBW/PT births. Effects of cocaine use during pregnancy on low birthweight and preterm birth: systematic review and meta-analyses. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Apr 2011;204(4):340.e1-12.

Dos Santos JF, de Melo Bastos Cavalcante C, Barbosa FT, et al. Maternal, fetal and neonatal consequences associated with the use of crack cocaine during the gestational period: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 09 2018;298(3):487–503.

Metz TD, Stickrath EH. Marijuana use in pregnancy and lactation: a review of the evidence. Am J Obstet Gynecol Dec 2015;213(6):761–78.

Haug K, Irgens LM, Skjaerven R, Markestad T, Baste V, Schreuder P. Maternal smoking and birthweight: effect modification of period, maternal age and paternal smoking. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Jun 2000;79(6):485–9.

Brand JS, Gaillard R, West J, et al. Associations of maternal quitting, reducing, and continuing smoking during pregnancy with longitudinal fetal growth: Findings from Mendelian randomization and parental negative control studies. PLoS Med Nov 2019;16(11):e1002972.

McCowan L, Dekker G, Chan E, et al. Spontaneous preterm birth and small for gestational age infants in women who stop smoking early in pregnancy: prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2009;338:b338.

Bickerstaff M, Beckmann M, Gibbons K, Flenady V. Recent cessation of smoking and its effect on pregnancy outcomes. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol Feb 2012;52(1):54–8.

Polakowski LL, Akinbami LJ, Mendola P. Prenatal smoking cessation and the risk of delivering preterm and small-for-gestational-age newborns. Obstet Gynecol Aug 2009;114(2 Pt 1):318–25.

Hoyt AT, Canfield MA, Romitti PA, et al. Does Maternal Exposure to Secondhand Tobacco Smoke During Pregnancy Increase the Risk for Preterm or Small-for-Gestational-Age Birth? Matern Child Health J Oct 2018;22(10):1418–29

84. Sengpiel V, Elind E, Bacelis J, et al. Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy is associated with birth weight but not with gestational length: results from a large prospective observational cohort study.
85. CARE Study Group. Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and risk of fetal growth restriction: a large prospective observational study.
86. NHS England. Foods to avoid in pregnancy.
87. Pandey S, Shetty A, Hamilton M, Bhattacharya S, Maheshwari A. Obstetric and perinatal outcomes in singleton pregnancies resulting from IVF/ICSI: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
88. Shah PS, on behalf of Knowledge Synthesis Group on Determinants of LBW/PT births. Paternal factors and low birthweight, preterm, and small for gestational age births: a systematic review.
89. Khandwala YS, Baker VL, Shaw GM, Stevenson DK, Lu Y, Eisenberg ML. Association of paternal age with perinatal outcomes between 2007 and 2016 in the United States: population based cohort study.
90. Bandoli G, Lindsay S, Johnson DL, Kao K, Luo Y, Chambers CD. Change in paternity and select perinatal outcomes: causal or confounded?
91. Bilagi A, Burke DL, Riley RD, Mills I, Kilby MD, Morris RK. Association of maternal serum PAPP-A levels, nuchal translucency and crown-rump length in first trimester with adverse pregnancy outcomes: retrospective cohort study.
92. Smith GC, Crossley JA, Aitken DA, et al. First-trimester placentation and the risk of antepartum stillbirth.
93. Morris RK, Bilagi A, Devani P, Kilby MD. Association of serum PAPP-A levels in first trimester with small for gestational age and adverse pregnancy outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis.
94. Morris RK, Cnossen JS, Langejans M, et al. Serum screening with Down's syndrome markers to predict pre-eclampsia and small for gestational age: systematic review and meta-analysis.
95. Ormesher L, Warrander L, Liu Y, et al. Risk stratification for early-onset fetal growth restriction in women with abnormal serum biomarkers: a retrospective cohort study.
96. Cooper S, Johnson JA, Metcalfe A, et al. The predictive value of 18 and 22 week uterine artery Doppler in patients with low first trimester maternal serum PAPP-A.
97. Singnoi W, Wanapirak C, Sekararithi R, Tongsong T. A cohort study of the association between maternal serum Inhibin-A and adverse pregnancy outcomes: a population-based study.
98. Toal M, Chan C, Fallah S, et al. Usefulness of a placental profile in high-risk pregnancies.
99. Kantomaa T, Vääräsmäki M, Gissler M, Sairanen M, Nevalainen J. First trimester low maternal serum pregnancy associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) as a screening method for adverse pregnancy outcomes.
100. Gagnon A, Wilson RD, Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada Genetics Committee. Obstetrical complications associated with abnormal maternal serum markers analytes.
101. Zhong Y, Zhu F, Ding Y. Serum screening in first trimester to predict pre-eclampsia, small for gestational age and preterm delivery: systematic review and meta-analysis.
102. Papastefanou I, Wright D, Lolos M, Anampousi K, Mamalis M, Nicolaides KH. Competing-risks model for prediction of small-for-gestational-age neonate from maternal characteristics, serum pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A and placental growth factor at 11-13 weeks' gestation.

- Wenstrom KD, Hauth JC, Goldenberg RL, DuBard MB, Lea C. The effect of low-dose aspirin on pregnancies complicated by elevated human chorionic gonadotropin levels. Am J Obstet Gynecol Oct 1995;173(4):1292–6
- Goetzinger KR, Cahill AG, Macones GA, Odibo AO. Echogenic bowel on second-trimester ultrasonography: evaluating the risk of adverse pregnancy outcome. Obstet Gynecol Jun 2011;117(6):1341–8
- Kim HJ, Kim JH, Chay DB, Park JH, Kim MA. Association of isolated single umbilical artery with perinatal outcomes: Systemic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol Sci May 2017;60(3):266–73
- Dagklis T, Siargkas A, Apostolopoulou A, et al. Adverse perinatal outcomes following the prenatal diagnosis of isolated single umbilical artery in singleton pregnancies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Perinat Med. Mar 28 2022;50(3):244–52
- Battarbee AN, Palatnik A, Ernst LM, Grobman WA. Association of Isolated Single Umbilical Artery With Small for Gestational Age and Preterm Birth. Obstet Gynecol Oct 2015;126(4):760–4
- Bukowski R, Hansen NI, Pinar H, et al. Altered fetal growth, placental abnormalities, and stillbirth. PloS One. 2017;12(8):e0182874
- Gutvirtz G, Walfisch A, Beharier O, Sheiner E. Isolated single umbilical artery is an independent risk factor for perinatal mortality and adverse outcomes in term neonates. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 11 2016;294(5):931–5
- Balayla J, Desilets J, Shrem G. Placenta previa and the risk of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR): a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Perinat Med Aug 27 2019;47(6):577–84
- Allen VM, Joseph K, Murphy KE, Magee LA, Ohlsson A. The effect of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy on small for gestational age and stillbirth: a population based study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth Aug 06 2004;4(1):17
- Gunnarsdottir J, Akhter T, Högberg U, Cnattingius S, Wikström AK. Elevated diastolic blood pressure until mid-gestation is associated with preeclampsia and small-for-gestational-age birth: a population-based register study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth May 28 2019;19(1):186
- Zhu B, Huang K, Bao W, et al. Dose-response relationship between maternal blood pressure in pregnancy and risk of adverse birth outcomes: Ma'anshan birth cohort study. Pregnancy Hypertens Jan 2019;15:16–22
- Wei SQ, Bilodeau-Bertrand M, Liu S, Auger N. The impact of COVID-19 on pregnancy outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cmaj. Apr 19 2021;193(16):E540-e548
- Villar J, Ariff S, Gunier RB, et al. Maternal and Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality Among Pregnant Women With and Without COVID-19 Infection: The INTERCOVID Multinational Cohort Study. JAMA Pediatr Aug 1 2021;175(8):817–26
- Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Coronavirus (COVID-19) infection in Pregnancy. Information for healthcare professionals. RCOG: London; 2022. Accessed 21st June, 2023. https://www.rcog.org.uk/media/ftzilsfj/2022-12-15-coronavirus-covid-19-infection-in-pregnancy-v16.pdf

Value of placental volume and vascular flow indices as predictors of intrauterine growth retardation. First-trimester prediction of birth weight. Antenatal blood pressure for prediction of pre-eclampsia, preterm birth, and small for gestational age babies. Body mass index at 11-13 weeks' gestation and pregnancy complications. Prediction of preeclampsia and delivery of small for gestational age babies based on a combination of clinical risk factors in high-risk women. Prediction of Small for Gestational Age Infants in Healthy Nulliparous Women Using Clinical and Ultrasound Risk Factors Combined with Early Pregnancy Biomarkers. External validation and clinical usefulness of first-trimester prediction models for small- and large-for-gestational-age infants. Predictive performance for placental dysfunction related stillbirth of the competing risks model for small-for-gestational-age fetuses. Antenatal dietary education and supplementation to increase energy and protein intake. Effects of Mediterranean Diet or Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction on Prevention of Small-for-Gestational Age Birth Weights in Newborns Born to At-Risk Pregnant Individuals. Omega-3 fatty acid addition during pregnancy. Multiple-micronutrient supplementation for women during pregnancy. Effect of high dose folic acid supplementation in pregnancy on pre-eclampsia. Calcium supplementation during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive disorders and related problems. Prepregnancy and early pregnancy calcium supplementation among women at high risk of pre-eclampsia. Magnesium supplementation in pregnancy. Vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy. Vitamin D during pregnancy and maternal, neonatal.

Analysis of interventions for maternal and infant health outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials on vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy, incident preeclampsia, psychosocial interventions for smoking cessation in pregnancy, maternal nutrient supplementation for impaired fetal growth, antiplatelet agents for preventing pre-eclampsia, prevention of preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction with aspirin, aspirin for the prevention of preterm and term preeclampsia, antiplatelet therapy for preventing preeclampsia, the role of aspirin dose in preventing preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction, time-dependent effects of low-dose aspirin on blood pressure in pregnant women, aspirin discontinuation in pregnancies at high risk of preterm preeclampsia, aspirin use during pregnancy and the risk of bleeding complications, antithrombotic therapy for improving maternal or infant health outcomes in women at risk of placental dysfunction, LMWH in prevention of preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction, enoxaparin and aspirin compared with aspirin alone to prevent placenta-mediated pregnancy complications, enoxaparin for prevention of preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction in women with a history, and heparin in pregnant women with previous placenta-mediated pregnancy complications.

Van Pampus MG, de Vries J. Does low-molecular-weight heparin influence fetal growth or uterine and umbilical arterial Doppler in women with a history of early-onset uteroplacental insufficiency and an inheritable thrombophilia? Secondary randomised controlled trial results. Rodger MA, Gris JC, de Vries JIP, et al. Low-molecular-weight heparin and recurrent placenta-mediated pregnancy complications: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from randomised controlled trials. Meher S, Duley L. Progesterone for preventing pre-eclampsia and its complications. Norman JE, Marlow N, Messow CM, et al. Vaginal progesterone prophylaxis for preterm birth (the OPPTIMUM study): a multicentre, randomised, double-blind trial. Hassan SS, Romero R, Vidyadhari D, et al. for the PREGNANT Trial. Vaginal progesterone reduces the rate of preterm birth in women with a sonographic short cervix: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Guillotin V, Bouhet A, Barnetche T, et al. Hydroxychloroquine for the prevention of fetal growth restriction and prematurity in lupus pregnancy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Mekinian A, Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Masseau A, et al., on the behalf of the SNFMI and the European Forum of APS Chronic histiocytic intervillositis: outcome, associated diseases and treatment in a multicenter prospective study. Vardi L, Paterson H, Hung NA. Successful pregnancy following treatment of recurrent chronic histiocytic intervillositis. Abalos E, Duley L, Steyn DW, Gialdini C. Antihypertensive drug therapy for mild to moderate hypertension during pregnancy. Katsi V, Papakonstantinou IP, Papazachou O, Makris T, Tsioufis K. Beta-Blockers in Pregnancy: Clinical Update. Bais JM, Eskes M, Pel M, Bonsel GJ, Bleker OP. Effectiveness of detection of intrauterine growth retardation by abdominal palpation as a screening test in a low-risk population: an observational study. Kean L, Liu D. Antenatal care as a screening tool for the detection of small for gestational age babies in the low-risk population. Hall MH, Chng PK, MacGillivray I. Is routine antenatal care worthwhile? Rosenberg K, Grant JM, Hepburn M. Antenatal detection of growth retardation: actual practice in a large maternity hospital. Magee LA, Ornstein MP, von Dadelszen P. Fortnightly review: management of hypertension in pregnancy. Robert Peter J, Ho JJ, Valliapan J, Sivasangari S. Symphysial fundal height (SFH) measurement in pregnancy for detecting abnormal fetal growth. Pay ASD, Frøen JF, Staff AC, Jacobsson B, Gjessing HK. Symphysis-fundus measurement - the predictive value of a new reference curve. Morse K, Williams A, Gardosi J. Fetal growth screening by fundal height measurement. Bailey SM, Sarmandal P, Grant JM. A comparison of three methods of assessing inter-observer variation applied to measurement of the symphysis-fundal height. Gardosi J, Francis A. Controlled trial of fundal height measurement plotted on customised antenatal growth charts. Papageorghiou AT, Ohuma EO, Gravett MG, et al., International Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century (INTERGROWTH-21st). International standards for symphysis-fundal height based on serial measurements from the Fetal Growth Longitudinal Study of the INTERGROWTH-21st Project: prospective cohort study in eight countries.

2. 
182. Papageorghiou AT, Ohuma EO, Altman DG, et al., International Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century (INTERGROWTH- 21st). International standards for fetal growth based on serial ultrasound measurements: the Fetal Growth Longitudinal Study of the INTERGROWTH- 21st Project. Lancet Sep 06 2014;384(9946):869–79.
183. Bricker L, Medley N, Pratt JJ. Routine ultrasound in late pregnancy (after 24 weeks' gestation). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Jun 29 2015;(6):CD001451.
184. GC S, AA M, D W et al. Universal late pregnancy ultrasound screening to predict adverse outcomes in nulliparous women: a systematic review and cost-effectiveness analysis.
185. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Antenatal care Routine Third Trimester ultrasound for fetal growth. NICE Guideline [NG201]. London: NICE; 2021.
186. Wanyonyi SZ, Orwa J, Ozelle H, et al. Routine third-trimester ultrasound for the detection of small-for-gestational age in low-risk pregnancies (ROTTUS study): randomized controlled trial.
187. Sovio U, White IR, Dacey A, Pasupathy D, Smith GCS. Screening for fetal growth restriction with universal third trimester ultrasonography in nulliparous women in the Pregnancy Outcome Prediction (POP) study: a prospective cohort study.
188. Aderoba AK, Ioannou C, Kurinczuk JJ, Quigley MA, Cavallaro A, Impey L. The impact of a universal late third-trimester scan for fetal growth restriction on perinatal outcomes in term singleton births: A prospective cohort study.
189. Bonnevier A, Maršál K, Källén K. Detection and clinical outcome of small-for-gestational-age fetuses in the third trimester- A comparison between routine ultrasound examination and examination on indication.
190. Caradeux J, Martinez-Portilla RJ, Peguero A, Sotiriadis A, Figueras F. Diagnostic performance of third-trimester ultrasound for the prediction of late-onset fetal growth restriction: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
191. Monier I, Blondel B, Ego A, Kaminiski M, Goffinet F, Zeitlin J. Poor effectiveness of antenatal detection of fetal growth restriction and consequences for obstetric management and neonatal outcomes: a French national study.
192. The British Medical Ultrasound Society. Professional guidance for fetal growth scans performed after 23 weeks of gestation.
193. Society of Radiographers and the British Society for Medical Ultrasound. Guidelines for Professional Ultrasound Practice.
194. Fadigas C, Saiid Y, Gonzalez R, Poon LC, Nicolaides KH. Prediction of small-for-gestational-age neonates: screening by fetal biometry at 35-37 weeks.
195. Southam M, Williams M, Malik A, Gardosi J. Effect of serial scan frequency on detection of fetal growth restriction.
196. Mongelli M, Ek S, Tambyrajia R. Screening for fetal growth restriction: a mathematical model of the effect of time interval and ultrasound error.
197. Roberts R, Sibai B, Blackwell S, Chauhan S. Timing of serial ultrasound in risk pregnancies: a randomized controlled trial (SUN trial).
198. Chang TC, Robson SC, Boys RJ, Spencer JA. Prediction of the small for gestational age infant: which ultrasonic measurement is best?
199. Chauhan SP, Magann EF. Screening for fetal growth restriction.
200. Blue NR, Yordan JMP, Holbrook BD, Nirgudkar PA, Mozurkewich EL. Abdominal Circumference Alone versus Estimated Fetal Weight after 24 Weeks to Predict Small or Large for Gestational Age at Birth: A Meta-Analysis.

10. 1055/s-  0037-  1604059
 201. Pearce JM, Campbell S. A comparison of symphysis-  fundal height 
and ultrasound as screening tests for light-  for- gestational age in -
fants. Br J Obstet Gynaecol Feb 1987;94(2):100–4. 
202. Hammami A, Mazer Zumaeta A, Syngelaki A, Akolekar R, 
Nicolaides KH. Ultrasonographic estimation of fetal weight: devel -
opment of new model and assessment of performance of previous 
models. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 07 2018;52(1):35–43. 
203. Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Sharman RS, Deter RL, Park SK. 
Estimation of fetal weight with the use of head, body, and femur 
measurements—a prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Feb 
01 1985;151(3):333–7. 
204. Stirnemann J, Villar J, Salomon LJ, et al. for the International 
Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21st Century 
(INTERGROWTH-  21st). International estimated fetal weight stan -
dards of the INTERGROWTH-  21. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Apr 
2017;49(4):478–86. 
205. Sovio U, Smith GCS. Comparison of estimated fetal weight cen -
tiles near term for predicting extremes of birthweight centile. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 03 2021;224(3):292.e1-292.e19. 
206. Chitty LS, Altman DG, Henderson A, Campbell S. Charts of fetal 
size: 2. Head measurements Br J Obstet Gynaecol Jan 1994;101(1):35–
43. 
207. Salomon LJ, Alfirevic Z, Da Silva Costa F, et  al. ISUOG Practice 
Guidelines: ultrasound assessment of fetal biometry and growth. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jun 2019;53(6):715–23. 
208. Dudley NJ, Varley H. Caveats in the monitoring of fetal growth using 
ultrasound estimated fetal weight. Ultrasound Feb 2021;29(1):10–7. 
209. Sarris I, Ioannou C, Dighe M, et al., for the International 
Fetal and Newborn Growth Consortium for the 21 Century 
(INTERGROWTH-  21st) Standardization of fetal ultrasound bi -
ometry measurements: improving the quality and consistency of 
measurements. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Dec 2011;38(6):681–7. 
210. Dudley NJ. A systematic review of the ultrasound estimation of fetal 
weight. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jan 2005;25(1):80–9. 
211. Zdanowicz JA, Huber C, Gerull R, Mueller M, Raio L, Surbek D. 
Impact of Fetal Weight Estimation on the Prediction of Neonatal 
Morbidity and Mortality at the Limit of Viability. Fetal Diagn Ther. 
2017;42(1):63–70. 
212. Ambroise Grandjean G, Le Gall L, Bourguignon L, Collin A, Hossu 
G, Morel O. Is accuracy of estimated fetal weight improved by better 
image quality scores? Int J Gynaecol Obstet Apr 2023;161(1):289–97. 
213. Salomon LJ, Bernard JP, Duyme M, Doris B, Mas N, Ville Y. 
Feasibility and reproducibility of an image-  scoring method for 
quality control of fetal biometry in the second trimester. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol Jan 2006;27(1):34–40. 
214. Kiserud T, Benachi A, Hecher K, et al. The World Health 
Organization fetal growth charts: concept, findings, interpretation, 
and application. Am J Obstet Gynecol Feb 2018;218(2S):S619-S629. 
215. Buck Louis GM, Grewal J, Albert PS, et al. Racial/ethnic standards for 
fetal growth: the NICHD Fetal Growth Studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
Oct 2015;213(4):449.e1-449.e41. 
216. Chiossi G, Pedroza C, Costantine MM,

MORRIS et al. 220. Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Martinez-Poyer J. In utero analysis of fetal growth: a sonographic weight standard. Radiology Oct 1991;181(1):129-33. 221. Hugh O, Williams M, Turner S, Gardosi J. Reduction of stillbirths in England from 2008 to 2017 according to uptake of the Growth Assessment Protocol: 10-year population-based cohort study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 2021;57(3):401-8. 222. Sovio U, Smith GCS. The effect of customization and use of a fetal growth standard on the association between birthweight centile and adverse perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol Feb 2018;218(2S):S738-S744. 223. Hutcheon JA, Walker M, Platt RW. Assessing the value of customized birth weight centiles. Am J Epidemiol. Feb 15 2011;173(4):459-67. 224. Hutcheon J. Do customized birth weight charts add anything but complexity to the assessment of fetal growth? J Obstet Gynaecol Can Feb 2014;36(2):107-9. 225. Vieira MC, Relph S, Copas A, et al. The DESiGN trial (DEtection of Small for Gestational age Neonate), evaluating the effect of the Growth Assessment Protocol (GAP): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials. Mar 04 2019;20(1):154. 226. Corcoran P, Leitao S, O'Donoghue K, Greene RA. Lessons to be learned from the DESIGN trial. Accessed 22nd June. 2023. 227. Butler E, Hugh O, Gardosi J. Evaluating the Growth Assessment Protocol for stillbirth prevention: progress and challenges. J Perinat Med Jul 26 2022;50(6):737-47. 228. Kiserud T, Piaggio G, Carroli G, et al. The World Health Organization Fetal Growth Charts: A Multinational Longitudinal Study of Ultrasound Biometric Measurements and Estimated Fetal Weight. PLoS Med Jan 2017;14(1):e1002220. 229. Nicolaides KH, Wright D, Syngelaki A, Wright A, Akolekar R. Fetal Medicine Foundation fetal and neonatal population weight charts. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jul 2018;52(1):44-51. 230. Francis A, Hugh O, Gardosi J. Customized vs INTERGROWTH-21. Am J Obstet Gynecol Feb 2018;218(2S):S692-S699. 231. Vieira MC, Relph S, Persson M, Seed PT, Pasupathy D. Determination of birth-weight centile thresholds associated with adverse perinatal outcomes using population, customised, and Intergrowth charts: A Swedish population-based cohort study. PLoS Med Sep 2019;16(9):e1002902. 232. Ioannou C, Talbot K, Ohuma E, et al. Systematic review of methodology used in ultrasound studies aimed at creating charts of fetal size. BJOG Nov 2012;119(12):1425-39. 233. Schild RL. Three-dimensional volumetry and fetal weight measurement. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Nov 2007;30(6):799-803. 234. Tuuli MG, Kapalka K, Macones GA, Cahill AG. Three-Versus Two-Dimensional Sonographic Biometry for Predicting Birth Weight and Macrosomia in Diabetic Pregnancies. J Ultrasound Med Sep 2016;35(9):1925-30. 235. Mohsen LA, Amin MF. 3D and 2D ultrasound-based fetal weight estimation: a single center experience. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med Apr 2017;30(7):818-25. 236. Steller JG, Gumina D, Driver C, et al. 3D Fractional Limb Volume Identifies Reduced Subcutaneous and Lean Mass in Fetal Growth Restriction. J Ultrasound Med Jul 2022;41(7):1623-32. 237. Lee W, Deter R, Sangi-Haghpeykar H, Yeo L, Romero R. Prospective validation of fetal weight estimation using fractional limb volume. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Feb 2013;41(2):198-203. 238. Kadji C, Cann

- Prefumo F, Sebire NJ, Thilaganathan B. Decreased endovascular trophoblast invasion in first trimester pregnancies with high-resistance uterine artery Doppler indices. Hum Reprod Jan 2004;19(1):206–9.
- Triunfo S, Crovetto F, Rodriguez-Sureda V, et al. Changes in uterine artery Doppler velocimetry and circulating angiogenic factors in the first half of pregnancies delivering a small-for-gestational-age neonate. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 2017;49(3):357–63.
- Cnossen JS, Morris RK, ter Riet G, et al. Use of uterine artery Doppler ultrasonography to predict pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction: a systematic review and bivariable meta-analysis. CMAJ. Mar 11 2008;178(6):701–11.
- García B, Llurba E, Valle L, et al. Do knowledge of uterine artery resistance in the second trimester and targeted surveillance improve maternal and perinatal outcome? UTOPIA study: a randomized controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jun 2016;47(6):680–9.
- Parry S, Sciscione A, Haas DM, et al. Role of early second-trimester uterine artery Doppler screening to predict small-for-gestational-age babies in nulliparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 11 2017;217(5):594.e1-594.e10.
- Familiari A, Bhide A, Morlando M, Scala C, Khalil A, Thilaganathan B. Mid-pregnancy fetal biometry, uterine artery Doppler indices and maternal demographic characteristics: role in prediction of small-for-gestational-age birth.
- Poon LC, Lesmes C, Gallo DM, Akolekar R, Nicolaides KH. Prediction of small-for-gestational-age neonates: screening by biophysical and biochemical markers at 19-24 weeks.
- Roeder HA, Dejbakhsh SZ, Parast MM, Laurent LC, Woelkers DA. Abnormal uterine artery Doppler velocimetry predicts adverse outcomes in patients with abnormal analytes.
- Li N, Ghosh G, Gudmundsson S. Uterine artery Doppler in high-risk pregnancies at 23-24 gestational weeks is of value in predicting adverse outcome of pregnancy and selecting cases for more intense surveillance.
- Casagrandi D, Sivanandan L, Das R, et al. Prediction of small for gestational age using uterine artery Doppler as part of a multiparameter pragmatic approach in the second trimester.
- Ghi T, Contro E, Youssef A, et al. Persistence of increased uterine artery resistance in the third trimester and pregnancy outcome.
- Groom KM, North RA, Stone PR, et al. SCOPE Consortium Patterns of change in uterine artery Doppler studies between 20 and 24 weeks of gestation and pregnancy outcomes.
- Ventura W, De Paco Matallana C, Prieto-Sanchez MT, et al. Uterine and umbilical artery Doppler at 28 weeks for predicting adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with abnormal uterine artery Doppler findings in the early second trimester.
- Contro E, Maroni E, Cera E, et al. Unilaterally increased uterine artery resistance, placental location and pregnancy outcome.
- Bhide A, Acharya G, Bilardo CM, et al. ISUOG practice guidelines: use of Doppler ultrasonography in obstetrics.
- Papageorghiou AT, Yu CK, Bindra R, Pandis G, Nicolaides KH. Multicenter screening for pre-eclampsia and fetal growth restriction by transvaginal uterine artery Doppler at 23 weeks of gestation.
- Valiño N, Giunta G, Gallo DM, Akolekar R, Nicolaides KH. Uterine artery pulsatility index at 30-34 weeks' gestation in the prediction of adverse perinatal outcome.
- Martinez-Portilla RJ, Caradeux J, Meler E, Lip-Sosa DL, Sotiriadis A, Figueras F. Third-trimester uterine artery Doppler for prediction of adverse outcome in late small-for-gestational-age fetuses: systematic review and meta-analysis.
- Chang TC, Robson SC, Spencer JA, Gallivan S. Identification of fetal growth retardation: comparison of Doppler waveform indices and serial ultrasound measurements of abdominal circumference

260. Chang TC, Robson SC, Spencer JA, Gallivan S. Prediction of perinatal morbidity at term in small fetuses: comparison of fetal growth and Doppler ultrasound.
261. Owen P, Donnet ML, Ogston SA, Christie AD, Howie PW, Patel NB. Standards for ultrasound fetal growth velocity.
262. Larsen T, Petersen S, Greisen G, Larsen JF. Normal fetal growth evaluated by longitudinal ultrasound examinations.
263. Royston P. Calculation of unconditional and conditional reference intervals for fetal size and growth from longitudinal measurements.
264. Hugh O, Gardosi J. Fetal weight projection model to define growth velocity and validation against pregnancy outcome in a cohort of serially scanned pregnancies.
265. Perinatal Institute. Fetal growth rate calculator.
266. Jauniaux E, Ramsay B, Campbell S. Ultrasonographic investigation of placental morphologic characteristics and size during the second trimester of pregnancy.
267. Hafner E, Philipp T, Schuchter K, Dillinger-Paller B, Philipp K, Bauer P. Second-trimester measurements of placental volume by three-dimensional ultrasound to predict small-for-gestational-age infants.
268. Salafia CM, Misra DP, Yampolsky M, Charles AK, Miller RK. Allometric metabolic scaling and fetal and placental weight.
269. Wolf H, Oosting H, Treffers PE. Second-trimester placental volume measurement by ultrasound: prediction of fetal outcome.
270. Damodaram M, Story L, Eixarch E, et al. Placental MRI in intrauterine fetal growth restriction.
271. Wright E, Audette MC, Ye XY, et al. Maternal Vascular Malperfusion and Adverse Perinatal Outcomes in Low-Risk Nulliparous Women.
272. Toal M, Keating S, Machin G, et al. Determinants of adverse perinatal outcome in high-risk women with abnormal uterine artery Doppler images.
273. Higgins LE, Simcox L, Sibley CP, Heazell AE, Johnstone ED. Third trimester placental volume and biometry measurement: A method-development study.
274. Derwig IE, Akolekar R, Zelaya FO, Gowland PA, Barker GJ, Nicolaides KH. Association of placental volume measured by MRI and birth weight centile.
275. Aughwane R, Ingram E, Johnstone ED, Salomon LJ, David AL, Melbourne A. Placental MRI and its application to fetal intervention.
276. Heazell AE, Hayes DJ, Whitworth M, Takwoingi Y, Bayliss SE, Davenport C. Biochemical tests of placental function versus ultrasound assessment of fetal size for stillbirth and small-for-gestational-age infants.

Diagnostic accuracy of placental growth factor and ultrasound parameters to predict the small-for-gestational-age infant in women presenting with reduced symphysis-fundus height. Biophysical and biochemical markers at 30-34 weeks' gestation in the prediction of adverse perinatal outcome. Screening for fetal growth restriction using ultrasound and the sFLT1/PlGF ratio in nulliparous women. Prediction of small for gestational age neonates: screening by maternal factors, fetal biometry, and biomarkers at 35-37 weeks' gestation. Second-trimester contingent screening for small-for-gestational-age neonate. Accuracy of single ultrasound parameters in detection of fetal growth restriction. Fetal growth retardation: associated malformations and chromosomal abnormalities. Early asymmetric IUGR and aneuploidy. Chromosomal Microarray Analysis in Fetuses with Growth Restriction and Normal Karyotype: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Genomic Microarray in Fetuses with Early Growth Restriction: A Multicenter Study. Outcome of fetuses with short femur length detected at second-trimester anomaly scan: a national survey. Midtrimester isolated short femur and perinatal outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Prenatal and postnatal findings in small-for-gestational-age fetuses without structural ultrasound anomalies at 18-24 weeks. Association between congenital toxoplasmosis and preterm birth, low birthweight, and small for gestational age birth. Significance of maternal screening for toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus infection in cases of fetal growth restriction. Does malaria during pregnancy affect the newborn? Femur-sparing pattern of abnormal fetal growth in pregnant women from New York City after maternal Zika virus infection.

301. Groom KM, David AL. The role of aspirin, heparin, and other interventions in the prevention and treatment of fetal growth restriction.
302. Paauw ND, Terstappen F, Ganzevoort W, Joles JA, Gremmels H, Lely AT. Sildenafil During Pregnancy: A Preclinical Meta-Analysis on Fetal Growth and Maternal Blood Pressure.
303. von Dadelszen P, Dwinnell S, Magee LA, et al. for the Research into Advanced Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy (RAFT) Group. Sildenafil citrate therapy for severe early-onset intrauterine growth restriction.
304. Trapani A, Gonçalves LF, Trapani TF, Vieira S, Pires M, Pires MMS. Perinatal and Hemodynamic Evaluation of Sildenafil Citrate for Preeclampsia Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
305. Sharp A, Cornforth C, Jackson R, et al. Maternal sildenafil for severe fetal growth restriction (STRIDER): a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial.
306. Groom KM, McCowan LM, Mackay LK, et al. STRIDER NZAus: a multicentre randomised controlled trial of sildenafil therapy in early-onset fetal growth restriction.
307. Sharp A, Cornforth C, Jackson R, et al. Mortality in the UK STRIDER trial of sildenafil therapy for the treatment of severe early-onset fetal growth restriction.
308. Tanaka H, Kubo M, Nii M, Maki S, Umekawa T, Ikeda T. Treatment using tadalafil for severe pre-eclampsia with fetal growth restriction.
309. Kubo M, Tanaka H, Maki S, et al. Safety and dose-finding trial of tadalafil administered for fetal growth restriction: A phase-1 clinical study.
310. Mazarico E, Molinet-Coll C, Martinez-Portilla RJ, Figueras F. Heparin therapy in placental insufficiency: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
311. McCowan LM, Harding JE, Roberts AB, Barker SE, Ford C, Stewart AW. A pilot randomized controlled trial of two regimens of fetal surveillance for small-for-gestational-age fetuses with normal results of umbilical artery doppler velocimetry.
312. Morris RK, Malin G, Robson SC, Kleijnen J, Zamora J, Khan KS. Fetal umbilical artery Doppler to predict compromise of fetal/neonatal wellbeing in a high-risk population: systematic review and bivariate meta-analysis.
313. Magann EF, Isler CM, Chauhan SP, Martin JN. Amniotic fluid volume estimation and the biophysical profile: a confusion of criteria.
314. Nabhan AF, Abdelmoula YA. Amniotic fluid index versus single deepest vertical pocket as a screening test for preventing adverse pregnancy outcome.
315. Zhang J, Troendle J, Meikle S, Klebanoff MA, Rayburn WF. Isolated oligohydramnios is not associated with adverse perinatal outcomes.
316. Morris RK, Meller CH, Tamblyn J, et al. Association and prediction of amniotic fluid measurements for adverse pregnancy outcome: systematic review and meta-analysis.
317. Chauhan SP, Sanderson M, Hendrix NW, Magann EF, Devoe LD. Perinatal outcome and amniotic fluid index in the antepartum and intrapartum periods: A meta-analysis.
318. Boers KE, Vijgen SM, Bijlenga D, et al. Induction versus expectant monitoring for intrauterine growth restriction at term: randomised equivalence trial (DIGITAT).
319. van Wyk L, Boers KE, van der Post JA, et al. DIGITAT Study Group. Effects on (neuro)developmental and behavioral outcome at 2 years of age of induced labor compared with expectant management in intrauterine growth-restricted.

Infants: Long-term outcomes of the DIGITAT trial. Economic analysis comparing induction of labor and expectant management for intrauterine growth restriction at term. Planned early delivery versus expectant management of the term suspected compromised baby for improving outcomes. Intrauterine growth restriction at term: induction or spontaneous labor. Oligohydramnios in uncomplicated pregnancies beyond 40 completed weeks. Labor induction versus expectant management in low-risk nulliparous women. Perinatal death in a term fetal growth restriction randomized controlled trial. Management of late-onset fetal growth restriction: a pragmatic approach. Small-for-gestational-age babies after 37 weeks: impact study of risk-stratification protocol. 2-year neurodevelopmental and intermediate perinatal outcomes in infants with very preterm fetal growth restriction. Update on the diagnosis and classification of fetal growth restriction and proposal of a stage-based management protocol. A uniform management approach to optimize outcome in fetal growth restriction. Reference ranges for Doppler indices of umbilical and fetal middle cerebral arteries and cerebroplacental ratio. Clinical impact of Doppler reference charts on management of small-for-gestational-age fetuses: need for standardization. Monitoring of fetuses with intrauterine growth restriction: a longitudinal study. Relationship between monitoring parameters and perinatal outcome in severe, early intrauterine growth restriction. Relation of fetal blood gases and data from computer-assisted analysis of fetal heart rate patterns in small for gestation fetuses. Perinatal morbidity and mortality in early-onset fetal growth restriction: cohort outcomes of the trial of randomized umbilical and fetal flow in Europe. Infant wellbeing at 2 years of age in the Growth Restriction Intervention Trial: multicentered randomized controlled trial. Comparative analysis of 2-year outcomes in GRIT and TRUFFLE trials. The association of neonatal morbidity with long-term neurological outcome in infants who were growth restricted.

340. Ganzevoort W, Mensing Van Charante N, Thilaganathan B, et al. How to monitor pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restriction and delivery before 32 weeks: post-hoc analysis of TRUFFLE study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jun 2017;49(6):769-77.
341. Mactier H, Bates SE, Johnston T, et al. BAPM Working Group. Perinatal management of extreme preterm birth before 27 weeks of gestation: a framework for practice. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed May 2020;105(3):232-9.
342. Oros D, Figueras F, Cruz-Martinez R, Meler E, Munmany M, Gratacos E. Longitudinal changes in uterine, umbilical and fetal cerebral Doppler indices in late-onset small-for-gestational age fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Feb 2011;37(2):191-5.
343. Vergani P, Andreotti C, Roncaglia N, et al. Doppler predictors of adverse neonatal outcome in the growth restricted fetus at 34 weeks' gestation or beyond. Am J Obstet Gynecol Oct 2003;189(4):1007-11.
344. Akolekar R, Syngelaki A, Gallo DM, Poon LC, Nicolaides KH. Umbilical and fetal middle cerebral artery Doppler at 35-37 weeks' gestation in the prediction of adverse perinatal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Jul 2015;46(1):82-92.
345. Khalil AA, Morales-Rosello J, Morlando M, et al. Is fetal cerebroplacental ratio an independent predictor of intrapartum fetal compromise and neonatal unit admission? Am J Obstet Gynecol Jul 2015;213(1):54.e1-54.e10.
346. Morales-Rosello J, Khalil A, Morlando M, Hervas-Marin D, Perales-Marin A. Doppler reference values of the fetal vertebral and middle cerebral arteries, at 19-41 weeks gestation. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med Feb 2015;28(3):338-43.
347. DeVore GR. The importance of the cerebroplacental ratio in the evaluation of fetal well-being in SGA and AGA fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol Jul 2015;213(1):5-15.
348. Meher S, Hernandez-Andrade E, Basheer SN, Lees C. Impact of cerebral redistribution on neurodevelopmental outcome in small-for-gestational-age or growth-restricted babies: a systematic review. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Oct 2015;46(4):398-404.
349. Severi FM, Bocchi C, Visentin A, et al. Uterine and fetal cerebral Doppler predict the outcome of third-trimester small-for-gestational-age fetuses with normal umbilical artery Doppler. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol Mar 2002;19(3):225-8.
350. Ghosh GS, Gudmundsson S. Uterine and umbilical artery Doppler are comparable in predicting perinatal outcome of growth-restricted fetuses. BJOG Feb 2009;116(3):424-30.
351. Vergani P, Roncaglia N, Andreotti C, et al. Prognostic value of uterine artery Doppler velocimetry in growth-restricted fetuses delivered near term. Am J Obstet Gynecol Oct 2002;187(4):932-6.
352. Mylrea-Foley B, Thornton JG, Mullins E, et al. Perinatal and 2-year neurodevelopmental outcome in late preterm fetal compromise: the TRUFFLE 2 randomised trial protocol. BMJ Open. Apr 15 2022;12(4):e055543.
353. Thornton JG, Hornbuckle J, Vail A, Spiegelhalter DJ, Levene M, group Gs. Infant wellbeing at 2 years of age in the Growth Restriction Intervention Trial (GRIT): multicentred randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2004 Aug 7-13 2004;364(9433):513-20.
354. Bilardo CM, Hecher K, Visser GHA, et al. Severe fetal growth restriction at 26-32 weeks: key messages from the TRUFFLE study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 09 2017;50

NICE; 2015 (updated 2019). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng25
British Association of Perinatal Medicine. Antenatal Optimisation Toolkit. London: BAPM; 2020. https://www.bapm.org/pages/ 194-antenatal-optimisation-toolkit
Lasswell SM, Barfield WD, Rochat RW, Blackmon L. Perinatal regionalization for very low-birth-weight and very preterm infants: a meta-analysis. JAMA Sep 01 2010;304(9):992–1000. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2010.1226
Lees C. Protocol 02PRT/34 Trial of umbilical and fetal flow in Europe (TRUFFLE): a multicentre randomised study. https://www.thelancet.com/protocol-reviews/02PRT-34
Nicolaides KH, Economides DL, Soothill PW. Blood gases, pH, and lactate in appropriate-and small-for-gestational-age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol Oct 1989;161(4):996–1001. https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9378(89)90770-9
Robson SC, Crawford RA, Spencer JA, Lee A. Intrapartum amniotic fluid index and its relationship to fetal distress. Am J Obstet Gynecol Jan 1992;166(1 Pt 1):78–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9378(92)91833-v
GRIT Study Group. A randomised trial of timed delivery for the compromised preterm fetus: short term outcomes and Bayesian interpretation. BJOG Jan 2003;110(1):27–32. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-0528.2003.02014.x
Lin CC, Moawad AH, Rosenow PJ, River P. Acid-base characteristics of fetuses with intrauterine growth retardation during labor and delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol Jul 01 1980;137(5):553–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9378(80)90695-x
Burke G, Stuart B, Crowley P, Scanaill SN, Drumm J. Is intrauterine growth retardation with normal umbilical artery blood flow a benign condition? BMJ. Apr 21 1990;300(6731):1044–5. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.300.6731.1044
Baschat AA, Weiner CP. Umbilical artery doppler screening for detection of the small fetus in need of antepartum surveillance. Am J Obstet Gynecol Jan 2000;182(1 Pt 1):154–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9378(00)70505-9
Karsdorp VH, van Vugt JM, van Geijn HP, et al. Clinical significance of absent or reversed end diastolic velocity waveforms in umbilical artery. Lancet Dec 17 1994;344(8938):1664–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(94)90457-x
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Inducing Labour. NICE Guideline [NG207]. London: NICE; 2021 https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng207
Di Mascio D, Villalain C, Rizzo G, et al. Maternal and neonatal outcomes of pregnancies complicated by late fetal growth restriction undergoing induction of labor with dinoprostone compared with cervical balloon: A retrospective, international study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Jul 2021;100(7):1313–21. https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.14135
Villalain C, Herraiz I, Quezada MS, et al. Labor Induction in Late-Onset Fetal Growth Restriction: Foley Balloon versus Vaginal Dinoprostone. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2019;46(1):67–74. https://doi.org/10.1159/000491784
Al-Hafez L, Bicocca MJ, Chauhan SP, Berghella V. Prostaglandins for induction in pregnancies with fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM Mar 2022;4(2):100538. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajogmf.2021

A body of evidence including studies rated as 1+, directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results. 
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+