Care of late intrauterine fetal death and stillbirth
Key recommendations:
- A combination of mifepristone and a prostaglandin preparation should usually be recommended as the first-line intervention for induction of labor.
- Staff should be educated in discussing mode of birth with bereaved parents.
- A detailed informed discussion should be undertaken with parents of both physical and psychological aspects of a vaginal birth versus a caesarean birth.
- Clinical and laboratory tests should be recommended to assess maternal well-being and determine the cause of fetal death.
- Parents should be advised that with full investigation, a possible or probable cause can be found in up to three-quarters of late intrauterine fetal deaths.
- All parents should be offered cytogenetic testing of their baby.
- Parents should be advised that postmortem examination can provide information crucial to the management of future pregnancy.
Purpose and Scope:
- To identify evidence-based options for parents and their families who have a late intrauterine fetal death after 24+0 completed weeks of pregnancy.
- To incorporate information on general care before, during, and after birth, and care in future pregnancies.
Diagnosis:
- Ultrasonography is essential for the accurate diagnosis of late IUFD and should be available at all times.
- A second opinion should be obtained for the diagnosis.
- Auscultation and cardiotocography should not be used to diagnose late IUFD.
- Women should be prepared for the possibility of passive fetal movement.
- Auscultation of the fetal heart by Pinard stethoscope or Doppler ultrasound is not sufficiently accurate for diagnosis of late IUFD.
- Real-time ultrasound allows direct visualization of the fetal heart.
Communication of Diagnosis:
- An immediate offer should be made to call the partner, family, or friends of an unaccompanied woman.
- Clear language with no euphemisms or jargon should be used.
- The woman and her family should be given time to absorb any news, and the clinician should answer any questions they are capable of within their scope of practice.
- Discussions should aim to support maternal/parental choice.
- The woman and her family should be given written information to supplement discussions, which should include information about ongoing care and the contact details of a named healthcare professional.

RCOG patient information When your baby dies before birth and to consider alternative formats where this would help communication and understanding. Sands has led the development of the NBCP project, in collaboration with other charities and with the support of the Department of Health and Social Care and the All Party Parliamentary Group on Baby Loss. The project has aimed to ensure bereaved parents are offered equal, high quality, individualised, safe and sensitive care in any experience of pregnancy or baby loss. They have developed a care pathway and good practice recommendations for optimal care of bereaved parents after an IUFD, including at the time of diagnosis.

Care following diagnosis:
- The woman and her family should be given as much privacy and time alone as they wish.
- Staff should support women and their family to express any concerns.
- Details of the birth plan should be discussed, including mode of birth, pain relief, timings, and memory-making opportunities. If an interpreter is required, a professional interpreter should always be offered, rather than using friends and family.
- All staff caring for a woman and her family during labour and birth should be made aware of the baby's death.
- Staff should be sensitive to sounds that may be upsetting for bereaved parents and their family to hear and, where safely possible, cared for away from the labour ward environment.
- Continuity of caregiver should be ensured where possible.
- Parents need a dedicated space for privacy, but do not want to perceive that they have been abandoned.

Labour and Birth:
- The mode of birth should be an informed decision between the parents and an appropriately experienced obstetrician.
- A detailed informed discussion should be undertaken with parents of both physical and psychological aspects of a vaginal birth versus a caesarean birth.
- Late IUFD is not a contraindication to pool birth in suitable circumstances.
- Recommendations about labour and birth should consider the woman's choices, as well as her medical condition and previous intrapartum history.
- Women who are severely unwell or at high risk of deterioration should be strongly advised to take immediate steps towards birth.
- Women who are physically well with intact membranes and no laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation should be advised about the risks of delaying labor.
- If the woman returns home before labor, they should be given a 24-hour contact number for information and support.
- Women contemplating prolonged expectant management should be advised about the diagnostic value of postmortem and the appearance of the baby.
- Options for birth after diagnosis of late IUFD include spontaneous vaginal birth, immediate induction, delayed induction, caesarean birth, or expectant management.

How should labor be induced for a woman with an unscarred uterus:
- A combination of mifepristone and a prostaglandin preparation should usually be recommended as the first-line intervention for induction of labor.
- Misoprostol can be used in preference to prostaglandin E2 because of equivalent safety and efficacy with lower cost but at doses lower than those currently marketed in the UK.
- Women should be advised that vaginal misoprostol is as effective as oral therapy but associated with fewer adverse effects.
- A single 200 milligram dose of mifepristone is appropriate for this indication, followed by specific dosages of misoprostol based on gestational age.

Summary:
Low doses of misoprostol for induction of labor following late IUFD may be associated with longer induction-to-birth intervals and lower overall effectiveness. FIGO recommends a single 200 mg dose of mifepristone followed by varying doses of misoprostol based on gestational age. NICE states there is no robust evidence for optimum misoprostol dosage. Misoprostol use is off-label in the UK, with varying dosing methods available. Local protocols should be followed for maximum doses. Misoprostol has been shown to be effective for induction of labor in women with a history of lower segment caesarean birth, but evidence is limited for specific regimens beyond 27+6 weeks of gestation. Overall, evidence on methods of induction for women with prior caesarean birth is inadequate. Women with more than two caesarean births or atypical scars should be advised on the unknown safety of induction of labor. Studies are underpowered to detect differences in outcomes for many induction methods.

GREEN-  TOP GUIDELINE NO. 55
5.3.3  | Uterine rupture
Fetal heart rate anomaly, maternal tachycardia, atypical pain, vaginal bleeding, high head on examination, shoulder tip pain, hae -
maturia on catheter specimen, and maternal collapse are clinical features of uterine rupture. Cervical ripening with a transcervical Foley catheter after 28 weeks of gestation with a previous caesarean can be helpful. 
5.4 | Suitable facilities for labour
Women should be cared for in an environment that provides appropriate facilities for obstetric emergency care according to their individual circumstances. Maternity units should aim to develop a special labour ward room for women with late IUFD that pays special heed to emotional and practical needs without compromising safety. Care in labour should be given by an experienced midwife with accessible experienced obstetrician. 
5.5 | Intrapartum antimicrobial therapy
Women with sepsis should be treated with intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Routine antibiotic prophylaxis should not be used for late IUFD. Intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis for women colonised with group B streptococcus is not indicated. 
5.6 | Special recommendations for pain relief in labour
All usual modalities of intrapartum pain relief should be made available to women with late IUFD. Regional analgesia, patient-controlled analgesia, and water birth can be considered. 
6 | Puerperium
Women should receive care in an environment that provides safety according to individual clinical circumstance while meeting their needs to grieve and feel supported. Lactation, milk donation, milk suppression, ongoing physical symptoms, contraception, and continuity of care with a specialist/bereavement midwife should be discussed before discharge. 
6.2 | Suppression of lactation
Pharmacological measures are recommended for lactation suppression, with dopamine agonists being well-tolerated. Careful consideration should be undertaken when using dopamine agonists in women with hypertension or pre-eclampsia. 
6.3 | Thromboprophylaxis
Women with late IUFD should be routinely assessed for thromboprophylaxis, as it is an independent risk factor for venous thromboembolism. Heparin thromboprophylaxis should be discussed with a haematologist if the woman has DIC. 
6.4 | Notification of late IUFD
All key staff responsible for the care of the woman should be informed of the event, and existing antenatal appointments should be cancelled. Primary care healthcare professionals should also be informed of the woman's location post-discharge. 
7 | Investigations of the cause of late IUFD
Detailed history taking is essential for investigating the cause of late IUFD.

A vital first step in investigating the cause of late IUFD is to assess maternal wellbeing and determine the cause of fetal death. Full investigations, including postmortem and placental histology, can provide a possible or probable cause in up to three-quarters of cases. Healthcare professionals should be aware that abnormal test results may not always be related to late IUFD. Systems that consider fetal birthweight centile and multiple contributing factors can help categorize late IUFDs. All women with late IUFD should be offered a postmortem, genetic testing, and placental pathology. Women who are RhD negative should be offered a Kleihauer test to detect fetal-maternal hemorrhage. Fetal blood group can be determined by cell-free fetal DNA testing. Parents should be informed about the potential difficulty in determining fetal sex, and rapid genetic testing can be offered if needed. All women should be offered cytogenetic testing of their baby to identify anomalies. Placental biopsies should be taken from the fetal surface close to the cord insertion. Parents should be offered a full postmortem examination to explain the cause of late IUFD.

Parents should be advised that postmortem examination can provide crucial information for future pregnancy management. Consent for invasive procedures should be given, and cord, membranes, and placenta examination is recommended. Parents who decline full postmortem may be offered a limited examination. Non-invasive and minimally invasive postmortem methods should be offered, and imaging techniques like ultrasound and MRI can be used as substitutes. Placental pathology should be offered even if a full postmortem is declined. Healthcare professionals should be aware of individual and cultural approaches to death and offer appropriate counselling to all family members. Late IUFD can have devastating psychological, physical, and social costs, with ongoing effects on relationships and subsequent children. Parents should be advised about support groups and offered information on what happens during the postmortem procedure. Grief responses can evolve into PTSD, and partners and other family members are also at risk of severe psychological reactions. Counseling and interventions can aid in psychological recovery after late IUFD.

- Explain death to siblings and how to help them mourn
- Support groups like Sands are available for partners
- Bereavement support officers improve care for those who have experienced perinatal loss
- Specialized counseling services are available for individuals or couples who experience trauma or loss during pregnancy or birth
- Offer parents the opportunity to spend time with and make memories with their baby
- Offer parents the chance to see their baby more than once
- Offer artefacts of remembrance to parents
- Offer facilities for producing photographs, palm and footprints, and locks of hair with presentation frames
- Offer parents the option of leaving toys, pictures, and messages in the coffin
- Discuss funeral options including burial and cremation with parents, taking into account religious and cultural considerations
- Healthcare professionals should be offered training and support when caring for parents who experience a late IUFD
- Consider the wishes of the woman and those she wishes to be involved when arranging follow-up
- Inform parents about the review process for their baby's death before they leave the hospital
- Engage bereaved parents in the review process
- Provide a plain English summary of the review process findings to parents at the follow-up meeting

It is recognised that some parents find it very distressing to return to the unit where their baby was stillborn. The option of home visits or virtual appointments should be offered to parents. The timing of the appointment can vary, and the outcome of the review process should be communicated to parents.

Parents should be advised about the cause of late IUFD, chance of recurrence, and any specific means of preventing further loss. They should also be offered general pre-pregnancy advice, including support for smoking cessation and healthy weight management. The meeting should be documented for the parents in a letter that includes an agreed outline plan for future pregnancy.

For subsequent antenatal care following late IUFD, parents with a previous unexplained IUFD should be recommended to have obstetrician-led antenatal care with continuity of healthcare professional. The single most important risk factor for recurrent late IUFD is the history of previous late IUFD. Women in subsequent pregnancies after late IUFD should be offered fetal biometry and amniotic fluid measurement with additional Doppler flow velocimetry. Women with a previous unexplained late IUFD and/or signs of glucose dysmetabolism should be recommended to have screening for GDM.

Women and families who have experienced prior late IUFD may need emotional support and should be provided with support during pregnancy. Women in subsequent pregnancies after late IUFD should be offered induction of labour or birth by 39+0 weeks of gestation. Future reproductive choices and management decisions made in subsequent pregnancies can be altered after a late IUFD occurs. It is important to provide emotional support and care for parents and families who have experienced prior late IUFD.

Low-dose aspirin may reduce the risk of perinatal death in women at risk for placental insufficiency, particularly those with a history of stillbirth. Studies have shown that prophylactic use of low-dose aspirin during pregnancy can decrease the likelihood of developing pre-eclampsia, fetal growth restriction, and fetal or neonatal death. The ASPRE trial reported a possible lower rate of stillbirth and neonatal death among high-risk participants receiving low-dose aspirin. Compliance with low-dose aspirin is essential for its effectiveness. The Saving Babies Lives Care Bundle recommends considering aspirin for women at risk of late intrauterine fetal death starting from 12 weeks of gestation.

Practice in psychosocial care of mothers after stillbirth: a cohort study. All bereaved parents are entitled to good care after stillbirth: a mixed-methods multicentre study. RCOG patient information leaflet when your baby dies before birth. National bereavement care pathway. Parental behavior after perinatal death: twelve years of observations. The management of late fetal death: a guide to comprehensive care. Improved management of stillbirth using a care pathway. Impact of fetal maceration grade on risk of maternal disseminated intravascular coagulation after intrauterine fetal death. Relevance of plasma fibrinogen estimation in obstetric complications. Psychological complications after stillbirth – influence of memories and immediate management. Medical management of late intrauterine death using a combination of mifepristone and misoprostol. Considering a caesarean patient information leaflet. Long-term risks and benefits associated with caesarean delivery for mother, baby, and subsequent pregnancies. A comparison of women's memories of care during pregnancy, labour and delivery after stillbirth or live birth. Intrauterine fetal death and risk of shoulder dystocia at delivery. Maternal complications associated with stillbirth delivery: a cross-sectional analysis. Severe maternal morbidity among stillbirth and live birth deliveries in California. The use of the birthing pool after a diagnosis of stillbirth. Misoprostol for termination of pregnancy with intrauterine fetal demise in the second and third trimester of pregnancy. Comparison of mifepristone combination with misoprostol and misoprostol alone in the management of intrauterine death. Mifepristone and misoprostol compared with misoprostol alone for induction of labor in intrauterine fetal death: a randomized trial. Induction of labor using misoprostol with or without mifepristone in intrauterine death. Labour induction with prostaglandins: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Interruption of nonviable pregnancies of 24-28 weeks’ gestation using medical methods. A comparative study of vaginal misoprostol and intravenous oxytocin for induction of labour in women with intrauterine fetal death. Induction of labour in nulliparous and multiparous women: a UK, multicentre, open-label study of intravaginal misoprostol in comparison with dinoprostone. Misoprostol versus cervagem for the induction of labour to terminate pregnancy in the second and third trimester. Birth after previous caesarean birth. Route of delivery in women with stillbirth. Guidelines for vaginal birth after previous caesarean birth. Cervical ripening and transcervical Foley catheter and the risk of uterine rupture. "I'll never forget those cold words as long as I live": parent perceptions of death notification for stillbirth. Women's views about the importance of education in preparation for childbirth. Chlamydiosis in pregnancy. Overwhelming maternal sepsis due to a gas-forming Escherichia coli chorioamnionitis. A case of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) in a cow with endometritis and fetal death. Obstetric and psychological characteristics of women choosing epidural analgesia during labour. A comparison of intramuscular diamorphine and intramuscular pethidine for labour analgesia. Parenteral opioids for maternal pain management in labour. Neuraxial labor analgesia is not an independent predictor of perineal lacerations after vaginal delivery of patients with intrauterine fetal demise. Regional anaesthesia in patients at risk of bleeding. Clinical guideline contraception after pregnancy. The "Lactation after infant death (AID) framework": a guide for online health information provision about lactation after stillbirth and infant death. Parents' evaluation of support in Australian hospitals following stillbirth. Systematic review to understand and improve care after stillbirth: a review of parents' and healthcare professionals' experiences. Bereaved parents' experience of stillbirth in UK hospitals. Caring for families experiencing stillbirth: evidence-based guidance for maternity care providers. Treatment for lactation suppression: little progress in one hundred years. European Multicentre Study Group for Cabergoline in Lactation Inhibition. Postpartum intracranial hemorrhage in normotensive users of bromocriptine for lactation. The effect of chlorotrianisene as postpartum lactation suppression on blood coagulation factors. A retrospective drug use evaluation of cabergoline for lactation inhibition at a tertiary care teaching hospital.

Risk Manag. 2016;12:155–60.
 84. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Bromocriptine: monitor blood pressure when prescribing bromocriptine for prevention or inhibition of post-partum physiological lactation. London: MHRA; 2024.
 86. Rybstein MD. Risk factors for and clinical management of venous thromboembolism during pregnancy. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2019;17:396–404.
 87. Sultan AA, Tata LJ, West J, Fiaschi L, Fleming KM, Nelson-Piercy C, et al. Risk factors for first venous thromboembolism around pregnancy: a population-based cohort study from the United Kingdom. Blood. 2013;12119:3953–61.
 88. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. RCOG green-top guideline No. 37a. reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism during pregnancy & puerperium. London: RCOG; 2015.

139. Diagnostic accuracy of post-mortem ultrasound (PMUS): a systematic review
140. Routine perinatal and pediatric post-mortem radiography: detection rates and implications for practice
141. Feasibility of INTACT (INcisionless TArgeted Core Tissue) biopsy procedure for perinatal autopsy
142. Acceptance, reliability, and confidence of diagnosis of fetal and neonatal virtuopsy compared with conventional autopsy: a prospective study
143. Relationships between bile acid levels and fetal complication rates in intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
144. Autopsy findings in cases of fetomaternal hemorrhages
145. Fetal death from chlamydial infection across intact amniotic membranes
146. Adverse fetal outcome in specific IgM positive Chlamydia trachomatis infection in pregnancy
147. Cervicovaginal infections during pregnancy: epidemiological and microbiological aspects
148. Maternal and fetal inflammatory responses in unexplained fetal death
149. Impaired glucose tolerance during pregnancy is associated with increased fetal mortality
150. Male sex and pre-existing diabetes are independent risk factors for stillbirth
151. Perinatal morbidity in pregnancies of women with preconceptional and gestational diabetes mellitus
152. Incidence, risk factors, and pregnancy outcomes of gestational diabetes in Iran
153. Maternity care during the COVID-19 pandemic
154. Maternal thyroid deficiency and pregnancy complications: implications for population screening
155. Thrombophilias and adverse pregnancy outcome - A confounded problem
156. Absence of association of inherited thrombophilia with unexplained third trimester intrauterine fetal death
157. Association between maternal thrombophilia and adverse pregnancy outcome
158. Fetal hemolytic anemia and intrauterine death caused by anti-M immunization
159. Fatal hydrops fetalis caused by anti-D in a mother with partial D
160. Consequences for fetus and neonate of maternal red cell alloimmunization
161. Maternal anti-Ro and anti-La antibody associated endocardial fibroelastosis
162. Screening and intervention program aimed to reduce mortality and serious morbidity associated with severe neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
163. Analysis of diagnoses and diagnostic categories in the first 1,000 referrals to the Wisconsin stillbirth service program
164. Chromosome studies in couples with repeated spontaneous abortions
165. Cytogenetic experience with the culture of chorionic villi
166. Relationship between gestational cocaine use and pregnancy outcome
167. Use of interphase FISH with chromosome-specific probes as an alternative to cytogenetics in prenatal diagnosis
168. Cytogenetic studies in perinatal death
169. Cytogenetic analysis of trophoblasts by comparative genomic hybridization in embryo-fetal development anomalies
170. Cytogenetic evaluation of fetal death: the role of amniocentesis
171. Comparison of prenatal versus postnatal karyotyping for the investigation of intrauterine fetal death after the first trimester of pregnancy
172. Can post-mortem examination of the placenta help determine the cause of stillbirth
173. Economic and psychosocial consequences of stillbirths
174. Psychosocial impact of stillbirth
175. Long-term impact of perinatal bereavement
176. Risks of attempted and completed suicide within a year following stillbirth, miscarriage, or termination of pregnancy
177. Pregnancy loss experiences in lesbian and bisexual women
178. Increased mortality in parents bereaved in the first year of their child's life
179. Marriage and cohabitation outcomes after pregnancy loss
180. Effect of bereavement counseling on women with psychological problems associated with late pregnancy loss
181. Interventions, outcomes, and outcome measurement instruments in stillbirth care research
182. Effect of cognitive-behavioral-based counseling on grief symptoms severity in mothers after stillbirth
183. Evaluation of a specialized counseling service for perinatal bereavement
184. Impact of cognitive behavioral-based counseling on grief symptoms severity in mothers after stillbirth
185. Provider trait mindfulness in perinatal death counseling
186. Online yoga to reduce post-traumatic stress in women who have experienced stillbirth
187. Interpretations of stillbirth
188. Learning about grief from normal families: SIDS, stillbirth, and miscarriage
189. Young children's experiences of sibling death
190. The role of the bereavement officer in the loss of a baby at birth
191. Information on the Petals charity
192. Effects of making and sharing memories on maternal mental health after stillbirth
193. Support for mothers, fathers, and families after perinatal death
194. Contact with the baby following stillbirth and parental mental health and well-being
195. Impact of holding the baby following still

CARE OF LATE INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH AND STILLBIRTH
- Guidelines and evidence levels for classification of evidence levels.

Controlled trials with a very low risk of bias
Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials, or randomized controlled trials with a low risk of bias
Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials, or randomized controlled trials with a high risk of bias
High-quality systematic reviews of case-control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias, or chance
Well-conducted case-control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias, or chance
Case-control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias, or chance
Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case series
Expert opinion

Grades of Recommendation
At least one meta-analysis, systematic reviews, or RCT rated as 1++, and directly applicable to the target population
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population
Evidence level 3 or 4

Good Practice Points
Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group

APPENDIX II: Timing of maceration after late IUFD
Maceration timing
0–6 hours Little change, clear corneas
6 hours – 1 day Skin peeling on peripheries, bony prominences.
1–2 days More widespread skin peeling, with bullae (fluid blisters in epidermis), developing discoloration of abdomen.
2–3 days Hemolytic changes in cord, serosanguinous nasal fluid, fluid in body cavities, uniform pink tissues.
4–7 days Skull bone starting to become more separated. Eyes beginning to become sunken. Mandible suture more mobile. Periosteum and dura lifts from skull bones.
7 days and OVER Brown discoloration.
10–12 days Increased loss of fluid and eventually after many weeks a fetus papyraceous.

APPENDIX III: Stillbirth registration
The current law on stillbirth registration is set out in the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 (amended by the Still-Birth (Definition) Act 1992). The legal definition of stillbirth is “any child expelled or issued forth from its mother after the 24th week of pregnancy that did not breathe or show any other signs of life”.

APPENDIX IV: Perinatal Mortality Review Tool (PMRT)
The PMRT has been designed to support high-quality standardized perinatal reviews to understand why each baby died and improve future care.

APPENDIX V: Stillbirth Follow-up Consultation Checklist
Includes a checklist for follow-up consultations after stillbirth.

APPENDIX VI: Glossary
Definitions of terms related to stillbirth and perinatal mortality.

The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice. They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration by obstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available. RCOG Guidelines are not intended to be prescriptive directions defining a single course of management. Departure from local prescriptive protocols or guidelines should be fully documented in the patient's case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.