Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy
This guideline replaces The Management of Tubal Pregnancy, which was published in 2004.
Executive summary of recommendations
Diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy
Transvaginal ultrasound is the diagnostic tool of choice for tubal ectopic pregnancy.
Tubal ectopic pregnancies should be positively identified by visualizing an adnexal mass.
A serum beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (b-hCG) level is useful for planning management.
Ultrasound criteria may be used for the diagnosis of cervical ectopic pregnancy.
No biochemical investigations are needed routinely for caesarean scar pregnancy.
Ultrasound criteria may be used for the diagnosis of interstitial pregnancy.
Ultrasound criteria may be used for the diagnosis of cornual pregnancy.
No specific ultrasound criteria exist for the diagnosis of ovarian ectopic pregnancy.
Deﬁned ultrasound criteria can be used to diagnose an abdominal pregnancy.
A heterotopic pregnancy is diagnosed when ultrasound findings demonstrate intrauterine and ectopic pregnancy.
Management options
A laparoscopic surgical approach is preferable for tubal ectopic pregnancy.
Salpingectomy should be performed in preference to salpingotomy in the presence of a healthy contralateral tube.
Systemic methotrexate may be offered to suitable women with a tubal ectopic pregnancy.
Medical management with methotrexate can be considered for cervical pregnancy.
Women diagnosed with caesarean scar pregnancies should consider medical and surgical interventions.
Nonsurgical management is an acceptable option for stable interstitial pregnancies.
Cornual pregnancies should be managed by excision of the rudimentary horn.
Deﬁnitive surgical treatment is preferred for ovarian ectopic pregnancy.
Laparoscopic removal is an option for early abdominal pregnancy.
The intrauterine pregnancy must be considered in the management plan for heterotopic pregnancy.
Rhesus D (RhD)-negative women with an ectopic pregnancy require anti-D immunoglobulin.
Long-term fertility prospects following an ectopic pregnancy should be discussed with patients.
Support and counselling should be offered to women undergoing treatment for ectopic pregnancy.
Service and training
Providers of early pregnancy care should provide a 7-day early pregnancy assessment service.
Clear referral pathways should exist for women to access appropriate care for ectopic pregnancy.
Clinicians undertaking surgical management of ectopic pregnancy must have received appropriate training.
Clinicians undertaking ultrasound for the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy must have received appropriate training.

Clinicians must have appropriate training for ultrasound-guided needle techniques. If unable to perform full surgical procedures for ectopic pregnancy, experienced support must be available. Virtual reality simulators can aid in training for salpingectomy. Ectopic pregnancies include tubal, cervical, caesarean scar, interstitial, cornual, ovarian, abdominal, and heterotopic. Diagnosis and management of pregnancy of unknown location are not covered. Ectopic pregnancies have an incidence of approximately 11/1000 pregnancies in the UK. Risk factors include tubal damage, smoking, and in vitro fertilization. Tubal ectopic pregnancy is diagnosed using transvaginal ultrasound. Serum beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin levels are useful for planning management. Cervical ectopic pregnancies are rare and diagnosed using specific ultrasound criteria. No biochemical investigations are needed routinely for caesarean scar pregnancies. Interstitial pregnancies can be diagnosed using ultrasound criteria and confirmed with MRI.

A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. At presentation, based on clinical symptoms and ultrasound scan, if there is suspicion of interstitial pregnancy, a single serum b-hCG should be carried out. The following ultrasound scan criteria may be used for the diagnosis of cornual pregnancy: visualization of a single interstitial portion of fallopian tube in the main uterine body, gestational sac/products of conception seen mobile and separate from the uterus and completely surrounded by myometrium, and a vascular pedicle adjoining the gestational sac to the unicornuate uterus. A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. Ovarian ectopic pregnancy can be difficult to diagnose with certainty preoperatively, so the diagnosis should be considered whenever ultrasound findings are suspicious. A single serum b-hCG should be carried out at diagnosis to help with management. In some cases, a repeat serum b-hCG in 48 hours may be useful in deciding further management. A heterotopic pregnancy is diagnosed when the ultrasound findings demonstrate an intrauterine pregnancy and a coexisting ectopic pregnancy. A serum b-hCG level is of limited value in diagnosing heterotopic pregnancy. Methotrexate at a dose of 50 mg/m2 has been widely used as a single dose instead of a repeat surgical procedure, although, no formal comparative studies have been performed. Systemic methotrexate is the most commonly used drug for the pharmacological treatment of tubal ectopic pregnancy.

CG levels greater than 5000 iu/l are significant predictors of failure. Pretreatment changes in serum b-hCG levels, such as a smaller increase prior to methotrexate administration, can increase the chance of successful medical management. Methotrexate should be considered as the first-line management for women with specific criteria. Expectant management is a reasonable option for select women with low or declining serum b-hCG levels. Success rates are inversely proportional to serum b-hCG levels. Surgical, pharmacological, or conservative treatment options are available for different types of pregnancies, with specific recommendations for each.

Intrauterine pregnancy must be considered in the management plan. Methotrexate should only be considered if the intrauterine pregnancy is nonviable or if the woman does not wish to continue with the pregnancy. Surgical removal of the ectopic pregnancy is the method of choice for hemodynamically unstable women and is also an option for hemodynamically stable women. Expectant management is an option in heterotopic pregnancies where the ultrasound findings are of a nonviable pregnancy. The management approach for heterotopic pregnancy should consider the prognosis of the intrauterine pregnancy and the woman's wishes regarding its final outcome. Methotrexate is not an option for women with a viable intrauterine pregnancy or who wish to continue the pregnancy. Local injection of hyperosmolar glucose or potassium chloride with aspiration of the sac contents is an option for clinically stable women. Surgical management should be considered for hemodynamically unstable women with heterotopic pregnancy. Expectant management of an interstitial heterotopic pregnancy in a symptom-free woman with evidence that the pregnancy is not ongoing has been described. Women with ectopic pregnancy should be offered anti-D prophylaxis if they undergo surgical removal or experience repeated, heavy bleeding with abdominal pain. Counseling and support should be offered to women undergoing treatment for ectopic pregnancy, including information on support groups and bereavement counseling services. Women treated with methotrexate should wait at least 3 months before trying to conceive again. Plans for follow-up should be clearly recorded, and written information on treatment options and support services should be provided.

The manufacturers of methotrexate recommend a 3-month window after use before conception due to the length of time that it may remain present in some organs and because of concern for subsequent pregnancy and fetal development. A small cohort study showed a higher than expected major malformation rate in women who conceived within 3 months of methotrexate exposure. However, conception within 3 months of methotrexate should not be considered an indication for termination. Providers of early pregnancy care should offer a 7-day early pregnancy assessment service with direct access for women referred by general practitioners and accident and emergency departments. Women with suspected ectopic pregnancy should be managed in dedicated early pregnancy clinics. Laparoscopic salpingotomy is not part of the core training of gynecologists, so appropriate support should be available from senior staff trained in all surgical techniques for the management of ectopic pregnancy. Clinicians involved in the surgical, ultrasound, and medical management of ectopic pregnancy should have received appropriate training. Virtual reality simulators can be used as a training tool for surgical procedures. Clinicians should be trained to undertake both open and laparoscopic management of ectopic pregnancy. Future research recommendations include the need for anti-D in women with nontubal ectopic pregnancies, methotrexate for the treatment of ovarian ectopic pregnancy, and long-term fertility following the management of nontubal ectopic pregnancies. Useful links and support groups are provided for additional information and assistance.

First-trimester diagnosis and management of pregnancies implanted into the lower uterine segment Cesarean section scar. Diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up of cesarean scar pregnancy. Unforeseen consequences of increasing rate of cesarean deliveries: early placenta accreta and cesarean scar pregnancy. Pregnancy in a cesarean scar. Cesarean scar pregnancy: sonographic and magnetic resonance imaging findings, complications, and treatment. Comparative efficacy and safety of local and systemic methotrexate injection in cesarean scar pregnancy.

The use of methotrexate and arterial embolization to avoid surgery in cervical pregnancy. Strategies for conservative treatment of cervical ectopic pregnancy. Efficacy of methotrexate treatment in viable and nonviable cervical pregnancies. Uterine artery embolization in the management of vaginal bleeding from cervical pregnancy. Treatment of cervical pregnancy with cerclage, curettage, and balloon tamponade. Cervical pregnancy treated by uterine artery embolization combined with office hysteroscopy. Cesarean scar pregnancies: experience of 60 cases. Outcomes of primary surgical evacuation during the first trimester in different types of implantation in women with cesarean scar pregnancy. Outcome of cesarean scar pregnancies diagnosed sonographically in the first trimester. Natural history of early first-trimester pregnancies implanted in Cesarean scars. Management options for cesarean scar pregnancy. Diagnosis, management, and follow-up of cesarean scar pregnancy. Systematic review of treatment studies for cesarean scar pregnancy. Magnetic resonance imaging as an adjunct to ultrasound in evaluating cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. Hysteroscopic surgery of ectopic pregnancy in the cesarean section scar. Uterine-preserving emergency surgery for cesarean scar pregnancies. Laparoscopic management or laparoscopy combined with transvaginal management of type II cesarean scar pregnancy. Transvaginal removal of ectopic pregnancy tissue and repair of uterine defect for cesarean scar pregnancy. Transvaginal surgical treatment of cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. Efficacy of Shirodkar cervical suture in securing hemostasis following surgical evacuation of Cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. Treatment of pregnancy implanted within a cesarean scar with uterine artery embolization. Surgical treatment of cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy: efficacy and safety of ultrasound-guided suction curettage. Sonographic diagnosis of cesarean scar pregnancy at 16 weeks. Cesarean scar pregnancy as a precursor of morbidly adherent placenta. Conservative treatment of interstitial pregnancy. Feasibility of expectant management of interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Surgical management of interstitial pregnancy. Medical management of interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Laparoscopic management of interstitial pregnancy. Conservative and fertility-preserving treatment for interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Uterine artery embolization for management of interstitial twin ectopic pregnancy. Laparoscopic treatment for advanced interstitial pregnancy. Combined medical and surgical management of rudimentary uterine horn pregnancy. Laparoscopic management of rudimentary uterine horn pregnancy. Challenges in surgical management of ovarian ectopic pregnancy. Management of primary abdominal pregnancy. Contribution to the choice of therapy in abdominal pregnancy. Advanced abdominal pregnancy: case report and review of cases reported since 1946. A 30-year review of advanced abdominal pregnancy. Laparoscopic surgery in patients with an elevated shock index due to ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Management of a cervical heterotopic pregnancy presenting with first-trimester bleeding. Laparoscopic loop ligature for selective therapy in heterotopic interstitial and intrauterine pregnancy. Role of laparoscopy in the diagnosis and management of heterotopic pregnancies. Laparoscopic treatment of heterotopic pregnancies. Nonsurgical treatment of heterotopic pregnancy. Use of Rh immune globulin for the prevention of hemolytic disease. BCSH guideline for the use of anti-D immunoglobulin for the prevention of hemolytic disease.

Clinical Guidelines for Ectopic Pregnancy Management:

- Different treatment options for tubal ectopic pregnancy
- Fertility outcomes after treatment
- Effect of methotrexate on ovarian reserve
- Laparoscopic conservative treatment and fertility outcomes
- Factors affecting patient satisfaction after surgical treatment
- Grieving after early pregnancy loss
- Impact of previous perinatal loss on subsequent pregnancy
- Effects of relaxation training on anxiety and quality of life
- Contraindications to methotrexate treatment

These guidelines aim to assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about appropriate treatment for ectopic pregnancy. It is important to consider individual patient needs, resources, and limitations unique to the institution when implementing these guidelines. Areas of clinical uncertainty are highlighted for further research.

[27/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License.