Placenta Praevia and Placenta Accreta:
Diagnosis and Management
Green-top Guideline No. 27a
September 2018
Please cite this paper as: Jauniaux ERM, Alﬁrevic Z, Bhide AG, Belfort MA, Burton GJ, Collins SL, Dornan S, Jurkovic D,
Kayem G, Kingdom J, Silver R, Sentilhes L on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Placenta
Praevia and Placenta Accreta: Diagnosis and Management. Green-top Guideline No. 27a. BJOG 2018
DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.15306 RCOG Green-top Guidelines
Placenta Praevia and Placenta Accreta: Diagnosis and Management
ERM Jauniaux, Z Alﬁrevic, AG Bhide, MA Belfort, GJ Burton, SL Collins, S Dornan, D Jurkovic,
G Kayem, J Kingdom, R Silver, L Sentilhes, on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians andGynaecologists
Correspondence : Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 27 Sussex Place, Regent’s Park, London NW1 4RG.
Email: clinicaleffectiveness@rcog.org.uk
This is the fourth edition of this guideline. The ﬁrst, published in 2001, was entitled Placenta Praevia: Diagnosis and
Management ; the second, published in 2005, was entitled Placenta Praevia and Placenta Praevia Accreta: Diagnosis and
Management ; and the third, published in 2011, was entitled Placenta Praevia, Placenta Praevia Accreta and Vasa Praevia:
Diagnosis and Management .
The management and diagnosis of vasa praevia is addressed in Green-top Guideline No. 27b.
Executive summary
Antenatal diagnosis and care of women with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta
What are the risk factors for women with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta?
Caesarean delivery is associated with an increased risk of placenta praevia in subsequent
pregnancies. This risk rises as the number of prior caesarean sections increases. [ New 2018 ]B
Assisted reproductive technology and maternal smoking increase the risk of placenta praevia.
[New 2018 ]B
Should we screen women for placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta, if so, at what gestation and with what follow-up?
The midpregnancy routine fetal anomaly scan should include placental localisation thereby
identifying women at risk of persisting placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta. [ New 2018 ]P
The term placenta praevia should be used when the placenta lies directly over the internal os.
For pregnancies at more than 16 weeks of gestation the term low-lying placenta should beused when the placental edge is less than 20 mm from the internal os on transabdominal ortransvaginal scanning (TVS). [ New 2018 ]D
If the placenta is thought to be low lying (less than 20 mm from the internal os) or praevia
(covering the os) at the routine fetal anomaly scan, a follow-up ultrasound examinationincluding a TVS is recommended at 32 weeks of gestation to diagnose persistent low-lyingplacenta and/or placenta praevia.D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e2 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsWhat is the role and what are the risks of TVS?
Clinicians should be aware that TVS for the diagnosis of placenta praevia or a low-lying
placenta is superior to transabdominal and transperineal approaches, and is safe. [ New 2018 ]P
In women with a persistent low-lying placenta or placenta praevia at 32 weeks of gestation
who remain asymptomatic, an additional TVS is recommended at around 36 weeks of gestationto inform discussion about mode of delivery. [ New 2018 ]D
Cervical length measurement may help facilitate management decisions in asymptomatic women
with placenta praevia. A short cervical length on TVS before 34 weeks of gestation increases therisk of preterm emergency delivery and massive haemorrhage at caesarean section. [ New 2018 ]D
Where should women with a low-lying placenta or placenta praevia be cared for in the third trimester?
Women with recurrent bleeding (low-lying placenta or placenta praevia)
Tailor antenatal care, including hospitalisation, to individual woman ’s needs and social
circumstances, e.g. distance between home and hospital and availability of transportation,previous bleeding episodes, haematology laboratory results, and acceptance of receiving donorblood or blood products. [ New 2018 ]P
Where hospital admission has been decided, an assessment of risk factors for venous
thromboembolism in pregnancy should be performed as outlined in the Royal College of Obstetriciansand Gynaecologists Green-top Guideline No. 37a. This will need to balance the risk of developing avenous thromboembolism against the risk of bleedi ng from a placenta praevia or low lying placenta.D
It should be made clear to any woman being treated at home in the third trimester that she
should attend the hospital immediately if she experiences any bleeding, including spotting,contractions or pain (including vague suprapubic period-like aches).P
Asymptomatic women (low-lying placenta or placenta praevia)
Women with asymptomatic placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta in the third trimestershould be counselled about the risks of preterm delivery and obstetric haemorrhage, and theircare should be tailored to their individual needs.P
Women with asymptomatic placenta praevia con ﬁrmed at the 32-week follow-up scan and
managed at home should be encouraged to ensure they have safety precautions in place,including having someone available to help them as necessary and ready access to the hospital.P
Is there a place for cervical cerclage in women with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta?
The use of cervical cerclage to reduce bleeding and prolong pregnancy is not supported bysufﬁcient evidence to recommend its use outside of a clinical trial.P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e3 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsIn what circumstances, and at what gestation, should women be offered antenatal corticosteroids?
A single course of antenatal corticosteroid therapy is recommended between 34+0and
35+6weeks of gestation for pregnant women with a low-lying placenta or placenta praevia and
is appropriate prior to 34+0weeks of gestation in women at higher risk of preterm birth.
[New 2018 ]P
Is there a place for the use of tocolytics in women presenting with symptomatic low-lying placenta or placenta
praevia, who are in suspected preterm labour?
Tocolysis for women presenting with symptomatic placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta may
be considered for 48 hours to facilitate administration of antenatal corticosteroids. [ New 2018 ]C
If delivery is indicated based on maternal or fetal concerns, tocolysis should not be used in an
attempt to prolong gestation. [ New 2018 ]C
At what gestation should planned delivery occur?
Late preterm (34+0to 36+6weeks of gestation) delivery should be considered for women
presenting with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta and a history of vaginal bleeding orother associated risk factors for preterm delivery. [ New 2018 ]C
Delivery timing should be tailored according to antenatal symptoms and, for women presenting
with uncomplicated placenta praevia, delivery should be considered between 36+0and
37+0weeks of gestation. [ New 2018 ]C
In what situations is vaginal delivery appropriate for women with a low-lying placenta?
In women with a third trimester asymptomatic low-lying placenta the mode of delivery should
be based on the clinical background, the woman ’s preferences, and supplemented by
ultrasound ﬁndings, including the distance between the placental edge and the fetal head
position relative to the leading edge of the placenta on TVS. [ New 2018 ]D
Optimising the delivery of women with placenta praevia
Prior to delivery, all women with placenta praevia and their partners should have a discussion
regarding delivery. Indications for blood transfusion and hysterectomy should be reviewed andany plans to decline blood or blood products should be discussed openly and documented.P
Placenta praevia and anterior low-lying placenta carry a higher risk of massive obstetrichaemorrhage and hysterectomy. Delivery should be arranged in a maternity unit with on-siteblood transfusion services and access to critical care.D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e4 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsWomen with atypical antibodies form a particularly high-risk group and the care of these
women should involve discussions with the local haematologist and blood bank.D
Prevention and treatment of anaemia during the antenatal period is recommended for womenwith placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta as for any pregnant woman.D
Delivery for women with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta
What grade of obstetrician and anaesthetist should attend the caesarean delivery of a woman with placenta praevia?
As a minimum requirement for a planned caesarean section for a woman with placentapraevia, the surgical procedure should be carried out by an appropriately experienced operator.[New 2018 ]P
In cases of planned caesarean section for placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta, a senior
obstetrician (usually a consultant) and senior anaesthetist (usually a consultant) should bepresent within the delivery or theatre suite where the surgery is occurring.P
When an emergency arises, the senior obstetrician and senior anaesthetist should be alertedimmediately and attend urgently.P
What anaesthetic procedure is most appropriate for women having a caesarean section for placenta praevia?
Regional anaesthesia is considered safe and is associated with lower risks of haemorrhage thangeneral anaesthesia for caesarean delivery in women with placenta praevia or a low-lyingplacenta. Women with anterior placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta should be advised that itmay be necessary to convert to general anaesthesia if required and asked to consent. [ New 2018 ]D
What blood products should be available?
Close liaison with the hospital transfusion laboratory is essential for women presenting with
placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta. [ New 2018 ]P
Rapid infusion and ﬂuid warming devices should be immediately available. [ New 2018 ]P
Cell salvage is recommended for women where the anticipated blood loss is great enough to
induce anaemia, in particular, in women who would decline blood products.D
What surgical approach should be used for women with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta?
Consider vertical skin and/or uterine incisions when the fetus is in a transverse lie to avoid theplacenta, particularly below 28 weeks of gestation. [ New 2018 ]P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e5 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsConsider using preoperative and/or intraoperative ultrasonography to precisely determine
placental location and the optimal place for uterine incision. [ New 2018 ]D
If the placenta is transected during the uterine incision, immediately clamp the umbilical cord
after fetal delivery to avoid excessive fetal blood loss. [ New 2018 ]D
If pharmacological measures fail to control haemorrhage, initiate intrauterine tamponade and/or
surgical haemostatic techniques sooner rather than later. Interventional radiological techniquesshould also be urgently employed where possible. [ New 2018 ]C
Early recourse to hysterectomy is recommended if conservative medical and surgical
interventions prove ineffective. [ New 2018 ]D
Antenatal diagnosis and outcome of women with placenta accreta spectrum
What are the risk factors for women with placenta accreta spectrum?
The major risk factors for placenta accreta spectrum are history of accreta in a previous
pregnancy, previous caesarean delivery and other uterine surgery, including repeated endometrialcurettage. This risk rises as the number of prior caesarean sections increases. [ New 2018 ]B
Women requesting elective caesarean delivery for non-medical indications should be informed
of the risk of placenta accreta spectrum and its consequences for subsequent pregnancies.[New 2018 ]P
How can placenta accreta spectrum be suspected and diagnosed antenatally?
Antenatal diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum is crucial in planning its management and has
been shown to reduce maternal morbidity and mortality. [ New 2018 ]D
Previous caesarean delivery and the presence of an anterior low-lying placenta or placenta
praevia should alert the antenatal care team of the higher risk of placenta accreta spectrum.D
Ultrasound screening and diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum
Ultrasound imaging is highly accurate when performed by a skilled operator with experience indiagnosing placenta accreta spectrum. [ New 2018 ]C
Refer women with any ultrasound features suggestive of placenta accreta spectrum to a
specialist unit with imaging expertise. [ New 2018 ]B
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e6 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsWomen with a history of previous caesarean section seen to have an anterior low-lying
placenta or placenta praevia at the routine fetal anomaly scan should be speci ﬁcally screened
for placenta accreta spectrum. [ New 2018 ]D
Is there a role for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum?
Clinicians should be aware that the diagnostic value of MRI and ultrasound imaging in detecting
placenta accreta spectrum is similar when performed by experts. [ New 2018 ]C
MRI may be used to complement ultrasound imaging to assess the depth of invasion and
lateral extension of myometrial invasion, especially with posterior placentation and/or inwomen with ultrasound signs suggesting parametrial invasion.P
Where should women with placenta accreta spectrum be cared for?
Women diagnosed with placenta accreta spectrum should be cared for by a multidisciplinaryteam in a specialist centre with expertise in diagnosing and managing invasive placentation.[New 2018 ]P
Delivery for women diagnosed with placenta accreta spectrum should take place in a specialist
centre with logistic support for immediate access to blood products, adult intensive care unitand neonatal intensive care unit by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in complex pelvicsurgery. [ New 2018 ]D
When should delivery be planned for women with placenta accreta spectrum?
In the absence of risk factors for preterm delivery in women with placenta accreta spectrum,
planned delivery at 35+0to 36+6weeks of gestation provides the best balance between fetal
maturity and the risk of unscheduled delivery. [ New 2018 ]P
Planning delivery of women with suspected placenta accreta spectrum
Once the diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum is made, a contingency plan for emergency
delivery should be developed in partnership with the woman, including the use of aninstitutional protocol for the management of maternal haemorrhage. [ New 2018 ]P
What should be included in the consent form for caesarean section in women with suspected placenta accreta
spectrum?
Any woman giving consent for caesarean section should understand the risks associated with
caesarean section in general, and the speci ﬁc risks of placenta accreta spectrum in terms of
massive obstetric haemorrhage, increased risk of lower urinary tract damage, the need forblood transfusion and the risk of hysterectomy.P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e7 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAdditional possible interventions in the case of massive haemorrhage should also be discussed,
including cell salvage and interventional radiology where available. [ New 2018 ]D
What healthcare professionals should be involved?
The elective delivery of women with placenta accreta spectrum should be managed by a
multidisciplinary team, which should include senior anaesthetists, obstetricians andgynaecologists with appropriate experience in managing the condition and other surgicalspecialties if indicated. In an emergency, the most senior clinicians available should be involved.P
What anaesthetic is most appropriate for delivery?
The choice of anaesthetic technique for caesarean section for women with placenta accretaspectrum should be made by the anaesthetist conducting the procedure in consultation withthe woman prior to surgery.P
The woman should be informed that the surgical procedure can be performed safely withregional anaesthesia but should be advised that it may be necessary to convert to generalanaesthesia if required and asked to consent to this. [ New 2018 ]D
Optimising the delivery of women with placenta accreta spectrum
What surgical approach should be used for women with placenta accreta spectrum?
Caesarean section hysterectomy with the placenta left in situ is preferable to attempting to
separate it from the uterine wall.C
When the extent of the placenta accreta is limited in depth and surface area, and the entireplacental implantation area is accessible and visualised (i.e. completely anterior, fundal orposterior without deep pelvic invasion), uterus preserving surgery may be appropriate, includingpartial myometrial resection. [ New 2018 ] P
Uterus preserving surgical techniques should only be attempted by surgeons working in teams
with appropriate expertise to manage such cases and after appropriate counselling regardingrisks and with informed consent. [ New 2018 ]D
There are currently insuf ﬁcient data to recommend the routine use of ureteric stents in
placenta accreta spectrum. The use of stents may have a role when the urinary bladder isinvaded by placental tissue (see section 8.4.2). [ New 2018 ]C
What surgical approach should be used for women with placenta percreta?
There is limited evidence to support uterus preserving surgery in placenta percreta and women
should be informed of the high risk of peripartum and secondary complications, including theneed for secondary hysterectomy. [ New 2018 ]D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e8 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsExpectant management (leaving the placenta in situ )
Elective peripartum hysterectomy may be unacceptable to women desiring uterine preservation
or considered inappropriate by the surgical team. In such cases, leaving the placenta in situshould be considered. [ New 2018 ]D
When the placenta is left in situ, local arrangements need to be made to ensure regular
review, ultrasound examination and access to emergency care should the woman experiencecomplications, such as bleeding or infection. [ New 2018 ]D
Methotrexate adjuvant therapy should not be used for expectant management as it is of unproven
beneﬁt and has signi ﬁcant adverse effects. [ New 2018 ]C
When is interventional radiology indicated?
Larger studies are necessary to determine the safety and ef ﬁcacy of interventional radiology
before this technique can be advised in the routine management of placenta accreta spectrum.[New 2018 ]D
Women diagnosed with placenta accreta spectrum who decline donor blood transfusion should
be cared for in a unit with an interventional radiology service.D
How are women with undiagnosed or unsuspected placenta accreta spectrum best managed at delivery?
If at the time of an elective repeat caesarean section, where both mother and baby are stable,it is immediately apparent that placenta percreta is present on opening the abdomen, thecaesarean section should be delayed until the appropriate staff and resources have beenassembled and adequate blood products are available. This may involve closure of the maternalabdomen and urgent transfer to a specialist unit for delivery. [ New 2018 ] P
In case of unsuspected placenta accreta spectrum diagnosed after the birth of the baby, the
placenta should be left in situ and an emergency hysterectomy performed. [ New 2018 ]D
1. Purpose and scope
The purpose of this guideline is to describe the diagnostic modalities and review the evidence-based approach to the
clinical management of pregnancies complicated by placenta praevia and placenta accreta.
2. Introduction and background epidemiology
Placenta praevia and placenta accreta are associated with high maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality.1–5The
rates of placenta praevia and accreta have increased and will continue to do so as a result of rising rates ofcaesarean deliveries, increased maternal age and use of assisted reproductive technology (ART), placing greater
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e9 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologistsdemands on maternity-related resources. The highest rates of complication for both mother and newborn are
observed when these conditions are only diagnosed at delivery.
2.1 Placenta praevia
Determining placental location is one of the ﬁrst aims of routine midpregnancy (18+6to 21+6weeks of gestation)
transabdominal obstetric ultrasound examination.6,7Placenta praevia was originally deﬁned using transabdominal scan
(TAS) as a placenta developing within the lower uterine segment and graded according to the relationship and/or thedistance between the lower placental edge and the internal os of the uterine cervix. Grade I or minor praevia is
deﬁned as a lower edge inside the lower uterine segment; grade II or marginal praevia as a lower edge reaching the
internal os; grade III or partial praevia when the placenta partially covers the cervix; and grade IV or complete praevia
when the placenta completely covers the cervix. Grades I and II are also often deﬁned as ‘minor’ placenta praeviawhereas grades III and IV are referred to as ‘major’ placenta praevia.
The introduction of transvaginal scanning (TVS) in obstetrics in the 1980s has allowed for a more precise evaluation of
the distance between the placental edge and the internal os. A recent multidisciplinary workshop of the AmericanInstitute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM)
8has recommended discontinuing the use of the terms ‘partial’ and
‘marginal’ ,suggesting that the term ‘placenta praevia’ is used when the placenta lies directly over the internal os. For
pregnancies greater than 16 weeks of gestation, the placenta should be reported as ‘low lying’ when the placental edgeis less than 20 mm from the internal os, and as normal when the placental edge is 20 mm or more from the internalos on TAS or TVS. This new classiﬁcation could better deﬁne the risks of perinatal complications, such as antepartumhaemorrhage and major postpartum haemorrhage (PPH),
9,10and has the potential of improving the obstetric
management of placenta praevia. Recent articles reviewed in this guideline refer to the AIUM classiﬁcation.
The estimated incidence of placenta praevia at term is 1 in 200 pregnancies.5,9However, this is dependent on the
deﬁnition used and is likely to change with the introduction of the AIUM classiﬁcation described above and with therising incidence of the main risk factors, i.e. prior caesarean delivery and pregnancies resulting from ART. Therelationship between a low-lying placenta or placenta praevia and a velamentous insertion of the umbilical cord ispresented and discussed in the sister Green-top Guideline No. 27b: Vasa Praevia: Diagnosis and Management .
2.2 Placenta accreta
Placenta accreta is a histopathological term ﬁrst deﬁned by Irving and Hertig in 1937, as the “abnormal adherence of the
afterbirth in whole or in parts to the underlying uterine wall in the partial or complete absence of decidua”.11Irving and
Hertig did not include abnormally invasive placentation in their series and thus, their description was limited to abnormallyadherent placenta. Depending on the depth of villous tissue invasiveness, placenta accreta was subsequently subdivided bymodern pathologists into ‘creta’ or ‘adherenta’ where the villi adheres superﬁcially to the myometrium without interposingdecidua; ‘increta’ where the villi penetrate deeply into the uterine myometrium down to the serosa; and ‘percreta’ wherethe villous tissue perforates through the entire uterine wall and may invade the surrounding pelvic organs, such as thebladder.
12–14Cases of placenta accreta are also often subdivided into total, partial or focal according to the amount of
placental tissue involved and the different depths of accreta placentation have been found to co-exist in the same case.12,15
Thus, placenta accreta is a spectrum disorder ranging from abnormally adherent to deeply invasive placental tissue.
Detailed data on clinical ﬁndings and, where possible, on histopathological examination are essential when describing
different diagnostic or management techniques.16,17The diagnostic conundrum is obvious at the abnormally adherent
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e10 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologistsend of the spectrum where the differential diagnosis between a difﬁcult manual removal and an abnormally adherent
or placenta accreta may be impossible in the absence of histopathological conﬁrmation. These diagnostic difﬁculties
probably explain the current wide variation in reported prevalence of placenta accreta ranging between 1 in 300 and1 in 2000 pregnancies,
1–5and highlight the need for a standardised approach to imaging, clinical and histopathological
descriptions. In the last decade, even the condition itself has begun to be known by many different names, with‘morbidly adherent placenta’ becoming particularly popular. This terminology was originally used in the 19
thcentury
to describe the clinical complications associated with a retained placenta. This terminology is misleading as ‘morbidlyadherent’ does not encompass the abnormally invasive end of the accreta spectrum (increta and percreta), whichusually have the worst clinical outcomes.
16,17In order to overcome these difﬁculties, the terms ‘placenta accreta
spectrum’ or ‘abnormally adherent and invasive placenta’ should be used to include both the abnormally adherentand invasive forms of accreta placentation.
18In this guideline, the term placenta accreta spectrum will be used.
In the 1990s, the maternal mortality of placenta percreta was reported to be as high as 7% of cases.19More recent
large series have reported lower rates of maternal death and this is likely to be further improved by screening forplacenta accreta spectrum in women at high risk and in planning the delivery in specialist centres.
20–22
3. Identi ﬁcation and assessment of evidence
This guideline was developed in accordance with standard methodology for producing Royal College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists (RCOG) Green-top Guidelines. The Cochrane Library (including the Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews and the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects [DARE]), EMBASE, Trip, MEDLINE andPubMed (electronic databases) were searched for relevant randomised controlled trials (RCT), systematic reviewsand meta-analyses. The search was restricted to articles published between May 2009 and July 2016 (the search forthe previous guideline was up to May 2009). A top-up literature search was performed in March 2018. Thedatabases were searched using the relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, including all subheadings, andthis was combined with a keyword search. Search words included ‘placenta praevia’, ‘low lying placenta’, ‘placentaaccreta’, ‘placenta increta’ ‘placenta percreta’, ‘abnormally adherent placenta’ and ‘abnormally invasive placenta’. Thesearch was restricted to humans and the English language. The National Library for Health and the NationalGuideline Clearinghouse were also searched for relevant guidelines and reviews.
Where possible, recommendations are based on available evidence. In the absence of published evidence, these have
been annotated as ‘good practice points’. Further information about the assessment of evidence and the grading ofrecommendations may be found in Appendix 1.
4. Antenatal diagnosis and care of women with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta
4.1 What are the risk factors for women with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta?
Caesarean delivery is associated with an increased risk of placenta praevia in subsequent
pregnancies. This risk rises as the number of prior caesarean sections increases. [ New 2018 ]B
ART and maternal smoking increase the risk of placenta praevia. [ New 2018 ]B
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e11 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsIn 1997, a meta-analysis of the association of placenta praevia with history of caesarean delivery found a
dose-response pattern for the relative risk (RR) of placenta praevia of 4.5 (95% CI 3.6 –5.5) for one, 7.4
(95% CI 7.1 –7.7) for two, 6.5 (95% CI 3.6 –11.6) for three, and 44.9 (95% CI 13.5 –149.5) for four or more
prior caesarean deliveries compared with vaginal delivery.23Evidence
level 2 ++
A systematic review and meta-analysis of 22 studies including over 2 million deliveries indicated that the
incidence of placenta praevia increases from 10 in 1000 deliveries with one previous caesarean delivery to28 in 1000 with three or more caesarean deliveries.
24A 2014 meta-analysis conﬁrmed these ﬁndings and
reported an overall odds ratio (OR) of 1.47 (95% CI 1.44 –1.51) for placenta praevia after caesarean
section.25Evidence
level 1 +
Cohort studies have also reported that a second pregnancy within 1 year of a caesarean section is
associated with an increased risk of placenta praevia (RR 1.7, 95% CI 0.9 –3.1).26Compared with vaginal
birth, a previous prelabour caesarean section is associated with an increased risk of placenta praevia in thesecond delivery (adjusted OR [aOR] 2.62, 95% CI 1.24 –5.56).
27Evidence
level 2 ++
There have been contradictory reports regarding the incidence of placenta praevia in multiple pregnancies.
A retrospective cohort study of 1 172 405 twin live births and stillbirths in the USA between 1989 and1998 found no increased risk in twins.
28A retrospective cohort of 67 895 singleton and twin pregnancies
found that dichorionic (aOR 1.54, 95% CI 1.15 –2.06) and monochorionic (RR 3.29, 95% CI 1.32 –8.21)
twin pregnancies have an increased risk of placenta praevia compared with singletons.29Evidence
level 2 +
ART is associated with a higher incidence of placenta praevia independent of the high rate of multiple
pregnancies generated by the technique used.30,31A 2016 meta-analysis of ART singleton pregnancies
reported a RR of 3.71 (95% CI 2.67 –5.16) for placenta praevia32that was conﬁrmed by a 2017 meta-
analysis (OR 2.67, 95% CI 2.01 –3.34).33Furthermore, a 2017 meta-analysis of the impact of maternal
smoking on placental position34(OR 1.42, 95% CI 1.30 –1.50) has found an increased risk of placenta
praevia.Evidence
level 1 +
Advanced maternal age has been also associated with a slight increase in the risk of placenta praevia
(OR 1.08, 95% CI 1.07 –1.09) but this effect may be due to parity.35Evidence
level 2 /C0
4.2 Should we screen women for placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta, if so, at what
gestation and with what follow-up?
The midpregnancy routine fetal anomaly scan should include placental localisation thereby
identifying women at risk of persisting placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta. [ New 2018 ]P
The term placenta praevia should be used when the placenta lies directly over the internal os.
For pregnancies at more than 16 weeks of gestation the term low-lying placenta should beused when the placental edge is less than 20 mm from the internal os on TAS or TVS.[New 2018 ]D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e12 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsIf the placenta is thought to be low lying (less than 20 mm from the internal os) or praevia
(covering the os) at the routine fetal anomaly scan, a follow-up ultrasound examinationincluding a TVS is recommended at 32 weeks of gestation to diagnose persistent low-lyingplacenta and/or placenta praevia.D
Placenta praevia is a well-established complication of pregnancy associated with high maternal and
perinatal complication rates.4–9The UK National Screening Committee (UK NSC) does not recommend a
national screening program for placenta praevia, but it has supported current local practices of identifyingit at the routine midpregnancy (18
+6to 21+6weeks of gestation) antenatal screening ultrasound examination
in women whose placenta extends onto the internal cervical os (www.screening.nhs.uk/policies).36An update
published in 2014 that included a literature search covering the period between January 2008 andNovember 2012 concluded that this practice is not supported by new evidence, but that the placental site isroutinely reported at the time of the routine fetal anomaly scan. In turn, this routine study has become themain screening test for placenta praevia.
37
Apparent placental ‘migration’ following the development of the lower uterine segment during the thirdtrimester of pregnancy results in the resolution of the low-lying placenta in 90% of the cases beforeterm.
38–46This is less likely to occur in women with a previous caesarean delivery.39Evidence
level 4
In twin pregnancies, the likelihood of persistence of placenta praevia is also dependent on the gestational
age at sonographic detection. Among those with placenta praevia diagnosed in the second trimester themajority of cases resolve by 32 weeks of gestation.
29,47After 32 weeks of gestation around 50% of the
remaining placenta praevia will resolve, with no further changes after 36 weeks of gestation.29Evidence
level 3
The timing of a conﬁrmatory ultrasound examination in the third trimester has varied between 32 and
36 weeks of gestation depending on the extent of the placenta praevia over the internal cervical os. It isbased on the perceived risk of antenatal haemorrhage, but there is no strong evidence that it makes adifference in the care of asymptomatic women.
37The timing of the follow-up ultrasound examination
should also be tailored according to a previous history of caesarean delivery to exclude an associatedplacenta accreta spectrum.Evidence
level 4
4.3 What is the role and what are the risks of TVS?
Clinicians should be aware that TVS for the diagnosis of placenta praevia or a low-lying
placenta is superior to transabdominal and transperineal approaches, and is safe. [ New 2018 ]P
In women with a persistent low-lying placenta or placenta praevia at 32 weeks of gestation
who remain asymptomatic, an additional TVS is recommended at around 36 weeks of gestationto inform discussion about mode of delivery. [ New 2018 ]D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e13 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsCervical length measurement may help facilitate management decisions in asymptomatic
women with placenta praevia. A short cervical length on TVS before 34 weeks of gestationincreases the risk of preterm emergency delivery and massive haemorrhage at caesareansection. [ New 2018 ]D
TVS improves the accuracy of placental localisation particularly when the placenta is posterior or if the
TAS is unclear, for example, due to maternal obesity or the presence of large uterine ﬁbroids.5Evidence
level 4
There is only one small (n =38) RCT comparing TAS and TVS for placenta praevia, which supports this
safety proﬁle and reports superior views, especially for posterior placentas.48Evidence
level 1 +
If the distance between the internal os and the placental edge is 20 mm or more on TVS, the placental
location should be recorded as normal and managed as per routine. Studies have not demonstrated anincreased risk for caesarean section due to haemorrhage in these cases.
4,5By contrast, if the placenta
extends beyond the internal os on TVS during the second trimester, it is likely to be conﬁrmed asplacenta praevia at 32 weeks of gestation.
48–50However, ‘migration’ is still possible after 32 weeks of
gestation.50,51
TVS will reclassify 26 –60% of placentas diagnosed as low lying at the routine fetal anomaly scan.52–54
Overall, TVS has a high accuracy (positive predictive value of 93.3%, negative predictive value of 97.6% and
false-negative rate of 2.33%) in predicting placenta praevia in women suspected of having a low-lyingplacenta on TAS in the second and early third trimester, with a sensitivity of 87.5% and a speciﬁcity of98.8%.
55
TVS has also been used to measure the cervical length to predict preterm birth56and cohort studies with
low risks of confounding bias have shown that cervical length is a predictor of antepartum bleeding andemergency preterm caesarean section in placenta praevia.
57–60A prospective cohort study of 59 women
presenting with placenta praevia covering the internal os has shown that the best cut-off point for theidentiﬁcation of women at risk of haemorrhage requiring a caesarean delivery before 34 weeks ofgestation is a cervical length of 31 mm or less (sensitivity of 83.3% and speciﬁcity of 76.6%). Women witha cervical length of less than 31 mm have a 16 times (OR 16.4, 95% CI 3.4 –75.9) higher risk of emergency
caesarean section due to massive haemorrhage.
57Similarly, a prospective cohort study of 54 women with
placenta praevia covering the internal os has shown that combining a cervical length of less than 30 mmand measurement of the lower placental edge thickness of more than 10 mm has a sensitivity of 83.3%and a speciﬁcity of 78.4%.
58More prospective studies using a standardised ultrasound deﬁnition of
placental edge thickness are required before this sign can be used in clinical practice.
Compared with women with a long cervical length, women with a short cervical length (less than 25 mm)
have a RR of 7.2 (95% CI 2.3 –22.3) for massive haemorrhage during caesarean section for placenta
praevia.59Evidence
level 2 +
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e14 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsSerial TVS cervical length measurements from 26 weeks of gestation have indicated that when the length
of the cervix decreases rapidly to 35 mm or less there is an increased risk of preterm caesarean section
due to massive haemorrhage.60Evidence
level 2 /C0
4.4 Where should women with a low-lying placenta or placenta praevia be cared for in the third
trimester?
4.4.1 Women with recurrent bleeding (low-lying placenta or placenta praevia)
Tailor antenatal care, including hospitalisation, to individual woman ’s needs and social
circumstances, e.g. distance between home and hospital and availability of transportation,previous bleeding episodes, haematology laboratory results, and acceptance of receiving donorblood or blood products. [ New 2018 ]P
Where hospital admission has been decided, an assessment of risk factors for venous
thromboembolism in pregnancy should be performed as outlined in RCOG Green-top GuidelineNo. 37a. This will need to balance the risk of developing a venous thromboembolism againstthe risk of bleeding from a placenta praevia or low lying placenta.D
It should be made clear to any woman being treated at home in the third trimester that sheshould attend the hospital immediately if she experiences any bleeding, including spotting,contractions or pain (including vague suprapubic period-like aches).P
The Cochrane systematic review by Nielson on the impact of an intervention in women diagnosed as
having, or being likely to have a placenta praevia, which has not been updated since October 2002,includes only one small RCT (n =53) comparing hospital versus home care for symptomatic placenta
praevia.
61This trial found little evidence of any clear advantage or disadvantage to a policy of home versus
hospital care, and the only signiﬁcant difference was a reduction in length of hospital stay.62Evidence
level 1 /C0
Two large retrospective studies of women presenting with placenta praevia at the routine fetal anomaly
scan have proposed scores to predict the risk of emergency caesarean section. The ﬁrst study (n =250)
found that the risk is increased if the ﬁrst (sentinel) vaginal bleeding episode occurs before 29 weeks ofgestation (OR 2.64, 95% CI 1.17 –5.98), and with the occurrence of three or more episodes of antepartum
haemorrhage (OR 2.53, 95% CI 1.1 –5.86).
63The second (n =214) found that independent predictors for
emergency delivery are a history of caesarean section (OR 4.7, 95 CI 1.2 –12); antepartum haemorrhage
on one (OR 7.5, 95% CI 2.5 –23), two (OR 14, 95% CI 4.3 –47), and three or more occasions (OR 27,
95% CI 8.3 –90); and need for antenatal blood transfusion (OR 6.4, 95% CI 1.7 –23).10A retrospective
study of 214 women with singleton pregnancies found that the risk of preterm emergency caesareandelivery increases with the number of antepartum bleeding episodes with one (OR 7.5, 95% C, 2.5 –23),
two (OR 14, 95% CI 4.3 –47), and three or more (OR 27, 95% CI 8.3 –90), as well as need for blood
transfusion (OR 6.4, 95% C, 1.7 –23).
10The results of these studies suggest that predictors for emergency
delivery in women with placenta praevia can be used for individualised antenatal care regarding need forhospital admission, corticosteroid administration and timing of delivery.Evidence
level 2 /C0
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e15 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAdmission to hospital during pregnancy is a risk factor for venous thromboembolism. RCOG Green-top
Guideline No. 37a addresses thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy, including women at increased risk ofhaemorrhage.Evidence
level 4
4.4.2 Asymptomatic women (low-lying placenta or placenta praevia)
Women with asymptomatic placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta in the third trimester
should be counselled about the risks of preterm delivery and obstetric haemorrhage, and theircare should be tailored to their individual needs.P
Women with asymptomatic placenta praevia con ﬁrmed at the 32-week follow-up scan and
managed at home should be encouraged to ensure they have safety precautions in place,including having someone available to help them as necessary and ready access to the hospital.P
Most women with asymptomatic placenta praevia (no bleeding or contractions) can be cared for as
outpatients with similar outcomes compared to hospitalisation, and at lower cost.5Numerous factors
inﬂuence the chances of low-lying placenta or placenta praevia persisting until delivery, such as priorcaesarean section,
43the distance between the placental edge and the internal os, and the thickness of the
placental edge.4These parameters can be useful in tailoring individual woman’s needs.Evidence
level 4
4.5 Is there a place for cervical cerclage in women with placenta praevia or a low-lying
placenta?
The use of cervical cerclage to reduce bleeding and prolong pregnancy is not supported by
sufﬁcient evidence to recommend its use outside of a clinical trial.P
The Cochrane systematic review by Nielson61on the impact of cerclage in women diagnosed as having,
or being likely to have, placenta praevia included two small RCTs (n =25 and 36) comparing cervical
cerclage versus no cerclage. There may be a reduction in preterm births before 34 weeks of gestation(RR 0.45, 95% CI 0.23 –0.87), but this evidence is not robust enough to recommend its use outside of
clinical trials.Evidence
level 1 /C0
There have been no new trials looking at this issue since the last update of this guideline.
4.6 In what circumstances, and at what gestation, should women be offered antenatal
corticosteroids?
A single course of antenatal corticosteroid therapy is recommended between 34+0and
35+6weeks of gestation for pregnant women with a low-lying placenta or placenta praevia
and is appropriate prior to 34+0weeks of gestation in women at higher risk of preterm birth.
[New 2018 ]P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e16 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsA large case –control study found that neonatal morbidities in women with placenta praevia include an
increased risk of lower 5-minute Apgar scores, neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission, anaemia,
respiratory distress syndrome, mechanical ventilation and intraventricular haemorrhage.64There is no
evidence, however, that neonates born after pregnancies with placenta praevia are more likely to be smallfor gestational age when compared to non-praevia controls.
65Evidence
level 2 ++
Compared with placebo or no treatment with antenatal corticosteroids (betamethasone, dexamethasone
or hydrocortisone), antenatal corticosteroids are associated with a reduction in the most serious adverseoutcomes related to prematurity, including perinatal death (RR 0.72, 95% CI 0.58 –0.89), respiratory
distress syndrome (average RR 0.66, 95% CI 0.56 –0.77), intraventricular haemorrhage (average RR 0.55,
95% CI 0.40 –0.76) and necrotising enterocolitis (RR 0.50, 95% CI 0.32 –0.78).
66
The 2016 RCT has found that the administration of betamethasone to women with a singleton pregnancy
at risk for late preterm delivery (34+0to 36+5weeks of gestation) signiﬁcantly reduces the rate of
neonatal respiratory complications.67Evidence
level 1 +
A decision analytic model designed to compare total maternal and neonatal quality-adjusted life years for
delivery of women with placenta praevia at 34+0to 36+6weeks of gestation indicated that corticosteroids
administration at 35+5weeks of gestation followed by planned delivery at 36 weeks of gestation optimises
maternal and neonatal outcomes.69Evidence
level 4
4.7 Is there a place for the use of tocolytics in women presenting with symptomatic low-lying
placenta or placenta praevia, who are in suspected preterm labour?
Tocolysis for women presenting with symptomatic placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta may
be considered for 48 hours to facilitate administration of antenatal corticosteroids. [ New 2018 ]C
If delivery is indicated based on maternal or fetal concerns, tocolysis should not be used in an
attempt to prolong gestation. [ New 2018 ]C
A systematic review to determine if the prolonged (48 hours or more) use of tocolytics in women with
symptomatic preterm placenta praevia improves perinatal outcome identiﬁed two retrospective studies(total, n =217) and one RCT (n =60).
69The results of the RCT showed that pregnancy can be prolonged
for more than 7 days with continued tocolytics (OR 3.10, 95% CI 1.38 –6.96). When combined with the data
of retrospective studies, the results did not reach signiﬁcance (OR 1.19, 95% CI 0.63 –2.28). The RCT was
judged inadequately compliant with the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials statement.Evidence
level 1 /C0
A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicentre trial including 109 women at 24+0to
33+6weeks with at least one episode of placenta praevia bleeding and intact membranes has shown that
there was no difference in the prolongation of pregnancy between the nifedipine (n =54) and placebo
(n=55) groups.70Adverse perinatal outcomes were comparable between groups.Evidence
level 1 +
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e17 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists4.8 At what gestation should planned delivery occur?
Late preterm (34+0to 36+6weeks of gestation) delivery should be considered for women
presenting with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta and a history of vaginal bleeding orother associated risk factors for preterm delivery. [ New 2018 ]C
Delivery timing should be tailored according to antenatal symptoms and, for women presenting
with uncomplicated placenta praevia, delivery should be considered between 36+0and
37+0weeks of gestation. [ New 2018 ]C
As the risk of major haemorrhage increases rapidly after 36 weeks of gestation, expert opinions have
highlighted that decisions regarding timing of delivery must be individualised and suggest that on the basisof the limited data available, women with uncomplicated placenta praevia should undergo scheduled birthby caesarean section between 36 and 37 weeks of gestation.
68,71,72Evidence
level 4
The risks of bleeding, labour, or bleeding and labour leading to the need for emergency delivery increase with
advancing gestational age, whereas the risks of morbidity associated with prematurity decrease.4,5The risk of
an emergent bleed associated with placenta praevia has been reported to be 4.7% by 35 weeks of gestation,15% by 36 weeks of gestation, 30% by 37 weeks of gestation and 59% by 38 weeks of gestation.
73Evidence
level 2 /C0
A US population-based cohort study using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Linked Birth
and Infant Death data ﬁles has evaluated the effects of delivering placenta praevia at 35, 36 and 37 weeksof gestation on the risk of several neonatal outcomes.
74Compared with neonates born at 38 weeks of
gestation, those delivered at 35, 36 and 37 weeks of gestation have no greater odds of meconium passage,fetal distress, fetal anaemia, neonatal seizures, increased ventilator needs or infant death at 1 year.However, aOR odds of 5-minute Apgar scores of less than 7 are greater at 35 and 36 weeks of gestation(aOR 3.33, 95% CI 1.71 –6.47; and aOR 2.17, 1.11 –4.22, respectively) as are odds of NICU admission rates
(aOR 2.25, 95% CI 2.01 –2.50; and aOR 1.57, 1.38 –1.76, respectively).Evidence
level 2 +
4.9 In what situations is vaginal delivery appropriate for women with a low-lying placenta?
In women with a third trimester asymptomatic low-lying placenta the mode of delivery should
be based on the clinical background, the woman ’s preferences, and supplemented by
ultrasound ﬁndings, including the distance between the placental edge and the fetal head
position relative to the leading edge of the placenta on TVS. [ New 2018 ]D
Women presenting with a placental edge less than 20 mm from the internal os in the third trimester are
more likely to need delivery by caesarean section when the placental edge is thicker (over 10 mm)75,76
and/or contains a sponge-like echo77or marginal ‘sinus’.78These additional ultrasound features are poorly
deﬁned, not routinely assessed in UK practice and the success rates of vaginal delivery when the placentaledge is between 10 and 20 mm from the internal os vary widely (56% and 93%, respectively).
79–82The
corresponding studies are small, observational and retrospective, making a recommendation for a speciﬁcmode of delivery based on ultrasound ﬁndings difﬁcult.Evidence
level 2 /C0
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e18 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists5. Optimising the delivery of women with placenta praevia
Prior to delivery, all women with placenta praevia and their partners should have a discussion
regarding delivery. Indications for blood transfusion and hysterectomy should be reviewed and
any plans to decline blood or blood products should be discussed openly and documented.P
Placenta praevia and anterior low-lying placenta carry a higher risk of massive obstetrichaemorrhage and hysterectomy. Delivery should be arranged in a maternity unit with on-siteblood transfusion services and access to critical care.D
Women with atypical antibodies form a particularly high-risk group and the care of thesewomen should involve discussions with the local haematologist and blood bank.D
Prevention and treatment of anaemia during the antenatal period is recommended for womenwith placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta as for any pregnant woman.D
General procedures for discussing and obtaining consent for caesarean section are described in detail in
RCOG Consent Advice No. 7: Caesarean section .83Evidence
level 4
Women having a caesarean section for placenta praevia are at increased risk of blood loss of more than
1000 ml compared with women having a caesarean section for other indications (RR 3.97, 95% CI 3.24 –4.85).84
Women with anterior placenta are at increased risk of blood loss.85Placenta praevia covering the internal
cervical os and anterior placentation are independent risk factors (OR 4.1 and OR 3.5, respectively) formassive haemorrhage during caesarean section.
85A US case –control study from the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units (MFMU) Network CesareanSection Registry has shown that maternal haemorrhagic morbidity is more common in women with praevia(19% versus 7%, adjusted RR 2.6, 95% CI 1.9 –3.5) and the main factors associated with maternal
haemorrhage include pre-delivery anaemia, thrombocytopenia, diabetes and magnesium use.
86Evidence
level 2 ++
The risk of massive haemorrhage together with the possibility of needing a blood transfusion has been
estimated to be approximately 12 times more likely in caesarean section for placenta praevia than incaesarean delivery for other indications.
87,88Similarly to uncomplicated pregnancies, women with placenta
praevia should be screened for anaemia and investigated if their haemoglobin levels are outside the normalUK range (110 g/l at ﬁrst visit and 105 g/l at 28 weeks of gestation).
36Iron supplementation should be
implemented if indicated.
For women at high risk of emergency transfusion, such as those presenting with placenta praevia and with
no clinically signiﬁcant alloantibodies, it has been recommended that group and screen samples should besent once a week to exclude or identify any new antibody formation and to keep blood available ifnecessary for delivery. However, this should be at the discretion of the team responsible and managedaccording to local facilitites.
88Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e19 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists6. Delivery for women with placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta
6.1 What grade of obstetrician and anaesthetist should attend the caesarean delivery of a woman
with placenta praevia?
As a minimum requirement for a planned caesarean section for a woman with placenta
praevia, the surgical procedure should be carried out by an appropriately experienced operator.[New 2018 ]P
In cases of planned caesarean section for placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta, a senior
obstetrician (usually a consultant) and senior anaesthetist (usually a consultant) should bepresent within the delivery or theatre suite where the surgery is occurring.P
When an emergency arises, the senior obstetrician and senior anaesthetist should be alertedimmediately and attend urgently.P
Maternal complications at caesarean section increase when the primary surgeon is a trainee rather than an
experienced surgeon.89Placenta praevia is often associated with additional complications, including fetal
malpresentation (transverse or breech presentation) requiring complex intraoperative manoeuvres todeliver the baby.
90Evidence
level 4
6.2 What anaesthetic procedure is most appropriate for women having a caesarean section for
placenta praevia?
Regional anaesthesia is considered safe and is associated with lower risks of haemorrhage than
general anaesthesia for caesarean delivery in women with placenta praevia or a low-lyingplacenta. Women with anterior placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta should be advised thatit may be necessary to convert to general anaesthesia if required and asked to consent to this.[New 2018 ]D
There is insufﬁcient evidence to support one technique over another and there have been no new trials since the
previous version of this guideline.
An RCT of regional versus general anaesthesia for placenta praevia, including women with placenta
accreta, has indicated that blood transfusion requirements (although not estimated blood loss) are greaterin the general anaesthetic group.
91Evidence
level 1 /C0
A 4-year observational study at 19 US academic centres of women undergoing caesarean delivery found that
the risk factors for haemorrhage-related morbidity are increased in those undergoing general anaesthesia.92Evidence
level 2 /C0
The recent case –control study from the NICHD/MFMU Network Cesarean Section Registry found
general anaesthesia to be one of the main factors associated with maternal haemorrhage in women withplacenta praevia.
86Evidence
level 2 ++
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e20 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists6.3 What blood products should be available?
Close liaison with the hospital transfusion laboratory is essential for women presenting with
placenta praevia or a low-lying placenta. [ New 2018 ]P
Rapid infusion and ﬂuid warming devices should be immediately available. [ New 2018 ]P
Cell salvage is recommended for women where the anticipated blood loss is great enough to
induce anaemia, in particular, in women who would decline blood products.D
Red cells, fresh frozen plasma, and cryoprecipitate or ﬁbrinogen concentrate are all kept by blood banks
supplying obstetric units. If the haemoglobin is less than 70 g/l in the postoperative period, where there isno ongoing or threat of bleeding, the decision to transfuse should be made on an informed individualbasis.
88In an extreme situation and when the blood group is unknown, group O rhesus D-negative red
cells should be given.88Further recommendations are provided in RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 52
Prevention and Management of Postpartum Haemorrhage .87
There is no evidence to support the use of autologous blood transfusion for placenta praevia.89
Cell salvage was not often used previously in obstetrics because of the perceived risk of amniotic ﬂuid
embolism or induction of maternal alloimmunisation. No deﬁnite cases of amniotic ﬂuid embolism havebeen reported so far and the risks of cell salvage in the obstetric population parallel those in thenonpregnant population.
93,94Evidence
level 4
6.4 What surgical approach should be used for women with placenta praevia or a low-lying
placenta?
Consider vertical skin and/or uterine incisions when the fetus is in a transverse lie to avoid the
placenta, particularly below 28 weeks of gestation. [ New 2018 ]P
Consider using preoperative and/or intraoperative ultrasonography to precisely determine
placental location and the optimal place for uterine incision. [ New 2018 ]D
If the placenta is transected during the uterine incision, immediately clamp the umbilical cord
after fetal delivery to avoid excessive fetal blood loss. [ New 2018 ]D
If pharmacological measures fail to control haemorrhage, initiate intrauterine tamponade and/
or surgical haemostatic techniques sooner rather than later. Interventional radiologicaltechniques should also be urgently employed where possible. [ New 2018 ]C
Early recourse to hysterectomy is recommended if conservative medical and surgical
interventions prove ineffective. [ New 2018 ]D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e21 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsIn cases of anterior placenta praevia, cutting through the placenta is often associated with increased
maternal bleeding. A retrospective cohort study found that avoiding incision of the anterior placentapraevia after 24 weeks of gestation reduces the need for maternal blood transfusion during or aftercaesarean delivery.
95
A ‘J’-shaped uterine incision has been evaluated in women presenting with placenta praevia in a smallretrospective study and shown to decrease intraoperative blood loss and facilitate the delivery of thefetus.
96Evidence
level 2 /C0
Intrauterine balloon tamponade, different types of compression sutures and uterine artery occlusion
techniques have been increasingly used since the previous version of the guideline in women with placentapraevia to control, reduce or stop intraoperative bleeding and PPH. Case series on the use of intrauterinehydrostatic balloon catheters, including the Bakri balloon,
97–101the BT-Cath/C226balloon102or the
Sengstaken –Blakemore tube,103in women with placenta praevia have reported success in controlling PPH
ranging from 75% to 88%.Evidence
level 3
Factors associated with the failure of Bakri balloon tamponade for placenta praevia include prior caesarean
section, anterior placentation, thrombocytopenia and/or coagulopathy at the time of insertion, and a PPHvolume of more than 500 ml within the ﬁrst 1 hour of placement.
99Evidence
level 2 ++
Uterine compressive and endouterine sutures are well established techniques for the control of
haemorrhage following atonic PPH. The best known suture technique was described by B-Lynch in1997.
104A combined method of B-Lynch suture and the intrauterine balloon has also been successfully
used in preventing PPH in placenta praevia.105
Intraoperative interventional radiological techniques, including transarterial embolisation106and temporary
balloon occlusion107of the internal iliac arteries, have also been successfully used to prevent and control
haemorrhage in placenta praevia and should be considered when available. Follow-up studies of womenwho have undergone arterial embolisation for control of PPH suggest that the intervention does notimpair subsequent menstruation and fertility.
108–110Evidence
level 3
7. Antenatal diagnosis and outcome of women with placenta accreta spectrum
7.1 What are the risk factors for women with placenta accreta spectrum?
The major risk factors for placenta accreta spectrum are history of accreta in a previous
pregnancy, previous caesarean delivery and other uterine surgery, including repeatedendometrial curettage. This risk rises as the number of prior caesarean sections increases.[New 2018 ]B
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e22 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsWomen requesting elective caesarean delivery for non-medical indications should be informed
of the risk of placenta accreta spectrum and its consequences for subsequent pregnancies.[New 2018 ]P
All epidemiological studies of the last 2 decades have shown a direct association between the increase in
caesarean deliveries and the incidence of placenta accreta spectrum (abnormally adherent and invasiveplacenta) in subsequent pregnancies worldwide.
111–121The 2016 Nordic Obstetric Surveillance Study
found that the risk of invasive placentation increases seven-fold after one prior caesarean section.117Evidence
level 2 +
A meta-analysis of ﬁve cohorts and 11 case –control studies reported a summary OR of 1.96
(95% CI 1.41 –2.74) for placenta accreta spectrum after a caesarean section.24
The risk of placenta accreta spectrum increases with the number of previous caesarean sections. A
systematic review reported an increase in the incidence of accreta placentation from 3.3 –4.0% in women
with placenta praevia and no previous caesarean delivery, to 50 –67% in women with three or more
caesarean deliveries.25When stratiﬁed for the number of previous caesarean sections, the OR for
placenta accreta spectrum in a subsequent pregnancy ranges between 8.6 (95% CI 3.536 –21.078)111and
17.4 (95% CI 9.0 –31.4) for two previous caesarean sections, and 55.9 (95% CI 25.0 –110.3) for three or
more caesarean sections.120Evidence
level 2 ++
Placenta praevia is another important risk factor for placenta accreta spectrum (see Appendix II). A large
multicentre US cohort study noted that for women presenting with placenta praevia and prior caesareansection the risk of accreta placentation is 3%, 11%, 40%, 61% and 67% for one, two, three, four, and ﬁveor more caesarean deliveries, respectively.
112The national case –control study using the UK Obstetric
Surveillance System found that the incidence of placenta accreta spectrum increases from 1.7 per 10 000women overall to 577 per 10 000 in women with both a previous caesarean section and placentapraevia.
113Evidence
level 2 +
Other additional risk factors include maternal age110,113,117,120and ART, in particular in vitro
fertilisation.113,120,122 –125Advanced maternal age (35 years or more) in women without a previous
caesarean section increases the aOR by 1.30 (95% CI 1.13 –1.50) for every 1-year increase in age.113Evidence
level 2 /C0
Placenta accreta spectrum is not exclusively a consequence of caesarean delivery. Other surgical trauma
to the integrity of the uterine endometrium and/or superﬁcial myometrium, such as those followinguterine curettage, manual removal of the placenta, postpartum endometritis or myomectomy, has beenassociated with accreta placentation in subsequent pregnancies.
1,12,13Overall, the aOR for placenta
accreta spectrum after previous uterine surgery is 3.40 (95% CI 1.30 –8.91).113Evidence
level 2 +
The development of placenta accreta spectrum has also been reported in women with no surgical history
but presenting with a uterine pathology, such as bicornuate uterus, adenomyosis, submucous ﬁbroids andmyotonic dystrophy.
1,12,13Evidence
level 3
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e23 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsMore recently, there has been an increase in reports describing implantation into deﬁcient caesarean
section scars and mounting evidence that a caesarean scar pregnancy diagnosed in early pregnancy can
evolve into an abnormally adherent or invasive placenta in the second half of pregnancy.126–130A
caesarean scar pregnancy can be diagnosed using TVS from the second month of pregnancy using speciﬁcultrasound criteria.
129,130In the last decade, the number of reported cases of caesarean scar pregnancy
has increased due to improved awareness of the condition, widespread use of ultrasound scanning in earlypregnancy and an increase in the number of prior caesarean sections. The outcome of caesarean scarpregnancy depends on the amount of deﬁnitive placenta developing inside the scar and depth of villousinvasion. Further data are required to establish the relationship between a ﬁrst trimester scar pregnancyand the development of invasive placentation.Evidence
level 3
7.2 How can placenta accreta spectrum be suspected and diagnosed antenatally?
Antenatal diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum is crucial in planning its management and has
been shown to reduce maternal morbidity and mortality. [ New 2018 ]D
Previous caesarean delivery and the presence of an anterior low-lying placenta or placenta
praevia should alert the antenatal care team of the higher risk of placenta accreta spectrum.D
Maternal complications in placenta accreta spectrum are primarily the result of massive haemorrhage.5
Median estimated blood loss in cohorts of placenta accreta spectrum ranges from 2000 to 7800 ml and
the median number of units of blood transfused is 5 units.131Antenatal diagnosis of placenta accreta
spectrum reduces maternal peripartum haemorrhage and morbidity.20,132 –135Evidence
level 4
Population studies have shown that placenta accreta spectrum remains undiagnosed before delivery in
one-half136to two-thirds of cases.120In a series from specialist centres, approximately one-third of cases
of placenta accreta were not diagnosed during pregnancy.137Evidence
level 2 +
Multidisciplinary management in a maternity unit with access to maternal and neonatal intensive care is
often required for women with placenta accreta spectrum.21,22,135,138For such care to be organised, the
diagnosis must be made antenatally.Evidence
level 4
7.2.1 Ultrasound screening and diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum
Ultrasound imaging is highly accurate when performed by a skilled operator with experience in
diagnosing placenta accreta spectrum. [ New 2018 ]C
Refer women with any ultrasound features suggestive of placenta accreta spectrum to a
specialist unit with imaging expertise. [ New 2018 ]B
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e24 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsWomen with a history of previous caesarean section seen to have an anterior low-lying
placenta or placenta praevia at the routine fetal anomaly scan should be speci ﬁcally screened
for placenta accreta spectrum. [ New 2018 ]D
Numerous ultrasound imaging techniques have been reported over the years, including greyscale imaging
and colour Doppler imaging (CDI), and/or three-dimensional power Doppler sonography.16,17,139 –141In
2016, the European Working Group on Abnormally Invasive Placenta proposed a standardised descriptionof ultrasound signs (see Appendix III) used for the prenatal diagnosis of placenta accreta
140and the
International Abnormally Invasive Placenta Expert Group produced a proforma protocol for the
ultrasound assessment.141Evidence
level 4
A systematic review and meta-analysis of 23 ultrasound studies including 3707 pregnancies at risk of
placenta accreta found that the overall performance of ultrasound when performed by skilled operatorswas very good with a sensitivity of 90.72% (95% CI 87.2 –93.6), speciﬁcity of 96.94% (95% CI 96.3 –97.5)
and diagnostic OR of 98.59 (95%CI 48.8 –199.0). Among the different ultrasound signs, abnormality of the
uterus –bladder interface had the best speciﬁcity of 99.75% (95% CI 99.5 –99.9) for the prediction of
placenta accreta. Abnormal vasculature on CDI had the best predictive accuracy with a sensitivity of90.74% (95% CI 85.2 –94.7), speciﬁcity of 87.68% (95% CI 84.6 –90.4) and diagnostic OR of 69.02
(95% CI 22.8 –208.9).
142
A 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis using the standardised ultrasound signs (see Appendix III) has
shown that in women presenting with placenta praevia and history of prior caesarean section, theperformance of ultrasound for the antenatal detection of placenta accreta spectrum is even higher with asensitivity of 97.0% (95% CI 93.0 –99.0), speciﬁcity of 97.0% (95% CI 97.0 –98.0) and diagnostic OR of
228.5 (95% CI 67.2 –776.9) in prospective studies.
143Placental lacunae give the placenta a ‘moth-eaten’
appearance on greyscale imaging and the increased vascularity of the placental bed with large feedervessels entering the lacunae are the most common ultrasound signs associated with placenta accretaspectrum.
16,17,142,143
Determining the depth and lateral extension of placental invasion is helpful for planning the individual careof women diagnosed with placenta accreta spectrum.
16,17,144No ultrasound sign or a combination of
ultrasound signs have so far been found to be speciﬁc to the depth of placenta accreta spectrum toprovide an accurate differential diagnosis between adherent and invasive accreta placentation.
16This may
be due to the wide heterogeneity in terminology used to describe the grades of placenta accretaspectrum, differences in study design with most studies not reporting detailed data on clinical diagnosis atbirth and/or on histopathology examination, and many studies having included cases of placental retentionin their cohort with no evidence of abnormal villous adherence or invasion.Evidence
level 2 ++
As the vast majority of placenta accreta spectrum are now the consequence of low placentation into a
previous caesarean section scar, TVS has an important role in the early diagnosis, follow-up, differentialdiagnosis between adherent and invasive accreta placentation, and management of placenta accretaspectrum.
143Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e25 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists7.2.2 Is there a role for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum?
Clinicians should be aware that the diagnostic value of MRI and ultrasound imaging in detecting
placenta accreta spectrum is similar when performed by experts. [ New 2018 ]C
MRI may be used to complement ultrasound imaging to assess the depth of invasion and
lateral extension of myometrial invasion, especially with posterior placentation and/or inwomen with ultrasound signs suggesting parametrial invasion.P
MRI has been increasingly used for the prenatal diagnosis of placenta accreta.145–149The main MRI
features of placenta accreta include abnormal uterine bulging, dark intraplacental bands on T2-weightedimaging, heterogeneous signal intensity within the placenta, disorganised vasculature of placenta anddisruption of the uteroplacental zone. A systematic review has found that most studies are of a smallsample size and thus, sensitivity and speciﬁcity of MRI in diagnosing placenta accreta varies widely between75% and 100%, and 65% and 100%, respectively.
148
Two systematic reviews and meta-analyses have found that the diagnostic value of ultrasound imaging andMRI in detecting placenta accreta spectrum is similar. The ﬁrst review
147included 13 studies and reported
a sensitivity of 83% (95% CI 77 –88), speciﬁcity of 95% (95% CI 93 –96) and detection OR of 63.41
(95% CI 29.04 –138.48) for ultrasound, compared with a sensitivity of 82% (95% CI 72 –90), speciﬁcity of
88% (95% CI 81 –94) and detection OR of 22.95 (95% CI 3.19 –165.11) for MRI. The second review
(2014)148included 18 studies and found that the overall diagnostic accuracy of MRI has a sensitivity
of 94.4% (95% CI 86.0 –97.9), speciﬁcity of 84.0% (95% CI 76.0 –89.8) and diagnostic OR of 89.0
(95% CI 22.8 –348.1). The latter review also found that MRI has high predictive accuracy in assessing both
the depth and topography of placental invasion.Evidence
level 2 ++
The use of intravenous gadolinium injection may increase the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of MRI in the
diagnosis of the invasive forms of placenta accreta spectrum but the evidence on long-term fetal safety islimited.
149Furthermore, the experience of the radiologists remains an independent factor in the diagnostic
accuracy of MRI.Evidence
level 4
7.3 Where should women with placenta accreta spectrum be cared for?
Women diagnosed with placenta accreta spectrum should be cared for by a multidisciplinary
team in a specialist centre with expertise in diagnosing and managing invasive placentation.[New 2018 ]P
Delivery for women diagnosed with placenta accreta spectrum should take place in a specialist
centre with logistic support for immediate access to blood products, adult intensive care unitand NICU by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in complex pelvic surgery. [ New 2018 ]D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e26 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsMore data have become available since the last version of this guideline on the speciﬁc management of
placenta accreta spectrum. Overall, women with accreta placentation should be cared for according to therisks of severe maternal bleeding and premature delivery. Placenta percreta can be associated with majorprenatal complications from early in pregnancy, such as uterine rupture
150–152and bladder involvement
with associated life-threatening haemorrhage.153–155
A 2015 expert review has suggested that caesarean delivery of women at high risk and/or diagnosed
prenatally with placenta accreta spectrum, in particular its invasive forms, should occur in a specialist
centre with multidisciplinary expertise and experience in managing complex pelvic surgery, and with
access to an adult intensive care unit and NICU.135Evidence
level 4
A retrospective cohort study of 77 women with suspected placenta accreta found that women who
delivered prior to a planned delivery date were signiﬁcantly more likely to have had vaginal bleeding anduterine activity when compared with women who had a scheduled delivery.
20Each episode of antenatal
vaginal bleeding is associated with an increased risk of unscheduled delivery (aOR 3.8, 95% CI 1.8 –7.8) and
the risk increases when associated with preterm prelabour rupture of membranes.Evidence
level 2 /C0
Considering the higher frequency of placenta praevia in the accreta group,143,156these results are likely to
be inﬂuenced by the perinatal complications of placenta praevia. Surveys of healthcare providers in the USand Canada have highlighted widely varied approaches to virtually every aspect of care for placentaaccreta spectrum.
157–160Similarly, a recent online survey completed by members of the expert panel for
the perinatal management of placenta accreta spectrum disorders for the International Federation ofGynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) has found wide variation in global practices.
161Evidence
level 4
There is increasing evidence from retrospective cohort studies from the USA that women with placenta
accreta spectrum diagnosed prenatally, cared for by a specialist multidisciplinary team, are less likely torequire large volume blood transfusion and reoperation within 7 days of delivery for bleeding complicationscompared with women cared for by non-multidisciplinary standard obstetric care without a speciﬁcprotocol.
21,22,135,138,162,163Women admitted at 34 weeks of gestation and delivered between 34 and
35 weeks of gestation by a specialist multidisciplinary team have a signiﬁcantly lower emergency surgeryrate than those not cared for by such a team (23% versus 64%; P=0.001) despite a similar median
gestational age at delivery [34 (16 –39) weeks versus 34 (19 –40) weeks; P=0.50, respectively].
21In addition,
maternal outcomes are improved over time with increasing experience within a well-establishedmultidisciplinary team performing two to three cases per month.
22Very few of these studies provide data
on the differential clinical diagnosis between abnormally adherent and abnormally invasive accreta, ordetailed pathologic conﬁrmation of the depth and lateral extension of villous myometrial invasion.Evidence
level 2 /C0
7.4 When should delivery be planned for women with placenta accreta spectrum?
In the absence of risk factors for preterm delivery in women with placenta accreta spectrum,
planned delivery at 35+0to 36+6weeks of gestation provides the best balance between fetal
maturity and the risk of unscheduled delivery. [ New 2018 ]P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e27 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsSimilarly to placenta praevia, clinical factors should be considered when determining the timing of
administration of antenatal corticosteroids and the optimal gestational age for delivery in women with
placental accreta.164,165There are currently no RCTs or well-controlled observational studies to guide
best practice in delivery timing of placenta accreta spectrum.
In cases of suspected placenta accreta spectrum, where signiﬁcant blood loss and caesarean hysterectomy
is anticipated, delivery at between 34 and 35 weeks of gestation has been proposed in order to avoidemergency delivery, which still occurs about 20% of the time even in scheduled cases.
164,166A 2010
decision analysis supports this approach based on the increasing likelihood of emergency delivery aspregnancy goes beyond 34 weeks of gestation.
167Evidence
level 4
The data of three recent single institution retrospective cohort studies of women with prior caesarean
delivery diagnosed prenatally with placenta accreta have indicated that in the absence of risk factors forpreterm delivery, it is safe to plan the delivery at 36 weeks of gestation. The ﬁrst study included 103 womendelivered between 1982 and 2002 and found that the mean gestational age at delivery is 33
+5weeks of
gestation in cases of deep placental invasion (increta and percreta) compared with 35+2weeks of gestation in
the superﬁcial adherent group.168The second study of 216 women found that urgent delivery for bleeding
decreased signiﬁcantly with advancing gestation.169Most women were delivered at 36 weeks of gestation or
greater, with nearly 90% in the absence of bleeding complications. The third study of 84 women who hadreached 34
+0weeks of gestation with a suspected praevia accreta found that those with no risk factors for
preterm birth are at low risk for an unscheduled delivery prior to 36 weeks of gestation.170Evidence
level 2 +
8. Planning delivery of women with suspected placenta accreta spectrum
Once the diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum is made, a contingency plan for emergency
delivery should be developed in partnership with the woman, including the use of aninstitutional protocol for the management of maternal haemorrhage. [ New 2018 ]P
Due to a lack of RCTs or well-controlled observational studies, the optimal management of placenta accreta
spectrum remains undeﬁned and is determined by the expertise available, the depth and lateral extension of theaccreta portion of the placenta, the presence of an associated placenta praevia, radiological ﬁndings, the medical andsurgical comorbidities, and ﬁnally, the accessibility of a regional team focused on these patients.
The main risk associated with the delivery of placenta accreta spectrum is massive haemorrhage and its
associated complications, such as coagulopathy, multisystem organ failure and death. Many women withplacenta accreta spectrum require massive blood transfusion (8 units or more) and their median plateletcount is lowest compared with other causes of massive PPH.
171,172Evidence
level 2 +
A review of 34 studies published between 1977 and 2012, including a total number of 508 617 deliveries
and 865 cases of conﬁrmed placenta accreta, found that the most signiﬁcant maternal risks associated withdelivery are the need for postpartum transfusion due to haemorrhage and peripartum hysterectomy.Maternal mortality remains rare, but signiﬁcantly higher than among matched postpartum controls.
122
Transfusions in placenta accreta spectrum should be guided by a national and/or institutional protocol forthe management of PPH.
87,88Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e28 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists8.1 What should be included in the consent form for caesarean section in women with suspected
placenta accreta spectrum?
Any woman giving consent for caesarean section should understand the risks associated with
caesarean section in general, and the speci ﬁc risks of placenta accreta spectrum in terms of
massive obstetric haemorrhage, increased risk of lower urinary tract damage, the need forblood transfusion and the risk of hysterectomy.P
Additional possible interventions in the case of massive haemorrhage should also be discussed,including cell salvage and interventional radiology where available. [ New 2018 ]D
Any woman with suspected placenta accreta spectrum should meet with a senior obstetrician in the
antenatal period. The different risks and treatment options should have been discussed and a plan agreed,which should be reﬂected clearly in the consent form and medical record. This should include standarddiscussion for the caesarean section procedure
83and whether conservative management of the placenta
or proceeding straight to hysterectomy is preferred in the situation where increta or percreta isconﬁrmed at surgery.
Where available, cell salvage should be considered. If the woman refuses donor blood transfusion, it is
recommended
88that she be transferred to a unit with a cell saver.Evidence
level 4
8.2 What healthcare professionals should be involved?
The elective delivery of women with placenta accreta spectrum should be managed by a
multidisciplinary team, which should include senior anaesthetists, obstetricians and gynaecologistswith appropriate experience in managing the condition and other surgical specialties if indicated. Inan emergency, the most senior clinicians available should be involved.P
Following the previous version of the guideline, the National Patient Safety Agency in collaboration with
the RCOG and the Royal College of Midwives set up an expert working group to develop a care bundlefor placenta accreta.
173Six elements of good care were agreed upon. The care bundle was then tested in
six units over a 5-month pilot study period and it was found to be both achievable and practical. Clinicaloutcomes were monitored, conﬁrming the high morbidity associated with this condition.Evidence
level 4
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e29 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsThe six elements considered to be reﬂective of good care are:
/C15Consultant obstetrician planning and directly supervising delivery.
/C15Consultant anaesthetist planning and directly supervising anaesthesia at delivery.
/C15Blood and blood products available.
/C15Multidisciplinary involvement in preoperative planning.
/C15Discussion and consent, including possible interventions (such as hysterectomy, leaving the placenta in situ, cell
salvage and interventional radiology).
/C15Local availability of a level 2 critical care bed.
The 2015 MBRRACE report from the Conﬁdential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths in the UK has indicated
that despite increasing numbers of women at risk from placenta accreta spectrum following previouscaesarean section, only one death occurred in a woman who had a placenta praevia percreta and historyof two previous caesarean sections.
174There were no deaths from unexpected placenta accreta found at
caesarean section, suggesting that previous recommendations regarding imaging and preparations forwomen with placenta praevia and a previous caesarean section have been followed.
175Evidence
level 2 ++
A 2015 single centre retrospective cohort study of the effectiveness of a standardised operative approach
in 98 cases of histologically conﬁrmed placenta accreta supports the early presence of a gynaecologicalsurgeon and oncologist at delivery and demonstrates that a ‘call if needed’ approach is not acceptable forthese complex cases.
176Evidence
level 2 +
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) guidelines highlight that to enhance
patient safety, it is important that the delivery be performed by an experienced obstetric team thatincludes an obstetric surgeon, with other surgical specialists, such as urologists, general surgeons, andgynaecological surgeons and oncologists, available if necessary.
165Evidence
level 4
8.3 What anaesthetic is most appropriate for delivery?
The choice of anaesthetic technique for caesarean section for women with placenta accreta
spectrum should be made by the anaesthetist conducting the procedure in consultation withthe woman prior to surgery.P
The woman should be informed that the surgical procedure can be performed safely withregional anaesthesia but should be advised that it may be necessary to convert to generalanaesthesia if required and asked to consent to this. [ New 2018 ]D
Both general and regional anaesthetic techniques have been shown to be safe for surgical procedures
required for the delivery of placenta accreta spectrum; the judgment of which type of technique to beused should be made on an individual basis.
166Evidence
level 4
There is insufﬁcient evidence to support one technique over another and there have been no new trials since the
previous version of this guideline.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e30 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists8.4 Optimising the delivery of women with placenta accreta spectrum
There are no RCTs comparing different surgical approaches for placenta accreta spectrum suspected
antenatally. Both conservative and radical surgical approaches can be associated with a high maternal morbidityalthough the value of an experienced team in a specialist centre decreases the risk signiﬁcantly.
21,22,135,138,162,163Evidence
level 4
8.4.1 What surgical approach should be used for women with placenta accreta spectrum?
Caesarean section hysterectomy with the placenta left in situ is preferable to attempting to
separate it from the uterine wall.C
When the extent of the placenta accreta is limited in depth and surface area, and the entireplacental implantation area is accessible and visualised (i.e. completely anterior, fundal orposterior without deep pelvic invasion), uterus preserving surgery may be appropriate, includingpartial myometrial resection. [ New 2018 ] P
Uterus preserving surgical techniques should only be attempted by surgeons working in teams
with appropriate expertise to manage such cases and after appropriate counselling regardingrisks and with informed consent. [ New 2018 ]D
There are currently insuf ﬁcient data to recommend the routine use of ureteric stents in
placenta accreta spectrum. The use of stents may have a role when the urinary bladder isinvaded by placental tissue (see section 8.4.2). [ New 2018 ]C
The choice of surgical technique will depend on the position of the placenta, the depth of invasion, and
the parametrial extension of the placenta accreta spectrum as assessed by ultrasound and/or MRI beforedelivery, the visual assessment of the uterus at the time of surgery and the presenting clinical symptoms,i.e. bleeding or no bleeding.
5
The ACOG recommends planned, preterm caesarean section hysterectomy with the placenta left in situas removal of a placenta accreta spectrum is associated with signiﬁcant haemorrhagic morbidity.
165In
cases of high suspicion for accreta during caesarean delivery, the majority of members of the US Societyof Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM) and FIGO expert panel proceed with hysterectomy.
157–161Evidence
level 4
Similarly, in a 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis on the diagnosis and outcome of placenta accreta,
an elective or emergency caesarean hysterectomy was performed in 208 out of 232 (89.7%) cases.143Evidence
level 2 ++
A retrospective study of 57 cases of suspected accreta demonstrated signiﬁcantly reduced short-term
morbidity if the placenta is left in place and hysterectomy is performed electively compared withattempting to remove the placenta ﬁrst.
177Attempting placental separation risks hysterectomy in up to
100% of cases as also conﬁrmed by other authors.177,178Evidence
level 2 ++
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e31 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAc a s e –control study of 49 women requiring a peripartum hysterectomy for massive haemorrhage,
including 20 women presenting with placenta accreta, reported that the use of a vessel sealing device
during surgery decreases the estimated blood loss, the need for massive blood transfusions, and does not
increase operative time or complication rates.179Evidence
level 2 +
A systematic review found that uterus preserving surgery resulted in a secondary hysterectomy in
24/77 women (31%), maternal mortality in 2/55 women (4%), subsequent menstruation in 28/34 women(82%) and subsequent pregnancy in 19/26 women (73%).
180A more recent systematic review showed that
uterus preserving surgery is associated with a success rate of 48/76 women (63.2%), a secondaryhysterectomy in 23/76 women (30.0%), maternal mortality in 2/54 women (3.7%), subsequentmenstruation in 20/37 women (81.1%) and subsequent pregnancy in 21/27 women (77.8%).
181Evidence
level 2 ++
A small cohort study has shown that the introduction of the Triple-P procedure [perioperative placental
localisation, pelvic devascularisation and placental non-separation] involving delivery of the fetus viatransverse uterine incision above the upper border of the placenta, myometrial excision andreconstruction of the uterine wall reduces the rate of hysterectomy, PPH and duration of hospital stay inwomen with placenta accreta.
182The incidence of postoperative complications of the Triple-P procedure
depends on comorbidities and in particular, the placental position and the depth of villous invasion.183
Small case series have also reported on the successful use of compression sutures and on using the cervixas a natural tamponade by inverting it into the uterine cavity, and suturing the anterior and/or theposterior cervical lips into the anterior and/or posterior walls of the lower uterine segment.
184–187Evidence
level 3
A systematic review of peripartum surgical techniques used in placenta accreta spectrum has found that
methotrexate (MTX) and uterus preserving surgical techniques are associated with a 16% unintentionalurinary tract injury rate as opposed to 57% for standard hysterectomy and that use of ureteric stentsreduces the risk of urologic injury.
188Evidence
level 2 ++
There are no RCTs on the use of ureteric stents in placenta accreta spectrum. Ureteric stents or
catheters are more commonly used preoperatively in the USA where around 26% of the members ofboth the SMFM
158and ACOG fellows160are using them in the management of suspected abnormally
invasive placenta.Evidence
level 4
8.4.2 What surgical approach should be used for women with placenta percreta?
There is limited evidence to support uterus preserving surgery in placenta percreta and women
should be informed of the high risk of peripartum and secondary complications, including theneed for secondary hysterectomy. [ New 2018 ]D
The following four approaches have been described.136,158 –160,164,166,189
1. Primary hysterectomy following delivery of the fetus, without attempting placental separation.
2. Delivery of the fetus avoiding the placenta, with repair of the incision leaving the placenta in situ (see
section 8.5).
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e32 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists3. Delivery of the fetus without disturbing the placenta, followed by partial excision of the uterine wall (placental
implantation site) and repair of the uterus.
4. Delivery of the fetus without disturbing the placenta, and leaving it in situ, followed by elective secondary
hysterectomy 3 –7 days following the primary procedure.
There are no well-controlled observational studies, and therefore, no ﬁrm recommendations can be made.
Women with placenta percreta are more likely to require additional blood products and intensive care
admission than women with placenta creta or increta.189The incidence of urological complications is also
increased, including cystotomy and ureteric injury.190
When the urinary bladder is invaded by placental tissue, preoperative cystoscopy and the placement ofureteric stents have been recommended.
160,191Planned cystotomy can prevent extensive muscularis
damage and bleeding from attempts at dissection.191
Filling the bladder to identify the bladder separation site, opening the bladder to identify percreta villoustissue and removal of the involved bladder area have also been recommended by differentauthors.
160,164,192Evidence
level 4
Uterus preserving surgery is possible in placenta percreta as demonstrated in a cohort study of
71 women. A multidisciplinary stepwise surgical approach, including bilateral ligations of the anteriordivision of the iliac arteries before removing the placenta, was shown to be successful in controlling thebleeding and preserving the woman’s uterus in around 90% of the cases, with 14% of urinary tractcomplications, most of which can be identiﬁed and repaired during caesarean section.
193Evidence
level 3
A review of 119 placenta percreta cases published in the international literature has shown that expectant
management with the placenta left in situ is associated with severe long-term complications of
haemorrhage and infections, including a 58% risk of secondary hysterectomy up to 9 months after the
birth. Local resection appears to be associated with fewer complications within 24 hours postoperativelycompared with hysterectomy or leaving the placenta in situ. However, a selection bias in the direction ofless severe cases for the local resection technique may in part explain the lower complication rates withthat approach.
194Evidence
level 4
8.5 Expectant management (leaving the placenta in situ )
Elective peripartum hysterectomy may be unacceptable to women desiring uterine preservation
or considered inappropriate by the surgical team. In such cases, leaving the placenta in situshould be considered. [ New 2018 ]D
When the placenta is left in situ, local arrangements need to be made to ensure regular
review, ultrasound examination and access to emergency care should the woman experiencecomplications, such as bleeding or infection. [ New 2018 ]D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e33 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsMTX adjuvant therapy should not be used for expectant management as it is of unproven
beneﬁt and has signi ﬁcant adverse effects. [ New 2018 ]C
Conservative management in placenta accreta spectrum, including in cases of placenta increta and
percreta, is an option for women who desire to preserve their fertility. However, it is not recommended
in women presenting with major bleeding as it is unlikely to be successful and risks delaying deﬁnitive
treatment and increasing morbidity.5Evidence
level 4
A retrospective multicentre study examined 167 women treated conservatively for placenta accreta in
tertiary university hospital centres in France between 1993 and 2007. Conservative expectantmanagement with part of the placenta left in situ was successful in 131 out of 167 cases (78.4%;95% CI 71.4 –84.4).
195One woman died of myelosuppression and nephrotoxicity related to MTX
administration through the umbilical cord. Spontaneous placental resorption occurred in 87 out of 116cases (75.0%; 95% CI 66.1 –82.6), with a median delay from delivery of 13.5 weeks (range 4 –60 weeks).
195Evidence
level 2 +
Women should be warned of the risks of chronic bleeding, sepsis, septic shock, peritonitis, uterine
necrosis, ﬁstula, injury to adjacent organs, acute pulmonary oedema, acute renal failure, deep venousthrombosis or pulmonary embolism.
195Prophylactic antibiotics may be helpful in the immediate
postpartum period to reduce the risk of infective complications.196Evidence
level 4
An observational case series, including 24 women with placenta accreta left in situ after delivery and
treated with MTX, reported placental delivery in 33.3% of the cases (spontaneously in 55%, and in 45%following dilatation and surgical evacuation).
197There was no control group of women who did not
receive MTX and so it is unknown whether or not the MTX was clinically helpful. One woman did sufferliver damage and the risks of this therapy must be balanced against the unproven beneﬁt.
The pattern of follow-up for the conservative management of placenta accreta spectrum is not supported
by RCTs and is not stratiﬁed according to the depth and lateral extension of villous myometrial invasion.Some authors have reported cases where retained villous tissues have been removed after conservativemanagement using hysteroscopic resection
198,199or high-intensity focused ultrasound.200In rare cases, a
disseminated intravascular coagulation may develop requiring a secondary hysterectomy.201Evidence
level 3
8.6 When is interventional radiology indicated?
Larger studies are necessary to determine the safety and ef ﬁcacy of interventional radiology
before this technique can be advised in the routine management of placenta accreta spectrum.[New 2018 ]D
Women diagnosed with placenta accreta spectrum who decline donor blood transfusion should
be cared for in a unit with an interventional radiology service.D
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e34 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsSince the publication of the last version of this guideline there have been several cohort studies describing
the use of interventional radiology in assisting surgical and conservative management of placenta accreta with
variable success. The main aim of this procedure is to reduce the risks of intraoperative haemorrhage during
the caesarean delivery of pregnancies diagnosed antenatally with placenta accreta spectrum. Variouscombinations have been proposed, including intraoperative internal iliac artery and/or postoperative uterineartery embolisation
202,203and internal iliac artery204–207or abdominal balloon occlusion.208–212The latter
technique has been increasingly used in China. However, the methodology of these studies is veryheterogeneous with no data on the diagnosis of the different grades of villous invasion and variableconfounding factors, such as placental position and number of previous caesarean deliveries. Small cohortstudies have also been published on the use of a tourniquet
213,214and of surgical artery ligation.215Evidence
level 3
A single institution observational cohort study of 45 cases of placenta accreta describes the use of
prophylactic lower abdominal aorta balloon occlusion and found a reduced need for blood transfusion.209
One of the cases was complicated by lower extremity arterial thrombosis and another by ischaemic injuryto the femoral nerve. A comparative study of abdominal aortic occlusion versus internal iliacartery occlusion found that aortic balloon occlusion resulted in better clinical outcomes with less bloodloss, blood transfusion, balloon insertion time, ﬂuoroscopy time and fetal radiation dose.
212Evidence
level 2 /C0
A systematic review reported success rates of 159/177 (89.8%) for arterial embolisation, with secondary
hysterectomy being necessary in 20/177 (11.3%) and subsequent menstruation occurring in 74/85 (87.1%). In3/10 women (30%) a subsequent pregnancy occurred. Arterial balloon occlusion catheters have beenassociated with a success rate of 33/42 (78.6%) and the need for a secondary hysterectomy in 8/42 (19%).
181Evidence
level 2 ++
The value of prophylactic placement of balloon catheters in the iliac arteries in cases of placenta accreta
has been more controversial. This is mainly because of the higher risks of complications thanembolisation, including iliac artery thrombus or rupture, and ischaemic nerve injury.
216–219Evidence
level 3
A small RCT of women presenting with a prenatal diagnosis of placenta accreta was published in 2015.220
The women were randomised to either preoperative prophylactic balloon catheters (n =13) or to a
control group (n =14). No difference was observed for the number of women with blood loss greater
than 2500 ml, number of plasma products transfused, duration of surgery, peripartum complications andhospitalisation length. Reversible adverse effects related to prophylactic balloon catheter insertion werenoted in 2/13 (15.4%) cases.Evidence
level 1 +
8.7 How are women with undiagnosed or unsuspected placenta accreta spectrum best managed
at delivery?
If at the time of an elective repeat caesarean section, where both mother and baby are stable,
it is immediately apparent that placenta percreta is present on opening the abdomen, thecaesarean section should be delayed until the appropriate staff and resources have beenassembled and adequate blood products are available. This may involve closure of the maternalabdomen and urgent transfer to a specialist unit for delivery. [ New 2018 ]P
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e35 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsIn case of unsuspected placenta accreta spectrum diagnosed after the birth of the baby, the
placenta should be left in situ and an emergency hysterectomy performed. [ New 2018 ]D
If the placenta fails to separate with the usual measures, leaving it in place and closing, or leaving it in
place, closing the uterus and proceeding to a hysterectomy are both associated with less blood loss than
trying to separate it. Attempts at removing placenta accreta at caesarean section can lead to massive
haemorrhage, high maternal morbidity and possible maternal death. These risks are particularly high whenthe caesarean section takes place in an environment with no emergency access to blood bank productsand expertise in managing placenta accreta.
20,21,122,135Evidence
level 4
9. Clinical governance
9.1 Debrieﬁng
Postnatal follow-up should include debrieﬁng with an explanation of what happened, why it happened and any
implications for future pregnancy or fertility. In particular, women where conservative treatment of placenta accretaspectrum has been successful should be informed of the risk of recurrence.
9.2 Training
Raising the awareness about the clinical risk factors of placenta accreta spectrum should be pursued locally, includingorganising policies or guidelines for ﬂagging up women at risk and arranging for them to see a specialist consultantwhen suspected.
There should be appropriate training for ultrasound staff in the antenatal diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum.
9.3 Clinical incident reporting
Any lack of compliance with the care bundle by the clinical team for a woman with either placenta praevia or accreta
should be investigated.
There should be written protocols for the identiﬁcation of and planning further care of women suspected to have
placenta accreta spectrum.
10. Recommendations for future research
/C15A large prospective study comparing the impact on the management of the use of the ‘low-lying placenta or
placenta praevia’ classiﬁcation with the traditional classiﬁcation grades of I –IV at different gestations is
needed.
/C15P r o s p e c t i v es t u d i e sa r en e e d e dt oa s s e s st h er o l eo ft h i r dt r imester ultrasound in evaluating the risks of haemorrhage
and emergency caesarean section in low-lying p lacenta and determining the mode of delivery.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e36 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists/C15Large prospective population-based studies are needed to assess whether ultrasound is a cost-effective
screening tool for placenta accreta spectrum in women with a history of caesarean section(s) presenting with alow-lying placenta or placenta praevia in the second trimester of pregnancy.
/C15Prospective comparative studies of ultrasound imaging, including transvaginal ultrasound and MRI, are needed toevaluate the diagnostic accuracy for evaluation of the depth and topography of villous invasion in adjacentorgans.
/C15RCTs of optimal timing of delivery for both conditions (placenta praevia and placenta accreta) are needed.
/C15RCTs of surgical and nonsurgical management strategies for placenta accreta spectrum (including interventionalradiology) and comparing conventional versus conservative management, stratiﬁed according to the depth andlateral extension of villous myometrial invasion, are needed.
/C15Future studies on the diagnosis and management of placenta accreta spectrum should use a standardisedevidence-based approach, including systematic correlation between ultrasound signs and detailed clinicaldiagnosis at delivery, and pathologic conﬁrmation of grades of villous invasiveness where possible.
11. Auditable topics
11.1 Placenta praevia
/C15Antenatal diagnosis of placenta praevia and low lying placenta (100%).
/C15Antenatal detection and treatment of anaemia (100%).
/C15Antenatal imaging performed according to hospital policy (100%).
/C15Appropriate antenatal delivery plan made and documented, to include discussion with a woman and her partner,
documentation that the risks and indications for blood transfusion and hysterectomy have been discussed and
that concerns, queries or refusals of treatments have been addressed (100%).
/C15Involvement of local blood bank and haematologist in the care of women with placenta praevia and atypicalantibodies (100%).
/C15Appropriate personnel present at birth (100%).
/C15Appropriate site for birth (100%).
/C15Appropriate surgical approaches performed (100%).
/C15Antenatal steroid administration between 34+0and 35+6weeks of gestation (100%).
/C15Women requesting elective caesarean section for nonmedical reasons are informed of the risk of placentapraevia and accreta spectrum, and its consequences in future deliveries (100%).
11.2 Placenta accreta spectrum
/C15Antenatal imaging performed according to hospital policy with diagnosis conﬁrmed at birth (100%).
/C15Appropriate antenatal delivery plan documented, to include discussions with women and their partners on the
risks and indications of blood transfusion and hysterectomy, and having addressed any concerns (100%).
/C15All elements of the care bundle satisﬁed before elective surgery in women with placenta accreta spectrum(100%):
–consultant obstetrician planned and directly supervising the birth
–consultant anaesthetist planned and directly supervising anaesthetic at the birth
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e37 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists–blood and blood products available
–multidisciplinary involvement in preoperative planning
–discussion and consent includes possible interventions (such as hysterectomy, leaving the placenta in place, cell
salvage and interventional radiology)
–local availability of a level 2 critical care bed.
12. Useful links and support groups
/C15Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Low-lying placenta after 20 weeks (placenta praevia). Information
for you. London: RCOG; 2018 [https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/a-low-lying-placenta-after-20-
weeks-placenta-praevia/ ].
/C15National Childbirth Trust. Placenta praevia –low-lying placenta [https://www.nct.org.uk/pregnancy/low-lying-place
nta].
References
1. Jauniaux E, Jurkovic D. Placenta accreta: pathogenesis of a 20th
century iatrogenic uterine disease. Placenta 2012;33:244 –51.
2. Solheim KN, Esakoff TF, Little SE, Cheng YW, Sparks TN,
Caughey AB. The effect of cesarean delivery rates on the future
incidence of placenta previa, placenta accreta, and maternal
mortality. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2011;24:1341 –6.
3. Bowman ZS, Eller AG, Bardsley TR, Greene T, Varner MW,
Silver RM. Risk factors for placenta accreta: a large prospective
cohort. Am J Perinatol 2014;31:799 –804.
4. Vintzileos AM, Ananth CV, Smulian JC. Using ultrasound in the
clinical management of placental implantation abnormalities. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2015;213:S70 –7.
5. Silver RM. Abnormal placentation: Placenta previa, vasa previa
and placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol 2015;126:654 –68.
6. Jauniaux E, Campbell S. Ultrasonographic assessment of placental
abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:1650 –8.
7. Ballas S, Gitstein S, Jaffa AJ, Peyser MR. Midtrimester placenta
previa: normal or pathologic ﬁnding. Obstet Gynecol 1979;54:12 –4.
8. Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, Saade GR; Fetal Imaging
Workshop Invited Participants. Fetal imaging: Executive summary
of a joint Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of ChildHealth and Human Development, Society for Maternal-FetalMedicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine,
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American
College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Societyof Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop.
J Ultrasound Med 2014;33:745 –57.
9. Vahanian SA, Lavery JA, Ananth CV, Vintzileos A. Placental
implantation abnormalities and risk of preterm delivery: asystematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2015;213:S78 –90.
10. Ruiter L, Eschbach SJ, Burgers M, Rengerink KO, van Pampus
MG, Goes BY, et al. Predictors for emergency cesarean deliveryin women with placenta previa. Am J Perinatol 2016;33:1407 –14.
11. Irving C, Hertig AT. A study of placenta accreta. Surg Gynec Obst
1937;64:178 –200.
12. Luke RK, Sharpe JW, Greene RR. Placenta accreta: the adherent
or invasive placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1966;95:660 –8.
13. Fox H, Sebire NJ, editors. Pathology of the Placenta .3rd edition .
Philadelphia: Saunders-Elsevier; 2007.14. Benirschke K, Burton GJ, Baergen RN, editors. Pathology of the
Human Placenta . 6th ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2012.
15. Zosmer N, Jauniaux E, Bunce C, Panaiotova J, Shaikh H,
Nicholaides KH. Interobserver agreement on standardized
ultrasound and histopathologic signs for the prenatal diagnosis of
placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
2018;140:326 –31.
16. Jauniaux E, Collins SL, Jurkovic D, Burton GJ. Accreta
placentation: a systematic review of prenatal ultrasound imaging
and grading of villous invasiveness. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2016;215:712
–21.
17. Jauniaux E, Collins S, Burton GJ. Placenta accreta spectrum:
pathophysiology and evidence-based anatomy for prenatalultrasound imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018;218:75 –87.
18. Collins SL, Chantraine F, Morgan TK, Jauniaux E. Abnormally
adherent and invasive placenta: a spectrum disorder in need of a
name. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2018;51:165 –6.
19. O’Brien JM, Barton JR, Donaldson ES. The management of
placenta percreta: conservative and operative strategies. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:1632 –8.
20. Bowman ZS, Manuck TA, Eller AG, Simons M, Silver RM. Risk
factors for unscheduled delivery in patients with placenta accreta.Am J Obstet Gynecol 2014;210:241.e1 –6.
21. Shamshirsaz AA, Fox KA, Salmanian B, Diaz-Arrastia CR, Lee W,
Baker BW, et al. Maternal morbidity in patients with morbidlyadherent placenta treated with and without a standardized
multidisciplinary approach. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2015;212:218.e1-9
22. Shamshirsaz AA, Fox KA, Erfani H, Clark SL, Salmanian B, Baker BW,
et al. Multidisciplinary team learning in the management of themorbidly adherent placenta: outcome improvements over time.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;216:612.e1–e5.
23. Ananth CV, Smulian JC, Vintzileos AM. The association of
placenta previa with history of cesarean delivery and abortion: ameta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:1071 –8.
24. Marshall NE, Fu R, Guise JM. Impact of multiple cesarean
deliveries on maternal morbidity: a systematic review. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2011;205:262.e1 –8.
25. Klar M, Michels KB. Cesarean section and placental disorders in
subsequent pregnancies –a meta-analysis. J Perinat Med
2014;42:571 –83.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e38 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists26. Getahun D, Oyelese Y, Salihu HM, Ananth CV. Previous
cesarean delivery and risks of placenta previa and placental
abruption. Obstet Gynecol 2006;107:771 –8.
27. Downes KL, Hinkle SN, Sjaarda LA, Albert PS, Grantz KL.
Previous prelabor or intrapartum cesarean delivery and risk of
placenta previa. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2015;212:669.e1 –6.
28. Ananth CV, Demissie K, Smulian JC, Vintzileos AM. Placenta
praevia in singleton and twin births in the United States, 1989
through 1998: a comparison of risk factor proﬁles and associated
conditions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;188:275 –81.
29. Weis MA, Harper LM, Roehl KA, Odibo AO, Cahill AG. Natural
history of placenta previa in twins. Obstet Gynecol 2012;120:
753–8.
30. Grady R, Alavi N, Vale R, Khandwala M, McDonald SD. Elective
single embryo transfer and perinatal outcomes: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 2012;97:324 –31.
31. Korosec S, Ban Frangez H, Verdenik I, Kladnik U, Kotar V,
Virant-Klun I, et al. Singleton pregnancy outcomes after in vitrofertilization with fresh or frozen-thawed embryo transfer and
incidence of placenta praevia. Biomed Res Int 2014;2014:431797.
32. Qin J, Liu X, Sheng X, Wang H, Gao S. Assisted reproductive
technology and the risk of pregnancy-related complications andadverse pregnancy outcomes in singleton pregnancies: a meta-
analysis of cohort studies. Fertil Steril 2016;105:73 –85.e1–6.
33. Karami M, Jenabi E, Fereidooni B. The association of placenta
previa and associated reproductive techniques: a meta-analysis.J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2017;284:47 –51.
34. Shobeiri F, Jenabi E. Smoking and placenta previa: a meta-analysis.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2017;30:2985 –90.
35. Rosenberg T, Pariente G, Sergienko R, Wiznitzer A, Sheiner E.
Critical analysis of risk factors and outcome of placenta previa.
Arch Gynecol Obstet 2011;284:47 –51.
36. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Antenatal Care
for Uncomplicated Pregnancies. Clinical Guideline 62. Manhester:
NICE; 2017.
37. UK National Screening Committee. Screening for Vasa Praevia in
the Second Trimester of Pregnancy. External Review AgainstProgramme Appraisal Criteria for the UK National Screening
Committee (UK NSC). London: UK NSC; 2017.
38. Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Ramus RM, Santos-Ramos R, Twickler DM.
Persistence of placenta previa according to gestational age atultrasound detection. Obstet Gynecol 2002;99:692 –7.
39. Cho JY, Lee YH, Moon MH, Lee JH. Difference
in migration of placenta according to the location and typeof placenta previa. J Clin Ultrasound 2008;36:79 –84.
40. Eichelberger KY, Haeri S, Kessler DC, Swartz A, Herring A,
Wolfe HM. Placenta previa in the second trimester: sonographicand clinical factors associated with its resolution. Am J Perinatol
2011;28:735 –9.
41. Copland JA, Craw SM, Herbison P. Low-lying placenta: who
should be recalled for a follow-up scan? J Med Imaging Radiat
Oncol 2012;56:158 –62.
42. Robinson AJ, Muller PR, Allan R, Ross R, Baghurst PA, Keirse MJ.
Precise mid-trimester placenta localisation: does it predict
adverse outcomes?
Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2012;52:156 –60.
43. Lal AK, Nyholm J, Wax J, Rose CH, Watson WJ. Resolution of
complete placenta previa: does prior cesarean delivery matter? J
Ultrasound Med 2012;31:577 –80.
44. Kapoor S, Thomas JT, Petersen SG, Gardener GJ. Is the third
trimester repeat ultrasound scan for placental localisation
needed if the placenta is low lying but clear of the os at the mid-
trimester morphology scan? Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol
2014;54:428 –32.45. Quant HS, Friedman AM, Wang E, Parry S, Schwartz N.
Transabdominal ultrasonography as a screening test for second-
trimester placenta previa. Obstet Gynecol 2014;123:628 –33.
46. Heller HT, Mullen KM, Gordon RW, Reiss RE, Benson CB.
Outcomes of pregnancies with a low-lying placenta diagnosed on
second-trimester sonography. J Ultrasound Med 2014;33:691 –6.
47. Kohari KS, Roman AS, Fox NS, Feinberg J, Saltzman DH, Klauser CK,
et al. Persistence of placenta previa in twin gestations based on
gestational age at sonographic detection. J Ultrasound Med
2012;31:985 –9.
48. Sherman SJ, Carlson DE, Platt LD, Medearis AL. Transvaginal
ultrasound: does it help in the diagnosis of placenta previa?
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:256 –60.
49. Mustaf /C19a SA, Brizot ML, Carvalho MH, Watanabe L, Kahhale S,
Zugaib M. Transvaginal ultrasonography in predicting placentaprevia at delivery: a longitudinal study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2002;20:356 –9.
50. Becker RH, Vonk R, Mende BC, Ragosch V, Entezami M. The
relevance of placental location at 20-23 gestational weeks for
prediction of placenta previa at delivery: evaluation of 8650
cases. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001;17:496 –501.
51. Oppenheimer L, Holmes P, Simpson N, Dabrowski A. Diagnosis
of low-lying placenta: can migration in the third trimester predict
outcome? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001;18:100 –2.
52. Taipale P, Hiilesmaa V, Yl €ostalo P. Transvaginal ultrasonography
at 18-23 weeks in predicting placenta praevia at delivery.Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:422 –5.
53. Lauria MR, Smith RS, Treadwell MC, Comstock CH, Kirk JS,
Lee W, et al. The use of second-trimester transvaginalsonography to predict placenta previa. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
1996;8:337 –40.
54. Smith RS, Lauria MR, Comstock CH, Treadwell MC, Kirk JS,
Lee W, et al. Transvaginal ultrasonography for all placentas thatappear to be low-lying or over the internal cervical os.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:22 –4.
55. Leerentveld RA, Gilberts EC, Arnold MJ, Wladimiroff JW.
Accuracy and safety of transvaginal sonographic placentallocalization. Obstet Gynecol 1990;76:759 –62.
56. Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R. Predictive accuracy of changes in
transvaginal sonographic cervical length over time for pretermbirth: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2015;213:789 –801.
57. Ghi T, Contro E, Martina T, Piva M, Morandi R, Orsini LF, et al.
Cervical length and risk of antepartum bleeding in women with
complete placenta previa. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2009;33:209 –12.
58. Zaitoun MM, El Behery MM, Abd El Hameed AA, Soliman BS.
Does cervical length and the lower placental edge thicknessmeasurement correlates with clinical outcome in cases ofcomplete placenta previa? Arch Gynecol Obstet 2011;284:867 –73.
59. Mimura T, Hasegawa J, Nakamura M, Matsuoka R, Ichizuka K,
Sekizawa A, et al. Correlation between the cervical length andthe amount of bleeding during cesarean section in placentaprevia. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2011;37:830 –5.
60. Sekiguchi A, Nakai A, Okuda N, Inde Y, Takeshita T.
Consecutive cervical length measurements as a predictor ofpreterm cesarean section in complete placenta previa. J Clin
Ultrasound 2015;43:17 –22.
61. Neilson JP. Interventions for suspected placenta praevia. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2003;(2):CD001998.
62. Wing DA, Paul RH, Millar LK. Management of the symptomatic
placenta previa: a randomized, controlled trial of inpatient versus
outpatient expectant management. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1996;175:806 –11.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e39 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists63. Pivano A, Alessandrini M, Desbriere R, Agostini A, Opinel P,
d’Ercole C, et al. A score to predict the risk of emergency
caesarean delivery in women with antepartum bleeding andplacenta praevia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2015;195:
173–6.
64. Lal AK, Hibbard JU. Placenta previa: an outcome-based cohort
study in a contemporary obstetric population. Arch Gynecol Obstet
2015;292:299 –305.
65. Nørgaard LN, Pinborg A, Lidegaard Ø, Bergholt T. A Danish
national cohort study on neonatal outcome in singletonpregnancies with placenta previa. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
2012;91:546 –51.
66. Roberts D, Brown J, Medley N, Dalziel SR. Antenatal
corticosteroids for accelerating fetal lung maturation for womenat risk of preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;3:
CD004454.
67. Gyamﬁ-Bannerman C, Thom EA, Blackwell SC, Tita AT, Reddy UM,
Saade GR, et al.; NICHD Maternal–Fetal Medicine Units Network.Antenatal betamethasone for women at risk for late preterm
delivery. N Engl J Med 2016;374:1311 –20.
68. Zlatnik MG, Little SE, Kohli P, Kaimal AJ, Stotland NE, Caughey AB.
When should women with placenta previa be delivered? A decisionanalysis. J Reprod Med 2010;55:373 –81.
69. Bose DA, Assel BG, Hill JB, Chauhan SP. Maintenance tocolytics
for preterm symptomatic placenta previa: a review. Am J Perinatol
2011;28:45 –50.
70. Verspyck E, de Vienne C, Muszynski C, Bubenheim M,
Chanavaz-Lacheray I, Dreyfus M, et al. Maintenance nifedipine
therapy for preterm symptomatic placenta previa: A randomized,multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. PLoS One
2017;23:e0173717.
71. American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. ACOG
committee opinion no. 560: Medically indicated late-preterm andearly-term deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 2013;121:908 –10.
72. Spong CY, Mercer BM. D’alton M, Kilpatrick S, Blackwell S,
Saade G. Timing of indicated late-preterm and early-term birth.Obstet Gynecol 2011;118:323 –33.
73. Zlatnik MG, Cheng YW, Norton ME, Thiet MP, Caughey AB.
Placenta previa and the risk of preterm delivery. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 2007;20:719 –23.
74. Balayla J, Wo BL, B /C19edard MJ. A late-preterm, early-term
stratiﬁed analysis of neonatal outcomes by gestational age in
placenta previa: deﬁning the optimal timing for delivery. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 2015;28:1756 –61.
75. Bhide A, Prefumo F, Moore J, Hollis B, Thilaganathan B. Placental
edge to internal os distance in the late third trimester and mode
of delivery in placenta praevia. BJOG 2003;110:860 –4.
76. Ghourab S. Third-trimester transvaginal ultrasonography in
placenta previa: does the shape of the lower placental edge
predict clinical outcome? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001;18:
103–8.
77. Saitoh M, Ishihara K, Sekiya T, Araki T. Anticipation of uterine
bleeding in placenta previa based on vaginal sonographic
evaluation. Gynecol Obstet Invest 2002;54:37 –42.
78. Taga A, Sato Y, Sakae C, Satake Y, Emoto I, Maruyama S, et al.
Planned vaginal delivery versus planned cesarean delivery in cases
of low-lying placenta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2017;30:618 –22.
79. Vergani P, Ornaghi S, Pozzi I, Beretta P, Russo FM, Follesa I,
et al. Placenta previa: distance to internal os and mode ofdelivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2009;201:266.e1 –5.
80. Nakamura M, Hasegawa J, Matsuaka R, Mimura T, Ichizuka K,
Sekizawa A, et al. Amount of hemorrhage during vaginal deliverycorrelates with length from placental edge to external os incases with low-lying placenta whose length between placental
edge and internal os was 1-2 cm. J Obstet Gynaecol Res
2012;38:1041 –5.
81. Al Wadi K, Schneider C, Burym C, Reid G, Hunt J, Menticoglou S.
Evaluating the safety of labour in women with a placental edge 11 to
20 mm from the internal cervical Os. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
2014;36:674 –7.
82. Wortman AC, Twickler DM, McIntire DD, Dashe JS. Bleeding
complications in pregnancies with low-lying placenta. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 2016;29:1367 –71.
83. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Caesarean
Section. Consent Advice No. 7. London: RCOG; 2009.
84. Thomas J, Paranjothy S, editors. The National Sentinel Caesarean
Section Audit Report . London: RCOG Press; 2001.
85. Baba Y, Matsubara S, Ohkuchi A, Usui R, Kuwata T, Suzuki H,
et al. Anterior placentation as a risk factor for massive
hemorrhage during cesarean section in patients with placenta
previa. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2014;40:1243 –8.
86. Gibbins KJ, Einerson BD, Varner MW, Silver RM. Placenta previa
and maternal haemorrhagic morbidity. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 2018;31:494 –9.
87. Mavrides E, Allard S, Chandraharan E, Collins P, Green L, Hunt BJ,
et al. on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists. Prevention and management of postpartum
haemorrhage. BJOG 2016;124:e106 –49.
88. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Blood
Transfusions in Obstetrics. Green-top Guideline No. 47. London:
RCOG; 2015.
89. Madsen K, Grønbeck L, Rifbjerg Larsen C, Østergaard J, Bergholt T,
Langhoff-Roos J, et al. Educational strategies in performing cesarean
section. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2013;92:256 –63.
90. Pelosi MA, Apuzzio J, Fricchione D, Gowda VV. The “intra-
abdominal version technique” for delivery of transverse lie by low-segment caesarean section. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1979;135:1009 –11.
91. Hong JY, Jee YS, Yoon HJ, Kim SM. Comparison of general and
epidural anesthesia in elective cesarean section for placenta peviatotalis: maternal hemodynamics, blood loss and neonataloutcome. Int J Obstet Anesth 2003;12:12 –6.
92. Butwick AJ, Carvalho B, El-Sayed YY. Risk factors for obstetric
morbidity in patients with uterine atony undergoing caesareandelivery. Br J Anaesth 2014;113:661 –8.
93. Goucher H, Wong CA, Patel SK, Toledo P. Cell salvage in
obstetrics. Anesth Analg 2015;121:465 –8.
94. Morikawa M, Kuramoto A, Nakayama M, Oguchi H, Hasegawa M,
Funakoshi T, et al. Intraoperative red cell salvage during obstetric
surgery in 50 Japanese women. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2015;128:256 –9.
95. Verspyck E, Douysset X, Roman H, Marret S, Marpeau L.
Transecting versus avoiding incision of the anterior placentaprevia during cesarean delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
2015;128:44 –7.
96. Zou L, Zhong S, Zhao Y, Zhu J, Chen L. Evaluation of “J”-shaped
uterine incision during caesarean section in patients withplacenta previa: a retrospective study. J Huazhong Univ Sci
Technolog Med Sci 2010;30:212 –6.
97. Kumru P, Demirci O, Erdogdu E, Arısoy R, Ertekin AA, Tugrul S,
et al. The Bakri balloon for the management of postpartum
hemorrhage in cases with placenta previa. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 2013;167:167 –70.
98. Beckmann MM, Chaplin J. Bakri balloon during cesarean delivery
for placenta previa. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2014;124:118 –22.
99. Cho HY, Park YW, Kim YH, Jung I, Kwon JY. Efﬁcacy of
intrauterine Bakri balloon tamponade in cesarean section forplacenta previa patients. PLoS One 2015;10:e0134282.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e40 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists100. Maher MA, Abdelaziz A. Comparison between two management
protocols for postpartum hemorrhage during cesarean section
in placenta previa: Balloon protocol versus non-balloon protocol.J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2017;43:447 –55.
101. Soyama H, Miyamoto M, Sasa H, Ishibashi H, Yoshida M,
Nakatsuka M, et al. Effect of routine rapid insertion of Bakri
balloon tamponade on reducing hemorrhage from placentaprevia during and after cesarean section. Arch Gynecol Obstet
2017;296:469 –74.
102. Uygur D, Altun Ensari T, Ozgu-Erdinc AS, Dede H, Erkaya S,
Danisman AN. Successful use of BT-Cath(
/C226) balloon tamponade
in the management of postpartum haemorrhage due to placenta
previa. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2014;181:223 –8.
103. Ishii T, Sawada K, Koyama S, Isobe A, Wakabayashi A, Takiuchi T,
et al. Balloon tamponade during cesarean section is useful forsevere post-partum hemorrhage due to placenta previa. J Obstet
Gynaecol Res 2012;38:102 –7.
104. B-Lynch C, Coker A, Lawal AH, Abu J, Cowen MJ. The B-Lynch
surgical technique for the control of massive postpartum
haemorrhage: an alternative to hysterectomy? Five cases
reported. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1997;104:372 –5.
105. Yoong W, Ridout A, Memtsa M, Stavroulis A, Aref-Adib M,
Ramsay-Marcelle Z, et al. Application of uterine compression
suture in association with intrauterine balloon tamponade
(‘uterine sandwich’) for postpartum hemorrhage. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 2012;91:147 –51.
106. Inoue S, Masuyama H, Hiramatsu Y; Multi-Institutional Study
Group of Transarterial Embolization for Massive Obstetric
Haemorrhage in Chugoku & Shikoku Area Society of Obstetricsand Gynecology. Efﬁcacy of transarterial embolisation in the
management of post-partum haemorrhage and its impact on
subsequent pregnancies. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2014;54:
541–5.
107. Broekman EA, Versteeg H, Vos LD, Dijksterhuis MG, Papatsonis DN.
Temporary balloon occlusion of the internal iliac arteries to
prevent massive hemorrhage during cesarean delivery amongpatients with placenta previa. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2015;128:118 –21.
108. Sentilhes L, Gromez A, Clavier E, Resch B, Verspyck E, Marpeau
L. Fertility and pregnancy following pelvic arterial embolisation
for postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG 2010;117:84 –93.
109. Doumouchtsis SK, Nikolopoulos K, Talaulikar V, Krishna A,
Arulkumaran S. Menstrual and fertility outcomes following the
surgical management of postpartum haemorrhage: a systematic
review. BJOG 2014;121:382 –8.
110. Soro MP, Denys A, de Rham M, Baud D. Short and long term
adverse outcomes after arterial embolisation for the treatment
of postpartum haemorrhage: a systematic review. Eur Radiol
2017;27:749 –62.
111. Wu S, Kocherginsky M, Hibbard JU. Abnormal placentation:
twenty-year analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;192:1458 –61.
112. Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, Leveno KJ, Spong CY, Thom EA,
et al.; National Institute of Child Health and Human DevelopmentMaternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network. Maternal morbidity
associated with multiple repeat cesarean deliveries. Obstet Gynecol
2006;107:1226 –32.
113. Fitzpatrick KE, Sellers S, Spark P, Kurinczuk JJ, Brocklehurst P,
Knight M. Incidence and risk factors for placenta accreta/increta/
percreta in the UK: a national case-control study. PLoS One
2012;7:e52893.
114. Morlando M, Sarno L, Napolitano R, Capone A, Tessitore G,
Maruotti GM, et al. Placenta accreta: incidence and risk factors
in an area with a particularly high rate of cesarean section. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 2013;92:457 –60.115. Cook JR, Jarvis S, Knight M, Dhanjal MK. Multiple repeat
caesarean section in the UK: incidence and consequences to
mother and child. A national, prospective, cohort study. BJOG
2013;120:85
–91.
116. Higgins MF, Monteith C, Foley M, O’Herlihy C. Real increasing
incidence of hysterectomy for placenta accreta following
previous caesarean section. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
2013;171:54 –6.
117. Eshkoli T, Weintraub AY, Sergienko R, Sheiner E. Placenta
accreta: risk factors, perinatal outcomes, and consequences forsubsequent births. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2013;208:219.e1 –7.
118. Kamara M, Henderson JJ, Doherty DA, Dickinson JE, Pennell CE.
The risk of placenta accreta following primary elective caesarean
delivery: a case-control study. BJOG 2013;120:879 –86.
119. Creanga AA, Bateman BT, Butwick AJ, Raleigh L, Maeda A,
Kuklina E, et al. Morbidity associated with cesarean delivery in
the United States: is placenta accreta an increasingly important
contributor? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2015;213:384.e1 –11.
120. Thurn L, Lindqvist PG, Jakobsson M, Colmorn LB, Klungsoyr K,
Bjarnad /C19ottir RI, et al. Abnormally invasive placenta-prevalence,
risk factors and antenatal suspicion: results from a largepopulation-based pregnancy cohort study in the Nordiccountries. BJOG 2016;123:1348 –55.
121. Farquhar CM, Li Z, Lensen S, McLintock C, Pollock W, Peek MJ,
et al. Incidence, risk factors and perinatal outcomesfor placenta accreta in Australia and New Zealand: a case-control study. BMJ Open 2017;7:e017713.
122. Balayla J, Bondarenko HD. Placenta accreta and the risk of
adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes. J Perinat Med
2013;41:141 –9.
123. Esh-Broder E, Ariel I, Abas-Bashir N, Bdolah Y, Celnikier DH.
Placenta accreta is associated with IVF pregnancies: aretrospective chart review. BJOG 2011;118:1084 –9.
124. Ishihara O, Araki R, Kuwahara A, Itakura A, Saito H, Adamson GD.
Impact of frozen-thawed single-blastocyst transfer on maternal and
neonatal outcome: an analysis of 277,042 single-embryo transfercycles from 2008 to 2010 in Japan. Fertil Steril 2014;101:128 –33.
125. Kaser DJ, Melamed A, Bormann CL, Myers DE, Missmer SA,
Walsh BW, et al. Cryopreserved embryo transfer is an
independent risk factor for placenta accreta. Fertil Steril
2015;103:1176 –84 e2.
126. Ben Nagi J, Oﬁli-Yebovi D, Marsh M, Jurkovic D. First-trimester
cesarean scar pregnancy evolving into placenta previa/accreta at
term. J Ultrasound Med 2005;24:1569 –73.
127. Zosmer N, Fuller J, Shaikh H, Johns J, Ross JA. Natural history
of early ﬁrst-trimester pregnancies implanted in Cesarean scars.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2015;46:367 –75.
128. Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Cali G, Palacios-Jaraquemada JM,
Maymon R, Arslan AA, et al. Cesarean scar pregnancy and early
placenta accreta share common histology. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 2014;43:383 –95.
129. Jurkovic D, Knez J, Appiah A, Farahani L, Mavrelos D, Ross JA.
Surgical treatment of Caesarean scar pregnancy: efﬁcacy and
safety of ultrasound-guided suction curettage. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 2016;47:511 –7.
130. Cali G, Forlani F, Timor-Tritsch IE, Palacios-Jaraquemada J,
Minneci G, D’Antonio F. Natural history of Caesarean scar
pregnancy on prenatal ultrasound: the crossover sign.
Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 2017;50:100 –4.
131. Wright JD, Pri-Paz S, Herzog TJ, Shah M, Bonanno C, Lewin SN,
et al. Predictors of massive blood loss in women with placenta
accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2011;205:38.e1 –6.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e41 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists132. Tikkanen M, Paavonen J, Loukovaara M, Stefanovic V. Antenatal
diagnosis of placenta accreta leads to reduced blood loss. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 2011;90:1140 –6.
133. Chantraine F, Braun T, Gonser M, Henrich W, Tutschek B.
Prenatal diagnosis of abnormally invasive placenta reduces
maternal peripartum hemorrhage and morbidity. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 2013;92:439 –44.
134. Hall T, Wax JR, Lucas FL, Cartin A, Jones M, Pinette MG. Prenatal
sonographic diagnosis of placenta accreta: Impact on maternal and
neonatal outcomes. J Clin Ultrasound 2014;42:449 –55.
135. Silver RM, Fox KA, Barton JR, Abuhamad AZ, Simhan H, Huls CK,
et al. Center of excellence for placenta accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2015;212:561 –8.
136. Bailit JL, Grobman WA, Rice MM, Reddy UM, Wapner RJ,
Varner MW, et al.; Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute ofChild Health and Human Development (NICHD) Maternal-Fetal
Medicine Units (MFMU) Network. Morbidly adherent placenta
treatments and outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 2015;125:683 –9.
137. Bowman ZS, Eller AG, Kennedy AM, Richards DS, Winter TC 3rd,
Woodward PJ, et al. Accuracy of ultrasound for the prediction of
placenta accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2014;211:177.e1 –7.
138. Smulian JC, Pascual AL, Hesham H, Qureshey E, Bijoy Thomas M,
Depuy AM, et al. Invasive placental disease: the impact of a multi-
disciplinary team approach to management. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 2017;30:1423 –7.
139. Cal /C18ı G, Giambanco L, Puccio G, Forlani F. Morbidly adherent
placenta: evaluation of ultrasound diagnostic criteria and
differentiation of placenta accreta from percreta. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 2013;41:406 –12.
140. Collins SL, Ashcroft A, Braun T, Calda P, Langhoff-Ross J, Morel O,
et al.; European Working Group on Abnormally Invasive Placenta
(EW-AIP). Proposal for standardized ultrasound descriptors ofabnormally invasive placenta (AIP). Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2016;47:271 –5.
141. Alﬁrevic Z, Tang AW, Collins SL, Robson SC, Palacios-Jaraquemada
J; Ad-hoc International AIP Expert Group. Pro forma for ultrasoundreporting in suspected abnormally invasive placenta (AIP):an international consensus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2016;47:
276–8.
142. D’Antonio F, Iacovella C, Bhide A. Prenatal identiﬁcation of
invasive placentation using ultrasound: systematic review andmeta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2013;42:509 –17.
143. Jauniaux E, Bhide A. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis and outcome
of placenta previa accreta after cesarean delivery: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;217:27 –36.
144. Chantraine F, Nisolle M, Petit P, Schaaps JP, Foidart JM.
Individual decisions in placenta increta and percreta: a caseseries. J Perinat Med 2012;40:265 –70.
145. Palacios-Jaraquemada JM, Bruno CH, Mart /C19ın E. MRI in the
diagnosis and surgical management of abnormal placentation. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 2013;92:392 –
7.
146. Rahaim NS, Whitby EH. The MRI features of placental adhesion
disorder and their diagnostic signiﬁcance: systematic review. Clin
Radiol 2015;70:917 –25.
147. Meng X, Xie L, Song W. Comparing the diagnostic value of
ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging for placenta accreta:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Med Biol
2013;39:1958 –65.
148. D’Antonio F, Iacovella C, Palacios-Jaraquemada J, Bruno CH,
Manzoli L, Bhide A. Prenatal identiﬁcation of invasive
placentation using magnetic resonance imaging: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2014;44:8 –16.149. Millischer AE, Salomon LJ, Porcher R, Brasseur-Daudruy M,
Gourdier AL, Hornoy P, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging for
abnormally invasive placenta: the added value of intravenousgadolinium injection. BJOG 2017;124:88 –95.
150. Hornemann A, Bohlmann MK, Diedrich K, Kavallaris A, Kehl S,
Kelling K, et al. Spontaneous uterine rupture at the 21st week of
gestation caused by placenta percreta. Arch Gynecol Obstet
2011;284:875 –8.
151. Dew L, Harris S, Yost N, Magee K, dePrisco G. Second
trimester placenta percreta presenting as acute abdomen. Proc
(Bayl Univ Med Cent) 2015;28:38 –40.
152. Sun JN, Zhang BL, Yu HY, Zhang Q. Spontaneous uterine
rupture due to placenta percreta during pregnancy. Am J Emerg
Med 2016;34:1918.e1–3.
153. Abbas F, Talati J, Wasti S, Akram S, Ghaffar S, Qureshi R.
Placenta percreta with bladder invasion as a cause of life
threatening hemorrhage. J Urol 2000;164:1270 –4.
154. Wagaskar VG, Daga SO, Patwardhan SK. Placenta percreta
presenting with delayed haematuria. J Clin Diagn Res 2015;9:
PD01 –2.
155. Brown JV 3rd, Epstein HD, Laﬂamme LA, Goldstein BH. First-
trimester placenta percreta with urinary bladder invasion. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 2016;132:102 –3.
156. Vinograd A, Wainstock T, Mazor M, Beer-Weisel R, Klaitman V,
Dukler D, et al. Placenta accreta is an independent risk factorfor late pre-term birth and perinatal mortality. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 2015;28:1381 –7.
157. Mehrabadi A, Hutcheon JA, Liu S, Bartholomew S, Kramer MS,
Liston RM, et al.; Maternal Health Study Group of CanadianPerinatal Surveillance System (Public Health Agency of Canada).
Contribution of placenta accreta to the incidence of postpartum
hemorrhage and severe postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol
2015;125:814 –21.
158. Jolley JA, Nageotte MP, Wing DA, Shrivastava VK. Management
of placenta accreta: a survey of Maternal-Fetal Medicine
practitioners. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2012;25:756 –60.
159. Esakoff TF, Handler SJ, Granados JM, Caughey AB. PAMUS:
placenta accreta management across the United States. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 2012;25:761 –5.
160. Wright JD, Silver RM, Bonanno C, Gaddipati S, Lu YS, Simpson LL,
et al. Practice patterns and knowledge of obstetricians and
gynecologists regarding placenta accreta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 2013;26:1602 –9.
161. Cal M, Ayres-de-Campos D, Jauniaux E. International survey of
practices used in the diagnosis and management of placenta
accreta spectrum disorders. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2018;140:307 –11.
162. Eller AG, Bennett MA, Sharshiner M, Masheter C, Soisson AP,
Dodson M, et al. Maternal morbidity in cases of placenta accretamanaged by a multidisciplinary care team compared with
standard obstetric care. Obstet Gynecol 2011;117:331 –7.
163. Al-Khan A, Gupta V, Illsley NP, Mannion C, Koenig C, Bogomol A,
et al. Maternal and fetal outcomes in placenta accreta afterinstitution of team-managed care. Reprod Sci 2014;21:761 –71.
164. Publications Committee, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
Belfort MA. Placenta accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010;203:430 –9.
165. Committee on Obstetric Practice. Committee opinion no. 529:
placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol 2012;120:207 –11.
166. Belfort MA. Indicated preterm birth for placenta accreta. Semin
Perinatol 2011;35:252 –6.
167. Robinson BK, Grobman WA. Effectiveness of timing strategies
for delivery of individuals with placenta previa and accreta.
Obstet Gynecol 2010;116:835 –42.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e42 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists168. Seet EL, Kay HH, Wu S, Terplan M. Placenta accreta: depth of
invasion and neonatal outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
2012;25:2042 –5.
169. Rac MW, Wells CE, Twickler DM, Moschos E, McIntire DD,
Dashe JS. Placenta accreta and vaginal bleeding according
to gestational age at delivery. Obstet Gynecol 2015;125:
808–13.
170. Perlman NC, Little SE, Thomas A, Cantonwine DE, Carusi DA.
Patient selection for later delivery timing with suspected previa-
accreta. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2017;96:1021 –8.
171. Green L, Knight M, Seeney FM, Hopkinson C, Collins PW, Collis RE,
et al. The epidemiology and outcomes of women with
postpartum haemorrhage requiring massive transfusion with
eight or more units of red cells: a national cross-sectional study.BJOG 2016;123:2164 –70.
172. Brookﬁeld KF, Goodnough LT, Lyell DJ, Butwick AJ.
Perioperative and transfusion outcomes in women undergoing
cesarean hysterectomy for abnormal placentation. Transfusion
2014;54:1530 –6.
173. Paterson-Brown S, Singh C. Developing a care bundle for the
management of suspected placenta accreta. The Obstetrician &
Gynaecologist 2010;12:21 –7.
174. Knight M, Tuffnell D, Kenyon S, Shakespeare J, Gray R,
Kurinczuk JJ, editors on behalf of MBRRACE-UK. Saving Lives,
Improving Mothers’ Care. Surveillance of Maternal Deaths in the UK2011-13 and Lessons Learned to Inform Maternity Care from the UKand Ireland Conﬁdential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and
Morbidity 2009-13 . Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit,
University of Oxford; 2015.
175. Paterson-Brown S, Bamber J, on behalf of the MBRRACE-UK
haemorrhage chapter writing group. Prevention and treatment
of haemorrhage. In Knight M, Kenyon S, Brocklehurst P,Neilson J, Shakespeare J, Kurinczuk JJ editors, on behalf ofMBRRACE-UK. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers’ Care - Lessons
Learned to Inform Future Maternity Care from the UK and Ireland
Conﬁdential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009 –12.
Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University ofOxford; 2014.
176. Brennan DJ, Schulze B, Chetty N, Crandon A, Petersen SG,
Gardener G, et al. Surgical management of abnormally invasiveplacenta: a retrospective cohort study demonstrating thebeneﬁts of a standardized operative approach. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 2015;94:1380 –6.
177. Eller AG, Porter TF, Soisson P, Silver RM. Optimal management
strategies for placenta accreta. BJOG 2009;116:648 –54.
178. Hudon L, Belfort MA, Broome DR. Diagnosis and management
of placenta percreta: a review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1998;53:
509–17.
179. Rossetti D, Vitale SG, Bogani G, Rapisarda AM, Gulino FA,
Frigerio L. Usefulness of vessel-sealing devices for peripartum
hysterectomy: a retrospective cohort study. Updates Surg
2015;67:301 –4.
180. Steins Bisschop CN, Schaap TP, Vogelvang TE, Scholten PC.
Invasive placentation and uterus preserving treatment modalities:
a systematic review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2011;284:491 –502.
181. Mei J, Wang Y, Zou B, Hou Y, Ma T, Chen M, et al. Systematic
review of uterus-preserving treatment modalities for abnormally
invasive placenta. J Obstet Gynaecol 2015;35:777 –82.
182. Teixidor Vi
~nas M, Belli AM, Arulkumaran S, Chandraharan E.
Prevention of postpartum hemorrhage and hysterectomy in
patients with morbidly adherent placenta: a cohort study
comparing outcomes before and after introduction of the Triple-Pprocedure. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2015;46:350 –5.183. El Tahan M, Carrillo AP, Moore J, Chandraharan E. Predictors of
postoperative hospitalisation in women who underwent the
Triple-P Procedure for abnormal invasion of the placenta. J
Obstet Gynaecol 2018;38:71 –3.
184. Shazly SA, Badee AY, Ali MK. The use of multiple 8 compression
suturing as a novel procedure to preserve fertility in patients
with placenta accreta: case series. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol
2012;52:395 –9.
185. Huang G, Zhou R, Hu Y. A new suture technique for cesarean
delivery complicated by hemorrhage in cases of placenta previaaccreta. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2014;124:262 –3.
186. Kaplano /C21glu M, Kaplano /C21glu DK, Koyuncu O. A different approach
to placenta previa accreta: intrauterine gauze compress
combined B-Lynch uterine compression suture. Clin Exp Obstet
Gynecol 2015;42:53 –6.
187. El Gelany SA, Abdelraheim AR, Mohammed MM, Gad El-Rab MT,
Yousef AM, Ibrahim EM, et al. The cervix as a natural tamponade
in postpartum hemorrhage caused by placenta previa and placentaprevia accreta: a prospective study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
2015;15:295.
188. Tam Tam KB, Dozier J, Martin JN Jr. Approaches to reduce
urinary tract injury during management of placenta accreta,increta, and percreta: a systematic review. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 2012;25:329 –34.
189. Grace Tan SE, Jobling TW, Wallace EM, McNeilage LJ, Manolitsas T,
Hodges RJ. Surgical management of placenta accreta: a 10-yearexperience. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2013;92:445 –50.
190. Woldu SL, Ordonez MA, Devine PC, Wright JD. Urologic
considerations of placenta accreta: a contemporary tertiary careinstitutional experience. Urol Int 2014;93:74 –9.
191. Norris BL, Everaerts W, Posma E, Murphy DG, Umstad MP,
Costello AJ, et al. The urologist’s role in multidisciplinarymanagement of placenta percreta. BJU Int 2016;117:961 –5.
192. Matsubara S, Kuwata T, Usui R, Watanabe T, Izumi A, Ohkuchi A,
et al. Important surgical measures and techniques at cesarean
hysterectomy for placenta previa accreta. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
2013;92:372 –7.
193. Shabana A, Fawzy M, Refaie W. Conservative management of
placenta percreta: a stepwise approach. Arch Gynecol Obstet
2015;291:993 –8.
194. Clausen C, L €onn L, Langhoff-Roos J. Management of placenta
percreta: a review of published cases. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
2014;93:138 –43.
195. Sentilhes L, Ambroselli C, Kayem G, Provansal M, Fernandez H,
Perrotin F, et al. Maternal outcome after conservative treatment
of placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol 2010;115:526 –34.
196. Fox KA, Shamshirsaz AA, Carusi D, Secord AA, Lee P, Turan OM,
et al. Conservative management of morbidly adherent placenta:expert review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2015;213:755 –60.
197. Lin K, Qin J, Xu K, Hu W, Lin J. Methotrexate management for
placenta accreta: a prospective study. Arch Gynecol Obstet
2015;291:1259 –64.
198. Legendre G, Zoulovits FJ, Kinn J, Senthiles L, Fernandez H.
Conservative management of placenta accreta: hysteroscopic
resection of retained tissues. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2014;21:910 –3.
199. Mazzon I, Favilli A, Grasso M, Horvath S, Gerli S. Is the cold
loop hysteroscopic technique a myometrial sparing treatment for
placenta accreta residuals in a puerperal uterus? J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 2016;29:1613 –6.
200. Bai Y, Luo X, Li Q, Yin N, Fu X, Zhang H, et al. High-intensity
focused ultrasound treatment of placenta accreta after vaginal
delivery: a preliminary study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2016;47:492 –8.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e43 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists201. Judy AE, Lyell DJ, Druzin ML, Dorigo O. Disseminated intravascular
coagulation complicating the conservative management of placenta
percreta. Obstet Gynecol 2015;126:1016 –8.
202. Teixidor Vi ~nas M, Chandraharan E, Moneta MV, Belli AM. The
role of interventional radiology in reducing haemorrhage and
hysterectomy following caesarean section for morbidly adherent
placenta. Clin Radiol 2014;69:e345 –51.
203. Bouvier A, Sentilhes L, Thouveny F, Bouet PE, Gillard P,
Willoteaux S, et al. Planned caesarean in the interventional
radiology cath lab to enable immediate uterine arteryembolization for the conservative treatment of placenta accreta.Clin Radiol 2012;67:1089 –94.
204. Dilauro MD, Dason S, Athreya S. Prophylactic balloon occlusion
of internal iliac arteries in women with placenta accreta:literature review and analysis. Clin Radiol 2012;67:515 –20.
205. Clausen C, Stensballe J, Albrechtsen CK, Hansen MA, L €onn L,
Langhoff-Roos J. Balloon occlusion of the internal iliac arteries in
the multidisciplinary management of placenta percreta. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 2013;92:386 –91.
206. D’Souza DL, Kingdom JC, Amsalem H, Beecroft JR, Windrim RC,
Kachura JR. Conservative management of invasive placenta usingcombined prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon occlusion andimmediate postoperative uterine artery embolization. Can Assoc
Radiol J 2015;66:179 –84.
207. Chou MM, Kung HF, Hwang JI, Chen WC, Tseng JJ. Temporary
prophylactic intravascular balloon occlusion of the commoniliac arteries before cesarean hysterectomy for controlling
operative blood loss in abnormal placentation. Taiwan J Obstet
Gynecol 2015;54:493 –8.
208. Duan XH, Wang YL, Han XW, Chen ZM, Chu QJ, Wang L,
et al. Caesarean section combined with temporary aortic balloon
occlusion followed by uterine artery embolisation for themanagement of placenta accreta. Clin Radiol 2015;70:932 –7.
209. Wei X, Zhang J, Chu Q, Du Y, Xing N, Xu X, et al. Prophylactic
abdominal aorta balloon occlusion during caesarean section: a
retrospective case series. Int J Obstet Anesth 2016;27:3 –8.
210. Wu Q, Liu Z, Zhao X, Liu C, Wang Y, Chu Q, et al. Outcome of
Pregnancies After Balloon Occlusion of the Infrarenal Abdominal
Aorta During Caesarean in 230 Patients With Placenta Praevia
Accreta. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2016;39:1573 –9.211. Xie L, Wang Y, Luo FY, Man YC, Zhao XL. Prophylactic use of an
infrarenal abdominal aorta balloon catheter in pregnancies
complicated by placenta accreta. JO b s t e tG y n a e c o l 2017;37:
557–61.
212. Wang YL, Duan XH, Han XW, Wang L, Zhao XL, Chen ZM,
et al. Comparison of temporary abdominal aortic occlusion with
internal iliac artery occlusion for patients with placenta accreta -a non-randomised prospective study. Vasa 2017;46:53 –7.
213. Ikeda T, Sameshima H, Kawaguchi H, Yamauchi N, Ikenoue T.
Tourniquet technique prevents profuse blood loss in placenta accretacesarean section. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2005;31:27 –31.
214. Meng JL, Gong WY, Wang S, Ni XJ, Zuo CT, Gu YZ. Two-
tourniquet sequential blocking as a simple intervention for
hemorrhage during cesarean delivery for placenta previa accreta.Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2017;138:361
–2.
215. Iwata A, Murayama Y, Itakura A, Baba K, Seki H, Takeda S.
Limitations of internal iliac artery ligation for the reduction of
intraoperative hemorrhage during cesarean hysterectomy incases of placenta previa accreta. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2010;36:
254–9.
216. Bishop S, Butler K, Monaghan S, Chan K, Murphy G, Edozien L.
Multiple complications following the use of prophylactic internaliliac artery balloon cath eterisation in a patient with placenta percreta.
Int J Obstet Anesth 2011;20:70 –3.
217. Gagnon J, Boucher L, Kaufman I, Brown R, Moore A. Iliac artery
rupture related to balloon insertion for placenta accreta causingmaternal hemorrhage and neonatal compromise. Can J Anaesth
2013;60:1212 –7.
218. Teare J, Evans E, Belli A, Wendler R. Sciatic nerve ischaemia
after iliac artery occlusion balloon catheter placement for
placenta percreta. Int J Obstet Anesth 2014;23:178 –81.
219. Matsueda S, Hidaka N, Kondo Y, Fujiwara A, Fukushima K, Kato K.
External iliac artery thrombosis after common iliac artery balloonocclusion during cesarean hysterectomy for placenta accreta in
cervico-isthmic pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2015;41:1826 –30.
220. Salim R, Chulski A, Romano S, Garmi G, Rudin M, Shalev E.
Precesarean prophylactic balloon catheters for suspectedplacenta accreta: A randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol
2015;126:1022 –8.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e44 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAppendix I: Explanation of guidelines and evidence levels
Clinical guidelines are: ‘systematically developed statements which assist clinicians and patients in making decisions
about appropriate treatment for speciﬁc conditions’. Each guideline is systematically developed using a standardised
methodology. Exact details of this process can be found in Clinical Governance Advice No.1 Development of RCOG
Green-top Guidelines (available on the RCOG website at http://www.rcog.org.uk/green-top-development ). These
recommendations are not intended to dictate an exclusive course of management or treatment. They must beevaluated with reference to individual patient needs, resources and limitations unique to the institution and variationsin local populations. It is hoped that this process of local ownership will help to incorporate these guidelines intoroutine practice. Attention is drawn to areas of clinical uncertainty where further research may be indicated.
The evidence used in this guideline was graded using the scheme below and the recommendations formulated in a
similar fashion with a standardised grading scheme.
Classi ﬁcation of evidence levels Grades of recommendation
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews
of randomised controlled trials or randomised
controlled trials with a very low risk of bias
AAt least one meta-analysis, systematic review or
RCT rated as 1 ++, and directly applicable to the
target population; orA systematic review of RCTs or a body ofevidence consisting principally of studies rated as1+, directly applicable to the target population
and demonstrating overall consistency of results1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trials or
randomised controlled trials with a low risk
of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of
randomised controlled trials or randomised
controlled trials with a high risk of bias
BA body of evidence including studies rated as 2 ++
directly applicable to the target population, and
demonstrating overall consistency of results; orExtrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1 ++
or 1+2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case –control
or cohort studies or high-quality case –control
or cohort studies with a very low risk of
confounding, bias or chance and a highprobability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case –control or cohort
studies with a low risk of confounding, bias orchance and a moderate probability that therelationship is causalCA body of evidence including studiesrated as 2 +directly applicable to the target
population, and demonstrating overallconsistency of results; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated
as 2++
2– Case –control or cohort studies with a high risk
of confounding, bias or chance and a signiﬁcantrisk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies, e.g. case reports, case
seriesDEvidence level 3 or 4; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2 +
4 Expert opinionGood practice points
PRecommended best practice based on the
clinical experience of the guideline development
group
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e45 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAppendix II: Flow diagram for ultrasound diagnosis and follow-up of placenta praevia and placenta accreta spectrum
Abbreviations: BMI , body mass index; PAS , placenta accreta spectrum; TAS , transabdominal scan; TVS , transvaginal scan.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e46 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAppendix III: Ultrasound imaging signs commonly used to diagnose placenta accreta spectrum (modi ﬁed
from Collins SL)140
Ultrasound imaging signs Description
2D greyscale signs
Loss of the ‘clear zone ’ Loss or irregularity of the hypoechoic plane in the myometrium underneath
the placental bed (the ‘clear zone ’).
Abnormal placental lacunae Presence of numerous lacunae, including some that are large and irregular
(Finberg grade 3), often containing turbulent ﬂow visible in greyscale
imaging.
Bladder wall interruption Loss or interruption of the bright bladder wall (the hyperechoic band or
‘line ’between the uterine serosa and the bladder lumen).
Myometrial thinning Thinning of the myometrium overlying the placenta to less than 1 mm or
undetectable.
Placental bulge Deviation of the uterine serosa away from the expected plane, caused by an
abnormal bulge of placental tissue into a neighboring organ, typically thebladder. The uterine serosa appears intact but the outline shape is distorted.
Focal exophytic mass Placental tissue seen breaking through the uterine serosa and extending
beyond it. Most often seen inside a ﬁlled urinary bladder.
2D colour Doppler signs
Uterovesical hypervascularity Striking amount of colour Doppler signal seen between the myometrium
and the posterior wall of the bladder. This sign probably indicates numerous,closely packed, tortuous vessels in that region (demonstratingmultidirectional ﬂow and aliasing artifact).
Subplacental hypervascularity Striking amount of colour Doppler signal seen in the placental bed. This sign
probably indicates numerous, closely packed, tortuous vessels in that region
(demonstrating multidirectional ﬂow and aliasing artifact).
Bridging vessels Vessels appearing to extend from the placenta, across the myometrium and
beyond the serosa into the bladder or other organs. Often runningperpendicular to the myometrium.
Placental lacunae feeder vessels Vessels with high velocity blood ﬂow leading from the myometrium into the
placental lacunae, causing turbulence upon entry.
3D colour Doppler signs
Intraplacental hypervascularity(power Doppler)Complex, irregular arrangement of numerous placental vessels, exhibiting
tortuous courses and varying calibers.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e47 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsThis guideline was produced on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists by:
Professor ERM Jauniaux FRCOG, London (Lead Developer); Professor Z Alﬁrevic FRCOG, Liverpool, UK;Mr AG Bhide FRCOG, London, UK; Professor MA Belfort, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA; Professor GJ Burton, University of Cambridge, UK; Professor SL Collins MRCOG, Oxford, UK;
Dr S Dornan, Royal Jubilee Maternity Hospital, Belfast, UK; Mr D Jurkovic FRCOG, London, UK;Professor G Kayem, Armand-Trousseau and Louis-Mourier University Hospitals, Paris, France;
Professor J Kingdom, Mont Sinai, Toronto University, Canada; Professor R Silver, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA; Professor L Sentilhes, University Hospital Angers, France
and peer reviewed by:
Professor ML Brizot, University of S ~ao Paulo, S ~ao Paulo, Brazil; Dr G Cal /C18ı MSIEOG, ARNAS Civico Hospital, Palermo, Italy;
Professor J Dashe, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA;
Professor O Erez, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel; Dr D Fraser FRCOG, Norwich; Dr F Forlani,
University Hospital “Paolo Giaccone”, Palermo, Italy; Dr J Hasegawa, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki,Kanagawa, Japan; Dr YY Hu, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China; Dr N Lucas, Obstetric Anaesthetists’
Association, London; Professor P Martinelli, Universit /C18a di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy; Princess Royal Maternity Invasive
Placenta Team, London; RCOG Women’s Network; Professor SC Robson MRCOG, FRCP, Newcastle University;Royal College of Anaesthetists; Dr R Salim, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel; Professor RM Silver, The University of Utah,Salt Lake City, UT, USA; Dr JT Thomas FRANZCOG, CMFM, Mater Mothers’ Hospital, Brisbane, Australia; The UK Vasa
Praevia Raising Awareness Trust and the International Vasa Previa Foundation; Mr N Thomson, Society and College of
Radiographers, London; Dr M Tikkanen, Women
0s Clinic, Helsinki University Hospital Finland, Helsinki, Finland; Dr SG
Vitale, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
[Correction added on 21 February 2019, after ﬁrst online publication: SG Vitale has been added to peer reviewers.]Committee lead reviewers were: Dr A McKelvey MRCOG, Norwich; and Mr RJ Fernando FRCOG, LondonThe chairs of the Guidelines Committee were: Dr MA Ledingham MRCOG, Glasgow
1; Dr B Magowan FRCOG, Melrose1;
and Dr AJ Thomson MRCOG, Paisley2.
1co-chairs from June 20182until May 2018.
All RCOG guidance developers are asked to declare any conﬂicts of interest. A statement summarising
any conﬂicts of interest for this guideline is available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-researc
h-services/guidelines/gtg27a/.
The ﬁnal version is the responsibility of the Guidelines Committee of the RCOG.
The guideline will be considered for update 3 years after publication, with an intermediate
assessment of the need to update 2 years after publication.
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practice.
They present recognised methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidence, for consideration byobstetricians and gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. The ultimate judgement regarding a particular
clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other attendant in the light of clinical data presented
by the patient and the diagnostic and treatment options available.
This means that RCOG Guidelines are unlike protocols or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to be
prescriptive directions deﬁning a single course of management. Departure from the local prescriptive protocols orguidelines should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 126 e48 of e48 ª2018 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists