Management of Gestational Trophoblastic Disease
Green-top Guideline No. 38
September 2020

How do molar pregnancies present to the clinician?
The most common presentation of molar pregnancy is irregular vaginal bleeding, a positive pregnancy test, and supporting ultrasonographic evidence. Less common presentations include hyperemesis, excessive uterine enlargement, hyperthyroidism, early-onset pre-eclampsia, and abdominal distension due to theca lutein cysts. Rarely, women can present with haemoptysis or seizures due to metastatic disease affecting the lungs or brain.

How are molar pregnancies diagnosed?
The definitive diagnosis of a molar pregnancy is made by histological examination.

Removal of a molar pregnancy
Suction curettage is the method of choice for removal of complete molar pregnancies. Ultrasound guidance during removal and curettage may be of use to minimize the chance of perforation and ensure complete tissue removal. Anti-D prophylaxis is recommended following removal of a molar pregnancy.

In what circumstances should a repeat surgical removal be indicated and what is the timing?
Urgent surgical management is needed for heavy or persistent vaginal bleeding causing acute hemodynamic compromise. Consultation with a GTD referral center is recommended before performing surgical management for a second time in the same pregnancy.

Histological examination of pregnancy tissue in the diagnosis of GTD
The histological assessment of material obtained from all miscarriages is recommended to exclude trophoblastic neoplasia if no fetal parts are identified. A urinary pregnancy test should be done 3 weeks after a miscarriage.

Which women should be investigated for GTN after a non-molar pregnancy?
Any woman with persistent or irregular vaginal bleeding lasting more than 8 weeks after a pregnancy event should have a urine hCG test. Symptoms from metastatic disease, such as dyspnea and haemoptysis, should be monitored.

How should women with an elevated human chorionic gonadotrophin after a possible pregnancy event be managed?
Referral to a GTD center should be considered for all women with persistently elevated hCG levels.

Women with the following diagnoses should be registered and require follow-up:
- Complete molar pregnancy
- Partial molar pregnancy
- Twin pregnancy with complete or partial molar pregnancy
- Limited macroscopic or microscopic molar change suggesting possible early complete or partial molar pregnancy/choriocarcinoma
- PSTT or ETT
- Atypical PSN.

What is the optimum follow-up following a diagnosis of GTD?
Follow-up for complete molar pregnancy is for 6 months from the date of uterine removal. Follow-up for partial molar pregnancy is concluded once hCG levels have returned to normal on two samples, at least 4 weeks apart. Women who have not received chemotherapy no longer need to have hCG measured after any subsequent pregnancy event.

What is the optimum treatment for GTN?
Women with GTN may be treated with single-agent or multi-agent chemotherapy based on the FIGO 2000 scoring system. PSTT and ETT may be treated with surgery.

What is the recommended interval between a complete or partial molar pregnancy and trying to conceive in the future?
Women are advised not to conceive until their follow-up is complete. Women who undergo chemotherapy are advised not to conceive for 1 year after completion of treatment.

What is the long-term outcome of women treated for GTN?
The outlook for women treated for GTN is generally excellent with an overall cure rate close to 100%. Further pregnancies are achieved in approximately 80% of women following treatment for GTN.

Safe contraception following treatment of GTD
Women are advised not to become pregnant until their hCG follow-up is complete. Advice on contraception can be found in the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Health Guideline Executive Summary Contraception After Pregnancy.

Support for women and their families
GTD centers provide individualized support to women and their families throughout their GTD journey. Dedicated GTD nurse specialists and advisors are available for support.

Definitions
Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) includes a group of disorders ranging from complete and partial molar pregnancies to invasive mole, choriocarcinoma, PSTT, and ETT. GTN refers to the persistence of GTD after primary treatment.

Purpose and scope
This guideline describes the presentation, diagnosis, management, treatment, and follow-up of GTD and GTN, as well as advice on future pregnancy outcomes and contraception.

The incidence of GTD is associated with age at conception, being higher in the extremes of age. GTN may develop after a molar pregnancy, a non-molar pregnancy, or a livebirth. Clinicians should be aware of the symptoms and signs of molar pregnancy, which include irregular vaginal bleeding, a positive pregnancy test, and supporting ultrasonographic evidence. The definitive diagnosis of a molar pregnancy is made by histological examination. Suction curettage is the method of choice for removal of complete molar pregnancies, while ultrasound guidance during removal and curettage may be of use to minimize the chance of perforation and ensure complete removal. Anti-D prophylaxis is recommended following removal of a molar pregnancy. Preparation of the cervix immediately prior to uterine removal is safe, and the use of oxytocic infusion prior to completion of the removal is not recommended. In cases of persistent heavy vaginal bleeding and evidence of retained pregnancy tissue, a repeat surgical removal may be indicated. The histological assessment of material obtained from the medical or surgical management of all miscarriages is recommended to exclude trophoblastic neoplasia.

- Pregnancy tissue does not need to be routinely sent for histological examination after therapeutic abortion if fetal parts have been identified.
- Women who undergo medical abortion should do a urinary pregnancy test 3 weeks after the procedure.
- Referral to a GTD centre is recommended for women with persistently elevated hCG after excluding ectopic pregnancy or after two consecutive treatments with methotrexate for a pregnancy of unknown location.
- Any woman with persistent or irregular vaginal bleeding lasting more than 8 weeks after a pregnancy event should have a urine hCG test.
- Women with suspected ectopic molar pregnancy should be managed like any other case of ectopic pregnancy.
- Women diagnosed with a combined molar pregnancy and viable twin should be referred to a regional fetal medicine centre and GTD centre.
- Women with PSTT or ETT should be registered and cared for within a GTD centre.
- Women with atypical PSN should have their histology reviewed centrally.
- All women diagnosed with GTD should be registered at GTD centres for follow-up.
- Follow-up for GTD varies based on the type of pregnancy and hCG levels.
- Treatment for GTN may involve single-agent or multi-agent chemotherapy based on the FIGO scoring system.
- Surgery may be used to treat PSTT and ETT, as they are less sensitive to chemotherapy.
- The recommended interval between a complete or partial molar pregnancy and trying for another pregnancy varies based on hCG levels and normalization.

Women following a successful pregnancy after a previous molar pregnancy are advised not to conceive until their follow-up is complete. Chemotherapy recipients should wait 1 year before conceiving. Those with a pregnancy after a molar pregnancy not requiring treatment for GTN do not need to send a post-pregnancy hCG sample. The risk of another molar pregnancy is low, and women with subsequent pregnancies are not at increased risk of maternal complications. Women with a history of molar pregnancy may have an increased risk of preterm birth, large-for-gestational-age birth, and stillbirth. 

The long-term outcome for women treated for GTN is generally excellent, with a high cure rate. Further pregnancies are achieved in about 80% of women treated for GTN. There is an increased risk of premature menopause for women treated with combination agent chemotherapy. Women should be aware of the impact on fertility, especially with high-dose chemotherapy. 

Contraception should be used until hCG follow-up is complete to avoid pregnancy during recurrence risk. Exogenous estrogens, fertility drugs, and hormone replacement therapy can be used once hCG levels return to normal. 

Individualized support is available for women and their families throughout the GTD journey. GTD can have a negative impact on short-term health-related quality of life but long-term survivors have quality of life at or above population norms. 

Recommendations for future research include investigating predictors of molar pregnancies, evaluating the use of ultrasound in treatment, and refining the FIGO scoring system for chemotherapy resistance. 

Useful links and support groups are available for further information and assistance.

13. Routine histopathologic analysis of product of conception following first-trimester spontaneous miscarriages.
14. Sonographic diagnosis of partial versus complete molar pregnancy.
15. New insights in the pathophysiology of complete hydatidiform mole.
16. The accuracy of first trimester ultrasound in the diagnosis of hydatidiform mole.
17. Sonographic diagnosis of partial hydatidiform mole.
18. Sonographic appearance of first trimester complete hydatidiform moles.
19. Ultrasound diagnosis of molar pregnancy.
20. Hyperthyroidism and human chorionic gonadotrophin production in gestational trophoblastic disease.
21. Changes in clinical presentation of postterm choriocarcinoma at the New England Trophoblast Center in recent years.
22. The pathology of gestational trophoblastic disease: recent advances.

Local ownership of guidelines is important for routine practice. Clinical uncertainty may require further research. The evidence used in this guideline was graded. The guideline was developed by experts and peer-reviewed. Guidelines are educational aids and not prescriptive directions. Clinical judgment should consider patient data and available options. Departures from guidelines should be documented.