Maternal Collapse in Pregnancy and the Puerperium
Guideline No. 56
December 2019
J Chu, TA Johnston, J Geoghegan, on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

This is the second edition of this guideline. The first edition was published in 2011. 

Clinical issues
An obstetric modified early warning score chart should be used for all women undergoing observation, to allow early recognition of the woman who is becoming critically ill. Maternal collapse can result from a number of causes. A systematic approach should be taken to identify the cause. In cases of collapse assumed to be due to anaphylaxis mast cell tryptase levels can be useful in confirming the diagnosis. 

Physiological differences in pregnant women that affect resuscitation include aortocaval compression which reduces cardiac output from 20 weeks of gestation onwards and the efficacy of chest compressions during resuscitation. Changes in lung function, diaphragmatic splinting and increased oxygen consumption make pregnant women become hypoxic more readily and make ventilation more difficult. Difficult intubation is more likely in pregnancy. Pregnant women are at an increased risk of aspiration.

Maternal collapse resuscitation should follow the Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines using the standard ABCDE approach, with some modifications for maternal physiology, in particular relief of aortocaval compression. If maternal cardiac arrest occurs in the community setting, basic life support should be administered and rapid transfer arranged. Manual displacement of the uterus to the left is effective in relieving aortocaval compression in women above 20 weeks gestation. A left lateral tilt of the woman from head to toe at an angle of 15 –30o on a firm surface will relieve aortocaval compression in the majority of pregnant women and still allow effective chest compressions to be performed in the event of cardiac arrest. In cases of major trauma, the spine should be protected with a spinal board before any tilt is applied. In the absence of a spinal board, manual displacement of the uterus should be used. Intubation in an unconscious woman with a cuffed endotracheal tube should be performed immediately by an experienced anaesthetist. Supplemental high flow oxygen should be administered as soon as possible to counteract rapid deoxygenation. Bag and mask ventilation or insertion of a simple supraglottic airway should be undertaken until intubation can be achieved. If the airway is clear and there is no breathing, chest compressions should be commenced immediately. Two wide-bore cannulae (minimum 16 gauge) should be inserted as soon as possible. If peripheral venous access is not possible, early consideration of central venous access, intraosseous access or venous cutdown should be considered. There should be an aggressive approach to volume replacement, although caution should be exercised in the context of pre-eclampsia or eclampsia. Abdominal ultrasound by a skilled operator can assist in the diagnosis of concealed haemorrhage. The same defibrillation energy levels should be used as in a nonpregnant woman. There should be no alteration in algorithm drugs or doses used in the Resuscitation Council (UK) protocols. Common, reversible causes of maternal cardiopulmonary arrest should be considered throughout the resuscitation process. Resuscitation efforts should be continued until a decision is taken by the consultant obstetrician and consultant anaesthetist to discontinue resuscitation efforts. This decision should be made in consensus with the cardiac arrest team. 

In women over 20 weeks of gestation, if there is no response to correctly performed CPR within 4 minutes of maternal collapse or if resuscitation is continued beyond this, then perimortem caesarean section (PMCS) should be undertaken to assist maternal resuscitation. Ideally, this should be achieved within 5 minutes of the collapse. PMCS should not be delayed by moving the woman. It should be performed where maternal collapse has occurred and resuscitation is taking place. The operator should use the incision, which will facilitate the most rapid access. This may be a midline vertical incision or a suprapubic transverse incision. A scalpel and umbilical cord clamps (or alternative ligatures) should be available on the resuscitation trolley in all areas where maternal collapse may occur, including the accident and emergency department.

Senior staff with appropriate experience should be involved at an early stage. Transfer should be supervised by an adequately skilled team with appropriate equipment. In the case of maternal collapse secondary to antepartum haemorrhage, the fetus and placenta should be delivered promptly to allow control of the haemorrhage. In the case of massive placental abruption, caesarean section may occasionally be indicated even if the fetus is dead to allow

Coagulopathy can't be corrected by massive blood component replacement as it results in poorer outcomes in women with AFE. Cardiac cases should be managed by an expert cardiology team. Septic shock should be managed according to the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines. The antidote to magnesium toxicity is 10 ml 10% calcium gluconate or 10 ml 10% calcium chloride given by slow intravenous injection. If local anaesthetic toxicity is suspected, stop injecting immediately. Lipid rescue should be used in cases of collapse due to local anaesthetic toxicity. Intralipid/C22620% should be available in all hospitals offering maternity services. Arrhythmias should be managed as usual. All cases of lipid rescue should be reported to NHS Improvement and the Lipid Rescue site. Eclampsia should be managed according to the NICE Clinical Guideline 107 Hypertension in Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management. Neuroradiologists and neurosurgeons should be involved in the care of pregnant women with intracranial haemorrhage as soon as possible. In cases of anaphylaxis, all potential causative agents should be removed, and the ABCDE approach to assessment and resuscitation followed. The treatment for anaphylaxis is 1:1000 adrenaline 500 micrograms (0.5 ml) intramuscularly. Outcomes for mothers and babies depend on the cause of collapse, gestational age and access to emergency care. The team should include a senior midwife, an obstetrician and an obstetric anaesthetist. The most senior obstetrician and senior anaesthetist should be called at the time of a cardiopulmonary arrest call. The neonatal team should be called early if delivery is likely. A consultant intensivist should be involved as soon as possible if the woman survives. Accurate documentation is essential in all cases of maternal collapse. All cases of maternal collapse should generate a clinical incident form and the care should be reviewed through the clinical governance process. All cases of maternal death should be reported to MBRRACE-UK. All maternity staff should have annual formal multidisciplinary training in generic life support and the management of maternal collapse. Life support training improves resuscitation skills. Small group multidisciplinary interactive practical training is recommended to improve the management of maternal collapse. Debriefing is recommended for the woman, the family and the staff involved in the event.

Substandard care continues to be identified in areas including poor resuscitation skills. Vasovagal attacks and epileptic seizures are the most common causes of maternal collapse and are not covered by this guideline. The guideline was developed using standard methodology and included a search of several electronic databases for relevant clinical trials, reviews and meta-analyses. Recommendations are based on available evidence or annotated as 'good practice points' in the absence of published evidence. An obstetric modified early warning score chart should be used for early recognition of critically ill women. Despite the introduction of Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS) systems, the optimal system has yet to be identified. The physiological changes of pregnancy may render existing MEWS systems inappropriate. The National Early Warning Score 2 (NEWS2) is not recommended for women who are more than 20 weeks pregnant. A scoring system may still miss an unwell patient and a high level of clinical suspicion should be present. Maternal collapse can result from many causes. A systematic ABCDE approach should enable the clinical team to identify the most common causes of collapse. Major obstetric haemorrhage is among the most common causes of maternal collapse. Thromboembolism is the most common cause of direct maternal death. Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) has an incidence of 1.7 per 100 000 maternities.

Neurological morbidity in survivors of AFE is recognised, with a perinatal mortality rate of 67 per 1000 total births. AFE presents as collapse during labour or birth, or within 30 minutes of birth, with acute hypotension, respiratory distress, acute hypoxia, seizures and cardiac arrest. Disease progression depends on maternal survival, with initial pulmonary hypertension developing secondary to vascular occlusion, followed by left ventricular dysfunction or failure and coagulopathy. If AFE occurs prior to birth, profound fetal distress develops acutely. Diagnosis in nonfatal cases is clinical, as there is no established accurate diagnostic test premortem.

Cardiac disease was the most common cause of indirect maternal death in the MBRRACE-UK report 2016, responsible for 51 maternal deaths between 2012 and 2014. The main cardiac causes of maternal death are ischaemia and sudden arrhythmic cardiac death with a structurally normal heart. Aortic root dissection, congenital and rheumatic heart disease, and complications in pregnancy for women with mechanical prosthetic heart valves are also causes.

Sepsis is a significant cause of maternal morbidity and mortality, with bacteraemia leading to severe sepsis and septic shock causing collapse. The most common organisms implicated in obstetric sepsis are the streptococcal groups A, B and D, pneumococcus and Escherichia coli.

Drug toxicity and overdose, including substance misuse and therapeutic drug toxicity, should be considered in all cases of collapse. Toxic effects associated with local anaesthetics usually result from excessively high plasma concentrations, causing convulsions and cardiovascular collapse.

Eclampsia as the cause of maternal collapse is usually obvious in the inpatient setting. Epilepsy should always be considered in cases of maternal collapse associated with seizure activity.

Intracranial haemorrhage is a significant complication of uncontrolled, particularly systolic, hypertension, but can also result from ruptured aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations.

Anaphylaxis is a severe, life-threatening generalised or systemic hypersensitivity reaction, resulting in respiratory, cutaneous and circulatory changes, and possibly gastrointestinal disturbance and collapse. Common triggers are a variety of drugs, latex, animal allergens and foods. The incidence of severe perioperative obstetric anaphylaxis is between 1 and 3.5 per 100 000, with a mortality rate of approximately 1%. Mast cell tryptase levels can be useful in confirming the diagnosis.

Other causes of maternal collapse include hypoglycaemia, hyponatraemia, metabolic and electrolyte disturbances, airway obstruction, air embolism, tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade, hypothermia, local anaesthetic toxicity or failed tracheal intubation. 

Anyone involved in the resuscitation of pregnant women must be aware of the physiological differences, which can accelerate the development of hypoxia and acidosis, and make ventilation more difficult. 

From 20 weeks of gestation, aortocaval compression significantly reduces cardiac output and the efficacy of chest compressions during resuscitation. Changes in lung function, diaphragmatic splinting, and increased oxygen consumption make pregnant women become hypoxic more readily. Intubation is more likely to be difficult in pregnancy, and pregnant women are at an increased risk of aspiration. The increased cardiac output of pregnancy means that large volumes of blood can be lost rapidly. 

Resuscitation in maternal collapse should follow the Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines using the standard ABCDE approach, with some modifications for maternal physiology. If maternal cardiac arrest occurs in the community setting, basic life support should be administered and rapid transfer arranged. In the event of maternal collapse, signs of life should be sought. If signs of life are not detected, cardiopulmonary resuscitation should be commenced.

The cardiac arrest team, obstetric, obstetric anaesthetic and neonatal resuscitation teams should be called for a pregnant woman in cardiac arrest. From 20 weeks of gestation, adaptations are made to the resuscitation process. Manual displacement of the uterus to the left is effective in relieving aortocaval compression in women above 20 weeks’ gestation. This permits effective chest compressions in the supine position. A left lateral tilt of the woman from head to toe at an angle of 15 –30o on a firm surface will relieve aortocaval compression and still allow effective chest compressions. 

In cases of major trauma, the spine should be protected with a spinal board before any tilt is applied. After 20 weeks’ gestation, manual uterine displacement is the preferred method to reduce compression of the inferior vena cava and aorta by the gravid uterus. 

Intubation in an unconscious woman with a cuffed endotracheal tube should be performed immediately by an experienced anaesthetist. The airway in pregnancy is more vulnerable because of the increased risk of regurgitation and aspiration. 

Supplemental high flow oxygen should be administered as soon as possible to counteract rapid deoxygenation. Bag and mask ventilation or insertion of a simple supraglottic airway should be undertaken until intubation can be achieved. 

If the airway is clear and there is no breathing, chest compressions should be commenced immediately. Two wide-bore cannulae should be inserted as soon as possible. There should be an aggressive approach to volume replacement, although caution should be exercised in the context of pre-eclampsia or eclampsia. Abdominal ultrasound by a skilled operator can assist in the diagnosis of concealed haemorrhage. The same defibrillation energy levels should be used as in a nonpregnant woman. Chest compressions should be commenced immediately in the absence of a cardiac output.

Immediate and competent chest compressions directly impact maternal outcome. 30 chest compressions (at a rate of 100 –120 per minute) for every two ventilation breaths initially should be performed. If two rescuers are present, one should handle chest compressions and ventilation breaths, while the other ensures aortocaval decompression with manual uterine displacement. Once intubation is performed, the ratio of chest compressions to ventilation breaths should be desynchronised. Ventilation should be at a rate of 10 breaths per minute with continuous chest compressions at 100 –120 per minute. Early recourse to delivery of the fetus and placenta should be considered after 20 weeks of gestation if CPR is not effective. 

In women with a high BMI, chest compressions can be performed over the head if rescuer positioning is sub-optimal. Early vascular access should be obtained with wide-bore intravenous cannulae inserted above the diaphragm. If peripheral venous access is difficult, early consideration of central venous access, intraosseous access or venous cutdown should be given. 

Haemorrhage is the most common cause of maternal collapse. There must be a high index of suspicion for bleeding and awareness of the limitations of maternal clinical signs. In cases of significant haemorrhage, pre-eclampsia, or eclampsia, careful fluid management is essential. 

If defibrillation is required, the same settings should be used as in the nonpregnant adult. Adhesive defibrillator pads are preferable to defibrillator paddles. 

Resuscitation efforts should be continued until a decision is taken by the consultant obstetrician and consultant anaesthetist to discontinue. 

In women over 20 weeks of gestation, if there is no response to correctly performed CPR within 4 minutes of maternal collapse or if resuscitation is continued beyond this, then perimortem caesarean section (PMCS) should be undertaken to assist maternal resuscitation. Ideally, this should be achieved within 5 minutes of the collapse. PMCS should not be delayed by moving the woman. It should be performed where maternal collapse has occurred and resuscitation is taking place. The operator should use the incision, which will facilitate the most rapid access. This may be a midline vertical incision or a suprapubic transverse incision. A scalpel and umbilical cord clamps (or alternative ligatures) should be available on the resuscitation trolley in all areas where maternal collapse may occur. 

Delivery within 5 minutes of maternal collapse improves the chances of survival for the baby. If maternal resuscitation is continuing beyond 4 minutes of the collapse, delivery of the fetus and placenta should be performed as soon as possible. 

Time should not be wasted by moving the woman to an operating theatre; a PMCS can be performed anywhere, with a scalpel being the only essential equipment required. If resuscitation is successful following birth, there should be prompt transfer to an appropriate environment at that point, as well as anaesthesia and sedation, to control ensuing haemorrhage and complete the operation. 

In terms of the best incision to use, a midline abdominal incision and a classical uterine incision will give the most rapid access. However, the operator should use the approach they are most comfortable with. Manual uterine displacement can be stopped immediately prior to incision.

If resuscitation is successful, the uterus and abdomen should be closed to control blood loss and minimise infection risk. If not successful, the case should be discussed with the coroner or procurator fiscal to determine if a postmortem is needed before removing medical devices. Necessary equipment for a Perimortem Caesarean Section should be immediately available on the resuscitation trolley. 

Ongoing management depends on the cause of collapse and should involve senior staff early. The woman should be transferred to an appropriate environment for optimal care, usually a high dependency or critical care area. 

In case of maternal collapse due to antepartum haemorrhage, the fetus and placenta should be delivered promptly. Massive placental abruption may occasionally require caesarean section for rapid control of haemorrhage. Intravenous tranexamic acid significantly reduces mortality due to postpartum haemorrhage. 

Management of collapse due to massive haemorrhage as a result of placenta praevia should follow RCOG guidelines. 

For massive pulmonary embolism, treatment should follow RCOG guidelines, including the use of thrombolysis. 

Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) management is supportive, as there is no proven effective therapy. Coagulopathy needs early, aggressive treatment. 

Cardiac cases should be managed by an expert cardiology team post-resuscitation. 

Septic shock should be managed according to the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines. The speed and appropriateness of therapy in the initial hours after severe sepsis develops are likely to influence outcome. A multidisciplinary team approach is required.

For patients with lactate levels above 4 mmol/l, start with rapid administration of a minimum of 30 ml/kg of crystalloid within 3 hours of diagnosis. Once adequate volume replacement is achieved, use a vasopressor (noradrenaline, with vasopressin or adrenaline if required) and/or an inotrope (like dobutamine) to maintain arterial pressure above 65 mmHg. If hypotension persists despite fluid resuscitation, prefer dynamic variables of fluid status like transoesophageal Doppler and LiDCO over static variables like central venous pressure. Consider steroids if unresponsive to adequate fluid resuscitation and vasopressor therapy. Maintain oxygen saturation above 94% (88%-92% in women at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure) with facial oxygen. 

In case of drug overdose, the treatments are specific to the drug in question. Magnesium sulphate toxicity should be managed by slow intravenous injection of 10 ml 10% calcium gluconate or 10 ml 10% calcium chloride. 

If local anaesthetic toxicity is suspected, stop injecting immediately. Use lipid rescue in cases of collapse secondary to local anaesthetic toxicity. Manage arrhythmias as usual, and report all cases of lipid rescue to NHS Improvement and the Lipid Rescue site. 

Eclampsia should be managed in accordance with the NICE Clinical Guideline 107 Hypertension in Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management. 

For intracranial haemorrhage, involve neuroradiologists and neurosurgeons in the care of pregnant women at the earliest opportunity. 

In cases of anaphylaxis, remove all potential causative agents and follow the ABCDE approach to assessment and resuscitation. Use 1:1000 adrenaline 500 micrograms (0.5 ml) intramuscularly, which can be repeated after 5 minutes if there is no effect. Adjuvant therapy consists of chlorphenamine 10 mg and hydrocortisone 200 mg, given intramuscularly or by slow intravenous injection. 

Outcomes for mothers and babies depend on the cause of collapse, gestational age and access to emergency care, with survival rates being poorer if the collapse occurs out of hospital. Maternal survival rates of over 50% have been reported in maternal cardiac arrest.

Advanced life support was quickly delivered to women who collapsed at home, though they were more likely to die. Perimortem caesarean section (PMCS) was performed on 49 women, with a significantly shorter time between collapse and PMCS in those who survived. A systematic review found that in 31.7% of identified cases of PMCS, the procedure was beneficial for maternal or fetal survival, with no harm found in any of the 94 women who underwent PMCS. Maternal outcomes were more favorable if performed within 10 minutes of maternal cardiac arrest. Neonatal survival was associated with a shorter mean cardiac arrest to delivery time and was only found in women who suffered cardiac arrest in hospital. 

The team responding to maternal collapse should include a senior midwife, an obstetrician, and an obstetric anaesthetist. The most senior obstetrician and senior anaesthetist should be called at the time of a cardiopulmonary arrest. The neonatal team should be called early if delivery is likely. If the woman survives, a consultant intensivist should be involved as soon as possible. 

Accurate documentation is essential in all cases of maternal collapse. All cases of maternal collapse should generate a clinical incident form and the care should be reviewed through the clinical governance process. All cases of maternal death should be reported to MBRRACE-UK. 

All maternity staff should have annual formal multidisciplinary training in generic life support and the management of maternal collapse. Life support training improves resuscitation skills. Multidisciplinary team training in small groups has been shown to improve outcomes in all medical emergencies.

The ideal frequency of training for staff is not clear, but should occur at least annually. Debriefing is recommended for the woman, family, and staff involved in the event. Maternal collapse can be associated with post-traumatic stress disorder, postnatal depression, and tocophobia. Debriefing should be offered by a competent professional to support ongoing mental health. Recommendations for future research include investigating the effectiveness of CPR with manual uterine displacement versus maternal tilt, determining the effectiveness of human factors and emergency simulation training for maternal collapse clinical scenarios, and investigating the best diagnostic and management strategies for AFE. Auditable topics include the proportion of staff undergoing regular training in life support and maternal collapse, audit of the management of maternal collapse, compliance with incident reporting, achievement of PMCS within 5 minutes of collapse on hospital premises, and presence of a scalpel on resuscitation trolleys.

The text includes multiple references to clinical studies and guidelines relevant to the management of critically ill obstetric patients, and the recognition and response to acute illness in adults in hospital. Key sources include:

- Gao H, et al. Systematic review and evaluation of physiological track and trigger warning systems for identifying at-risk patients on the ward. 
- Hillman K, et al. Introduction of the medical emergency team (MET) system: a cluster-randomised controlled trial.
- National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Acutely Ill Patients in Hospital: Recognition of and Response to Acute Illness in Adults in Hospital. Clinical Guideline No. 50. 
- Royal College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2. Standardising the Assessment of Acute-illness Severity in the NHS.
- Resuscitation Council (UK). Adult advanced life support.
- Various studies and reports on complications and conditions such as amniotic fluid embolism, pulmonary embolism, blood loss estimation, and bacterial sepsis in pregnancy.
- Royal College of Anaesthetists. Anaesthesia, surgery and life-threatening allergic reactions. 6th National Audit Project: Perioperative Anaphylaxis.
- The Regulation and Quality Improvement Authority. Guideline for the prevention, diagnosis and management of hyponatraemia in labour and the immediate postpartum period.
- Various studies on maternal cardiac arrest, respiratory function during pregnancy, and the mechanical effects of the gravid uterus in late pregnancy.
- Guidelines 2000 for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Part 3: adult basic life support.
- Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association and Difficult Airway Society guidelines for the management of difficult and failed tracheal intubation in obstetrics.

The text refers to various clinical studies, guidelines, and reviews related to obstetric emergencies and procedures. These include failed tracheal intubation during obstetric general anaesthesia, aspiration of stomach contents into the lungs during obstetric anaesthesia, blood loss during and after delivery, resuscitation guidelines, emergency birth in the community, maternal cardiac arrest, manual displacement of the uterus during Caesarean section, lateral tilt for pregnant women, quality of chest compressions performed by inexperienced rescuers, resuscitation in late pregnancy, difficult intubation in obstetrics, managing the obese surgical patient, intraosseous access, sonography in pregnant patients with blunt abdominal trauma, physiological changes in pregnancy affecting defibrillation energy requirements, perimortem cesarean delivery, arterial oxygenation and alveolar-arterial gradients in term pregnancy, hemodynamic comparison of closed- and open-chest cardiac massage during human cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and guidelines on autopsy practice. Also mentioned are guidelines on antepartum haemorrhage prevention and management, and the diagnosis and management of placenta praevia and placenta accreta.

The text provides a list of clinical guidelines and studies related to obstetric emergencies. These include guidelines from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists on placenta praevia, postpartum haemorrhage, and thrombosis and embolism during pregnancy. Studies include the WOMAN trial on tranexamic acid administration for post-partum haemorrhage, a systematic review on the use of recombinant factor VIIa in amniotic fluid embolism, and guidelines on the management of sepsis and septic shock. It also mentions guidelines on the management of hypertension in pregnancy, cerebrovascular disorders complicating pregnancy, and severe local anaesthetic toxicity. There are also references to studies on the use of magnesium sulphate therapy in pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, and the impact of introducing practical obstetric multi-professional training into maternity units. The text concludes with an explanation of the grading scheme used for the evidence in the guidelines.

Controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of bias are included in the evidence base. High-quality systematic reviews of case-control or cohort studies, or high-quality case-control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a high probability that the relationship is causal are also included. Well-conducted case-control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal are considered. 

Causes of maternal collapse include Hypovolaemia, Hypoxia, cardiac events, hypo/hyperkalaemia, hyponatraemia, hypothermia, thromboembolism, toxicity, tension pneumothorax, tamponade, eclampsia and pre-eclampsia.

Changes in pregnancy that impact resuscitation include increased plasma volume, heart rate, cardiac output and respiratory rate, decreased systemic vascular resistance, arterial blood pressure, venous return, residual capacity, arterial pCO2, gastric motility, and enlarged uterus and weight increase. 

The maternal collapse algorithm includes steps such as assessing breathing, pulse, BP, fetal heart rate, identifying cause of collapse, open airway, start CPR if not breathing, establish IV access, high flow oxygen, intubate and then give continuous chest compressions, correct reversible causes, given adrenaline every 3-5 minutes, consider amiodarone, atropine, magnesium. It also includes the 4 Ts (Thromboembolism, Toxic and therapeutic, Cardiac tamponade, Tension pneumothorax) and 4 Hs (Hypoxia, Hypovolaemia, Hyper/hypokalaemia, Hypothermia) as reversible causes. 

Recommended airway equipment is taken from the Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association and Difficult Airway.

Routine airway equipment includes face masks, oropharyngeal airways size 2, 3 and 4, endotracheal tubes in a range of sizes, laryngoscopes, McCoy laryngoscopes, videolaryngoscopes, tracheal tube introducer, malleable stylet, Magill forceps, nasal cannula and oxygen tubing, and equipment for ramping/pillows. Monitoring equipment should include capnography. 

Recommended equipment for the management of unanticipated difficult intubation includes a range of reinforced tubes, microlaryngeal tubes sizes 5.0 and 6.0 mm, LMA-Fastrach™ tracheal tubes, supraglottic airway devices, LMA cuff pressure manometer, fibreoptic scope, camera and monitor, Aintree® intubating catheter, surgical cricothyroidotomy equipment for the ‘can’t intubate can’t oxygenate’ situation including scalpel with No. 10 blade, bougie, size 6.0 endotracheal tube, tracheal hook, forceps or tracheal dilator. 

Equipment for awake fibreoptic intubation includes equipment to deliver topical atomised local anaesthetic to the upper airway, Berman airway, epidural catheter, local anesthetic for topical anaesthesia, vasoconstrictors for the nose. 

Post collapse management includes treatment of underlying cause of collapse, transfer to appropriate clinical care setting, informing coroner/procurator, MBRRACE, ensuring accurate documentation, reviewing case through clinical governance process, offering staff support and debriefing, and debriefing patient and relatives.