The guideline provides instructions for the use of Carbetocin to prevent postpartum haemorrhage (PPH) in caesarean births. Carbetocin is a synthetic analogue of oxytocin with a longer duration of action and is recommended for use in specialist obstetric units. It should be offered to all patients undergoing caesarean birth, unless contraindicated. 

Carbetocin is administered after the birth of the baby and as soon as possible after umbilical cord clamping. The dose is 100 micrograms to be given over 1 minute. It is recommended to dilute 1 ml Carbetocin with 9 mls 0.9% sodium chloride making it up to 10mls total volume for administration. 

Contraindications include pregnancy and labour before birth of the baby, hypersensitivity to Carbetocin or oxytocin, hepatic or renal disease, serious cardiovascular disorders, epilepsy, and severe eclampsia or pre-eclampsia where concern for cardiovascular stability exists. Cautions for use include cardiovascular disease, severe hypotension, hyponatraemia or water intoxication, pre-eclampsia or eclampsia, general Anaesthesia, hyponatraemia, migraine, and asthma. 

The guideline also notes that the elimination half-life of Carbetocin is >40 minutes, compared with 1-6 minutes for oxytocin, and its clinical effect is apparent for up to 4 hours. Therefore, there is no need for a bolus or infusion of oxytocin and if uterine tone remains inadequate following administration of 100mcgs, a 2nd line agent should be considered.

Carbetocin is used to prevent postpartum haemorrhage in caesarean births, but its initial efficacy studies excluded women and people under general anaesthesia (GA). Oxytocin's link to water intoxication and hyponatraemia may theoretically exist for Carbetocin, but no cases have been reported. Carbetocin should not be used before the birth of the baby due to its long-lasting uterotonic activity. If vaginal or uterine bleeding persists after Carbetocin administration, causes such as retained placental fragments, lacerations, inadequate uterus repair, or blood coagulation disorders should be considered. Carbetocin is for single administration only, either intramuscular or intravenous. If uterine hypotonia or atonia persists, additional therapy with uterotonics should be considered.

Carbetocin has some antidiuretic activity, so hyponatraemia is possible, especially in patients receiving large volumes of intravenous fluids. Early signs of drowsiness, listlessness and headache should be recognized to prevent convulsions and coma. Carbetocin should be used cautiously in patients with migraine, asthma, cardiovascular disease, or any condition where rapid water addition may be hazardous.

During clinical trials, no drug interactions were identified between Carbetocin and analgesics, spasmolytics, or agents used for epidural or spinal anaesthesia. However, interactions known to be associated with oxytocin can't be excluded. Prostaglandins may potentiate the effect of Carbetocin, and their combined use is not recommended. Some inhalation anaesthetics may enhance the hypotensive effect and weaken the effect of Carbetocin on the uterus.

Common adverse effects of Carbetocin include anaemia, headache, tremor, dizziness, nausea, hypotension, flushing, chest pain, dyspnoea, pruritis, back pain, feeling of warmth, chills, and pain. Monitoring arrangements and training implications are outlined for compliance with guidelines and review of incident cases.