NICE
National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence
Endometriosis: diagnosis
and management
NICE guideline
Published: 6 September 2017
Last updated: 16 April 2024
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng73
NICE
guideline
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals
and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service.
It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the
responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in
consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the
guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to
use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and
developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate
unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health
inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be
inconsistent with complying with those duties.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Contents
Overview
Who is it for?.....
Recommendations........
1.1 Organisation of care.
1.2 Endometriosis information and support....
1.3 Endometriosis symptoms and signs.........
1.4 Referral for women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis.
1.5 Diagnosing endometriosis
1.6 Staging systems.......
1.7 Monitoring for women with confirmed endometriosis.
1.8 Pharmacological pain management.......
1.9 Non-pharmacological management.
1.10 Surgical management …………………………..
1.11 Management if fertility is a priority..
4
4
5
5
7
8
11
11
12
23
13
13
15
Terms used in this guideline...........
17
Recommendations for research.
1 Pain management programmes.
18
18
2 Laparoscopic treatment of peritoneal endometriosis (excision or ablation).
18
19
3 Lifestyle interventions (diet and exercise)
4 Information and support …………….
5 Hormonal treatments for people with endometriosis where fertility is a priority
Rationale and impact.….……………………..
Treatment of endometriosis when fertility is a priority
Context...........
Finding more information and committee details.
Update information
20
20
21
21
23
25
2 2 2 2 2 1
26
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
This guideline is the basis of QS172.
Overview
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing endometriosis. It aims to raise awareness
of the symptoms of endometriosis, and to provide clear advice on what action to take
when women and people with signs and symptoms first present in healthcare settings. It
also provides advice on the range of treatments available.
This guideline updates and replaces the recommendations on endometriosis in NICE's
guideline on fertility problems, which includes recommendations on fertility tests and
treatments such as assisted reproduction.
Who is it for?
• Healthcare professionals
•
Commissioners and providers
• Women and people with suspected or confirmed endometriosis, their families and
carers
O NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care.
Using inclusive language in healthcare is important for safety, and to promote equity,
respect and effective communication with everyone. This guideline does not use
inclusive language in whole or in part because:
⚫ the evidence has not been reviewed, and it is not certain from expert opinion
which groups the advice covers, or
•
.
the evidence has been reviewed, but the information available for some groups
was too limited to make specific recommendations, or
only a very limited number of recommendations have been updated in direct
response to new evidence or to reflect a change in practice.
Healthcare professionals should use their clinical judgement when implementing
recommendations, taking into account the individual's circumstances, needs and
preferences, and ensuring all people are treated with dignity and respect throughout
their care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
NICE has also produced a patient decision aid on hormonal treatment for
endometriosis.
1.1 Organisation of care
1.1.1
Set up a managed clinical network for women with suspected or confirmed
O NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
1.1.2
endometriosis, consisting of community services (including GPs, practice nurses,
school nurses and sexual health services), gynaecology services (see the
recommendation on gynaecology services) and specialist endometriosis services
(see the recommendation on specialist endometriosis services [endometriosis
centres]).
Community, gynaecology and specialist endometriosis services (endometriosis
centres) should:
•
provide coordinated care for women with suspected or confirmed
endometriosis
• have processes in place for prompt diagnosis and treatment of
endometriosis, because delays can affect quality of life and result in disease
progression.
Gynaecology services for women with suspected or confirmed
endometriosis
1.1.3
Gynaecology services for women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis
should have access to:
• a gynaecologist with expertise in diagnosing and managing endometriosis,
including training and skills in laparoscopic surgery
•
•
•
a gynaecology specialist nurse with expertise in endometriosis
a multidisciplinary pain management service
a healthcare professional with an interest in gynaecological imaging
fertility services.
Specialist endometriosis services (endometriosis centres)
1.1.4
Specialist endometriosis services (endometriosis centres) should have access to:
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
• gynaecologists with expertise in diagnosing and managing endometriosis,
•
•
including advanced laparoscopic surgical skills
a colorectal surgeon with an interest in endometriosis
a urologist with an interest in endometriosis
•
an endometriosis specialist nurse
•
a multidisciplinary pain management service with expertise in pelvic pain
• a healthcare professional with specialist expertise in gynaecological imaging
of endometriosis
• advanced diagnostic facilities (for example, radiology and histopathology)
•
fertility services.
1.2 Endometriosis information and support
1.2.1
1.2.2
1.2.3
Be aware that endometriosis can be a long-term condition, and can have a
significant physical, sexual, psychological and social impact. Women may have
complex needs and require long-term support.
Assess the individual information and support needs of women with suspected or
confirmed endometriosis, taking into account their circumstances, symptoms,
priorities, desire for fertility, aspects of daily living, work and study, cultural
background, and their physical, psychosexual and emotional needs.
Provide information and support for women with suspected or confirmed
endometriosis, which should include:
• what endometriosis is
• endometriosis symptoms and signs
• how endometriosis is diagnosed
• treatment options
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
1.2.4
• local support groups, online forums and national charities, and how to access
them.
If women agree, involve their partner (and/or other family members or people
important to them) and include them in discussions. For more guidance on
providing information to people and involving family members and carers, see the
NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services.
1.3 Endometriosis symptoms and signs
1.3.1
Suspect endometriosis in women (including young women aged 17 and under)
presenting with 1 or more of the following symptoms or signs:
•
chronic pelvic pain
• period-related pain (dysmenorrhoea) affecting daily activities and quality of
life
•
deep pain during or after sexual intercourse
• period-related or cyclical gastrointestinal symptoms, in particular, painful
bowel movements
•
period-related or cyclical urinary symptoms, in particular, blood in the urine or
pain passing urine
.
infertility in association with 1 or more of the above.
1.3.2
1.3.3
1.3.4
Inform women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis that keeping a pain
and symptom diary can aid discussions.
Offer an abdominal and pelvic examination to women with suspected
endometriosis to identify abdominal masses and pelvic signs, such as reduced
organ mobility and enlargement, tender nodularity in the posterior vaginal fornix,
and visible vaginal endometriotic lesions.
If a pelvic examination is not appropriate, offer an abdominal examination to
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
exclude abdominal masses.
1.4 Referral for women with suspected or confirmed
endometriosis
1.4.1 Consider referring women to a gynaecology service (see the recommendation on
gynaecology services) for an ultrasound or gynaecology opinion if:
.
they have severe, persistent or recurrent symptoms of endometriosis
•
they have pelvic signs of endometriosis or
1.4.2
1.4.3
• initial management is not effective, not tolerated or is contraindicated.
Refer women to a specialist endometriosis service (see the recommendation on
specialist endometriosis services [endometriosis centre]) if they have suspected
or confirmed:
deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder or ureter, or
• endometriosis outside the pelvic cavity.
Consider referring young women (aged 17 and under) with suspected or
confirmed endometriosis to a paediatric and adolescent gynaecology service,
gynaecology service or specialist endometriosis service (endometriosis centre),
depending on local service provision.
1.5 Diagnosing endometriosis
1.5.1
Do not exclude the possibility of endometriosis if the abdominal or pelvic
examination, ultrasound or MRI are normal. If clinical suspicion remains or
symptoms persist, consider referral for further assessment and investigation.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Ultrasound
1.5.2
1.5.3
Consider transvaginal ultrasound:
•
to investigate suspected endometriosis even if the pelvic and/or abdominal
examination is normal
• to identify endometriomas and deep endometriosis involving the bowel,
bladder or ureter.
If a transvaginal scan is not appropriate, consider a transabdominal ultrasound
scan of the pelvis.
Serum CA125
1.5.4 Do not use serum CA125 to diagnose endometriosis.
1.5.5
If a coincidentally reported serum CA125 level is available, be aware that:
• a raised serum CA125 (that is, 35 IU/ml or more) may be consistent with
having endometriosis
endometriosis may be present despite a normal serum CA125 (less than
35 IU/ml).
MRI
1.5.6
1.5.7
1.5.8
Do not use pelvic MRI as the primary investigation to diagnose endometriosis in
women with symptoms or signs suggestive of endometriosis.
Consider pelvic MRI to assess the extent of deep endometriosis involving the
bowel, bladder or ureter.
Ensure that pelvic MRI scans are interpreted by a healthcare professional with
specialist expertise in gynaecological imaging.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Diagnostic laparoscopy
Also refer to the section on surgical management and the section on management if
fertility is a priority.
1.5.9
1.5.10
1.5.11
1.5.12
1.5.13
Consider laparoscopy to diagnose endometriosis in women with suspected
endometriosis, even if the ultrasound was normal.
For women with suspected deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder or
ureter, consider a pelvic ultrasound or MRI before an operative laparoscopy.
During a diagnostic laparoscopy, a gynaecologist with training and skills in
laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis should perform a systematic inspection of
the pelvis.
During a diagnostic laparoscopy, consider taking a biopsy of suspected
endometriosis:
• to confirm the diagnosis of endometriosis (be aware that a negative
histological result does not exclude endometriosis)
• to exclude malignancy if an endometrioma is treated but not excised.
If a full, systematic laparoscopy is performed and is normal, explain to the woman
that she does not have endometriosis, and offer alternative management.
1.6 Staging systems
1.6.1
Offer endometriosis treatment according to the woman's symptoms, preferences
and priorities, rather than the stage of the endometriosis.
1.6.2
When endometriosis is diagnosed, the gynaecologist should document a detailed
description of the appearance and site of endometriosis.
1.7 Monitoring for women with confirmed
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
endometriosis
1.7.1
Consider outpatient follow-up (with or without examination and pelvic imaging)
for women with confirmed endometriosis, particularly women who choose not to
have surgery, if they have:
•
deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder or ureter or
• 1 or more endometrioma that is larger than 3 cm.
1.8 Pharmacological pain management
Analgesics
1.8.1
1.8.2
1.8.3
For women with endometriosis-related pain, discuss the benefits and risks of
analgesics, taking into account any comorbidities and the woman's preferences.
Consider a short trial (for example, 3 months) of paracetamol or a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) alone or in combination for first-line management
of endometriosis-related pain.
If a trial of paracetamol or an NSAID (alone or in combination) does not provide
adequate pain relief, consider other forms of pain management and referral for
further assessment.
Neuromodulators and neuropathic pain treatments
1.8.4
For recommendations on using neuromodulators to treat neuropathic pain, see
the NICE guideline on neuropathic pain.
Hormonal treatments
NICE has produced a patient decision aid on hormonal treatment for endometriosis.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
1.8.5
1.8.6
1.8.7
Explain to women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis that hormonal
treatment for endometriosis can reduce pain and has no permanent negative
effect on subsequent fertility.
Offer hormonal treatment (for example, the combined oral contraceptive pill or a
progestogen) to women with suspected, confirmed or recurrent endometriosis.
In September 2017, this was off-label use for some combined oral contraceptive
pills or progestogens. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines.
If initial hormonal treatment for endometriosis is not effective, not tolerated or is
contraindicated, refer the woman to a gynaecology service (see the
recommendation on gynaecology services), specialist endometriosis service (see
the recommendation on specialist endometriosis services [endometriosis
centres]) or paediatric and adolescent gynaecology service for investigation and
treatment options.
1.9 Non-pharmacological management
1.9.1 Advise women that the available evidence does not support the use of traditional
Chinese medicine or other Chinese herbal medicines or supplements for treating
endometriosis.
1.10 Surgical management
1.10.1
1.10.2
Ask women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis about their symptoms,
preferences and priorities with respect to pain and fertility, to guide surgical
decision-making.
Discuss surgical management options with women with suspected or confirmed
endometriosis. Discussions may include:
• what a laparoscopy involves
⚫ that laparoscopy may include surgical treatment (with prior patient consent)
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
1.10.3
1.10.4
•
how laparoscopic surgery could affect endometriosis symptoms
• the possible benefits and risks of laparoscopic surgery
• the possible need for further surgery (for example, for recurrent
endometriosis or if complications arise)
.
the possible need for further planned surgery for deep endometriosis
involving the bowel, bladder or ureter.
Perform surgery for endometriosis laparoscopically unless there are
contraindications.
During a laparoscopy to diagnose endometriosis, consider laparoscopic treatment
of the following, if present:
•
peritoneal endometriosis not involving the bowel, bladder or ureter
•
uncomplicated ovarian endometriomas.
1.10.5
1.10.6
As an adjunct to surgery for deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder or
ureter, consider 3 months of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists before
surgery.
In September 2017, this was off-label use for some gonadotrophin-releasing
hormone agonists. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines.
Consider excision rather than ablation to treat endometriomas, taking into
account the woman's desire for fertility and her ovarian reserve. Also see the
section on ovarian reserve testing in the NICE guideline on fertility problems.
Combination treatments
1.10.7
After laparoscopic excision or ablation of endometriosis, consider hormonal
treatment (with, for example, the combined oral contraceptive pill), to prolong the
benefits of surgery and manage symptoms.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
In September 2017, this was off-label use for some hormonal treatments
(including some combined oral contraceptive pills). See NICE's information on
prescribing medicines.
Hysterectomy in combination with surgical management
1.10.8
If hysterectomy is indicated (for example, if the woman has adenomyosis or
heavy menstrual bleeding that has not responded to other treatments), excise all
visible endometriotic lesions at the time of the hysterectomy.
1.10.9 Perform hysterectomy (with or without oophorectomy) laparoscopically when
combined with surgical treatment of endometriosis, unless there are
contraindications.
1.10.10
For women thinking about having a hysterectomy, discuss:
• what a hysterectomy involves and when it may be needed
⚫ the possible benefits and risks of hysterectomy
• the possible benefits and risks of having oophorectomy at the same time
.
how a hysterectomy (with or without oophorectomy) could affect
endometriosis symptoms
⚫ that hysterectomy should be combined with excision of all visible
endometriotic lesions
• endometriosis recurrence and the possible need for further surgery
• the possible benefits and risks of hormone replacement therapy after
hysterectomy with oophorectomy (also see the NICE guideline on
menopause).
1.11 Management if fertility is a priority
The recommendations in this section should be interpreted within the context of NICE's
guideline on fertility problems. The management of endometriosis-related subfertility
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
should have multidisciplinary team involvement with input from a fertility specialist and
access to fertility services. Depending on the severity of the endometriosis this may be in
a secondary care gynaecology service or a tertiary care specialist endometriosis service.
This should include the recommended diagnostic fertility tests or preoperative tests, as
well as other recommended fertility treatments such as assisted reproduction that are
included in the NICE guideline on fertility problems.
1.11.1
1.11.2
1.11.3
Offer excision or ablation of endometriosis plus adhesiolysis for endometriosis
not involving the bowel, bladder or ureter, because this improves the chance of
spontaneous pregnancy.
Offer laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy with excision of the cyst wall, or
laparoscopic drainage and ablation, to women or people with endometriomas,
because this improves the chance of spontaneous pregnancy. Take into account:
⚫ the possible impact on ovarian reserve
• that ablation and drainage may preserve ovarian reserve more than
cystectomy (also see the section on ovarian reserve testing in the NICE
guideline on fertility problems). [2017, amended 2024]
Discuss the benefits and risks of laparoscopic surgery as a treatment option with
women or people who have deep endometriosis (including endometriosis that
involves the bowel, bladder or ureter) and who are trying to conceive so they can
make an informed decision on its use. Topics to discuss may include:
• the possible impact of deep endometriosis on pregnancy outcomes
1.11.4
•
whether laparoscopic surgery may alter the chance of future pregnancy
⚫ the possible impact on fertility if complications arise
• alternatives to surgery
other fertility factors. [2017, amended 2024]
Do not offer hormonal treatment alone or in combination with surgery to women
or people with endometriosis who are trying to conceive, because it does not
improve spontaneous pregnancy rates. [2017, amended 2024]
O NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
For a short explanation of why the committee made the updated 2024
recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact
section on treatment of endometriosis when fertility is a priority.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
treatment of endometriosis when fertility is a priority.
Terms used in this guideline
Chronic pelvic pain
Defined as pelvic pain lasting for 6 months or longer.
Paediatric and adolescent gynaecology service
Paediatric and adolescent gynaecology services are hospital-based, multidisciplinary
specialist services for girls and young women (usually aged under 18).
Ovarian cystectomy
Ovarian cystectomy is a surgical excision of an ovarian endometriotic cyst. An ovarian
endometrioma is a cystic mass arising from ectopic endometrial tissue within the ovary.
Managed clinical networks
Linked groups of healthcare professionals from primary, secondary and tertiary care
providing a coordinated patient pathway. Responsibility for setting up these networks will
depend on existing service provision and location.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Recommendations for research
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research.
1 Pain management programmes
Are pain management programmes a clinically and cost-effective intervention for women
with endometriosis?
Why this is important
Pain is one of the most debilitating symptoms of endometriosis. Endometriosis-related
pain can be acute or chronic, and can adversely affect the woman's quality of life, ability to
work, and can affect partners and their families.
Pain management programmes have been found to be effective in managing chronic pelvic
pain, and can improve quality of life. However, it is unclear how much of this small
evidence base can be generalised to women with endometriosis for which evidence is
lacking. Furthermore, pain management programmes have not been compared with other
treatments available for endometriosis. Pain management programmes promote self-
management and are often provided in the community.
If found to be effective for endometriosis, pain management programmes would provide an
additional or alternative treatment option for women experiencing endometriosis-related
pain. Groups of particular interest are women for whom hormonal and surgical options
have been exhausted, women who would prefer an alternative to a pharmacological or
surgical approach, and women who may be prioritising trying to conceive.
2 Laparoscopic treatment of peritoneal
endometriosis (excision or ablation)
Is laparoscopic treatment (excision or ablation) of peritoneal disease in isolation effective
for managing endometriosis-related pain?
O NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Why this is important
Isolated peritoneal endometriosis can be an incidental finding in women who may or may
not experience pain or other symptoms.
Research is needed to determine whether laparoscopic treatment of isolated peritoneal
endometriosis in women with endometriosis-related pain results in a clinical and cost-
effective improvement in symptoms.
The current literature does not provide a clear answer because the stage of endometriosis
is often not sufficiently clearly defined in research studies, and the treatment modalities
used are multiple and varied. The resultant amalgamation of various stages of
endometriosis and variable treatment modalities leads to loss of certainty of outcome in
this specific group of women.
Establishing whether treating isolated peritoneal endometriosis is cost effective is
important, because this forms a large part of the workload in general gynaecology, and
uses considerable resources.
3 Lifestyle interventions (diet and exercise)
Are specialist lifestyle interventions (diet and exercise) effective, compared with no
specialist lifestyle interventions, for women with endometriosis?
Why this is important
Endometriosis is a long-term condition that can cause acute and chronic pain, and fatigue.
It has a significant and sometimes severe impact on the woman's quality of life and
activities of daily living, including relationships and sexuality, ability to work, fertility,
fitness and mental health.
Supporting self-management is critical to improving quality of life for women living with
endometriosis. In order to successfully self-manage the condition, women need evidence-
based, easily accessible information about the condition and ways of managing it that
support surgical and medical treatment. However, no high-quality research was identified
on the effectiveness of lifestyle interventions such as diet or exercise and other non-
medical treatments in reducing pain, fatigue and other symptoms.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Studies should aim to provide evidence-based options to support self-management of
endometriosis. This would improve the quality of life of women with endometriosis,
enabling them to manage pain and fatigue, and reducing the negative impact on their
career, relationships, sex lives, fertility, and physical and emotional wellbeing.
4 Information and support
What information and support interventions are effective to help women with
endometriosis deal with their symptoms and improve their quality of lives?
Why this is important
This guideline has identified that women with endometriosis and their partners feel that
information and support is not always provided in the way that best meet their needs.
However, the direct effectiveness of different types or formats of information and support
interventions on measurable outcomes such as health-related quality of life and level of
function (for example, activities of daily living) have not been tested. Good practice in this
area in non-specialist and specialist settings can improve satisfaction with the care
provided. It may also improve quality of life and positively affect relationships between
healthcare professionals and the woman with endometriosis, as well as the woman's
personal family relationships.
5 Hormonal treatments for people with
endometriosis where fertility is a priority
What is the effect of different doses and durations of hormonal treatments given either
before, after, or both before and after surgery on fertility outcomes in people with
endometriosis where fertility is a priority?
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale section on treatment of endometriosis when fertility is a priority.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
treatment of endometriosis when fertility is a priority.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Rationale and impact
This section briefly explains why the committee made the recommendations and how they
might affect practice. They link to details of the evidence and a full description of the
committee's discussion.
Treatment of endometriosis when fertility is a
priority
Recommendations 1.11.2 to 1.11.4
Why the committee made the recommendations
There was no evidence of an important difference in the pregnancy rate between
laparoscopic cystectomy and laparoscopic ablation and drainage of ovarian
endometriomas larger than 3 cm, but drainage and ablation may lead to increased ovarian
reserve (measured in terms of anti-Mullerian hormone levels, ovarian volume and antral
follicle count) compared to laparoscopic cystectomy, so ablation and drainage has been
included as an option if ovarian reserve is a priority.
Based on the committee's knowledge and experience and stakeholder feedback, the
definition of deep endometriosis has been clarified to state that it includes endometriosis
involving the bowel, bladder or ureter but is not limited to these sites, so that people are
not excluded from treatment inappropriately. The need to discuss that deep endometriosis
can impact on pregnancy outcomes has been added to the topics to discuss to provide a
broader consideration of the benefits and risks of surgery.
There was some limited evidence of increased rates of clinical pregnancy and live birth
with combinations of hormonal treatments with laparoscopic surgery compared to surgery
alone, but the evidence was mixed, with other evidence showing no difference. As there
was mixed evidence, the committee made a recommendation for research on hormonal
treatments. The committee clarified that this recommendation applied to hormonal
treatment alone or in combination with surgery.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
How the recommendations might affect practice
The inclusion of ablation and drainage as a treatment option is not expected to have a
resource impact as the cost of the 2 treatment options (cystectomy and ablation/drainage)
are similar. This change will allow the option of a treatment which may have less of an
impact on ovarian reserve.
Return to recommendations
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Context
Endometriosis is one of the most common gynaecological diseases needing treatment. It is
defined as the growth of endometrial-like tissue (the womb lining) outside the uterus
(womb). Endometriosis is mainly a disease of the reproductive years and, although its
exact cause is unknown, it is hormone mediated and is associated with menstruation.
Endometriosis is typically associated with symptoms such as pelvic pain, painful periods
and subfertility. Endometriosis is also associated with a lower quality of life. Women with
endometriosis report pain, which can be frequent, chronic and/or severe, as well as
tiredness, more sick days, and a significant physical, sexual, psychological and social
impact. Endometriosis is an important cause of subfertility and this can also have a
significant effect on quality of life.
Women may also have endometriosis without symptoms, so it is difficult to know how
common the disease is in the population. It is also unclear whether endometriosis is
always progressive or can remain stable or improve with time.
Delayed diagnosis is a significant problem for women with endometriosis. Patient self-help
groups emphasise that healthcare professionals often do not recognise the importance of
symptoms or consider endometriosis as a possibility. In addition, women can delay
seeking help because of a perception that pelvic pain is normal. Delays of 4 to 10 years
can occur between first reporting symptoms and confirming the diagnosis. Many women
report that the delay in diagnosis leads to increased personal suffering, prolonged ill
health and a disease state that is more difficult to treat.
Diagnosis can only be made definitively by laparoscopic visualisation of the pelvis, but
other, less invasive methods may be useful in assisting diagnosis, including ultrasound.
Management options for endometriosis include pharmacological, non-pharmacological and
surgical treatments. Endometriosis is an oestrogen-dependent condition. Most drug
treatments for endometriosis work by suppressing ovarian function, and are contraceptive.
Surgical treatment aims to remove or destroy endometriotic lesions. The choice of
treatment depends on the woman's preferences and priorities in terms of pain
management and/or fertility.
Endometriosis can be a chronic condition affecting women throughout their reproductive
lives (and sometimes beyond). Women's priorities and preferences may change over time,
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
and management strategies should change to reflect this.
Women with endometriosis typically present to community services (including GPs,
practice nurses, school nurses and sexual health services) with pain, and may then be
referred to gynaecology services for diagnosis and management. Some women may
present to fertility services. Complex surgical treatment is carried out in specialist
endometriosis services (endometriosis centres), which incorporate a multidisciplinary
team.
This guideline makes recommendations for the diagnosis and management of
endometriosis in community services, gynaecology services and specialist endometriosis
services (endometriosis centres).
The guideline also covers the care of women with confirmed or suspected endometriosis,
including recurrent endometriosis. It includes women who do not have symptoms but have
endometriosis discovered incidentally. Special consideration was given to young women
(aged 17 and under). The guideline does not cover the investigation of fertility problems
related to endometriosis, care of women with endometriosis occurring outside the pelvis,
nor postmenopausal women.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Finding more information and committee
details
To find NICE guidance on related topics, including guidance in development, see the NICE
topic pages on gynaecological conditions and fertility.
For full details of the evidence and the guideline committee's discussions, see the full
guideline and evidence review. You can also find information about how the guideline was
developed, including details of the committee.
NICE has produced tools and resources to help you put this guideline into practice. For
general help and advice on putting NICE guidelines into practice, see resources to help
you put guidance into practice.
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 25 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
Endometriosis: diagnosis and management (NG73)
Update information
April 2024: We have reviewed the evidence and updated some recommendations, and
made a recommendation for research, on treatment of endometriosis when fertility is a
priority. These recommendations are marked [2017, amended 2024]. We have also
amended the heading 'Surgical management when fertility is a priority' to 'Management if
fertility is a priority' to recognise that this section also covers non-surgical options.
Minor changes since publication
December 2021: We amended the recommendations on referral to clarify that women with
endometriosis outside the pelvic cavity should be referred to a specialist endometriosis
centre. We will not make further changes to the guideline. For more information, see the
surveillance report.
December 2019: We added links to our patient decision aid on hormonal treatment for
endometriosis.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-5918-1
Accreditation
NICE accredited
www.nice.org.uk/accreditation
NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 26 of
conditions#notice-of-rights).
26
