Information for
women with
endometriosis
Version 2014
eshre
SCIENCE MOVING
PEOPLE
MOVING SCIENCE
Patient version
of the ESHRE Guideline on
management of women
with endometriosis
Table of contents
About this booklet.
The ESHRE guideline on management of women with endometriosis
Why a patient version?
How this booklet was developed
More information
Who developed the ESHRE guideline on management of women with endometriosis?
Part 1: The menstrual cycle.......
Part 2: About Endometriosis
What is endometriosis?
What are the symptoms of endometriosis?
What causes endometriosis?
Endometriosis, adenomyosis, uterine fibroids and polyps?
How can endometriosis be classified?
Classification systems used in this document
How can you reduce the chances of getting endometriosis?
Part 3: Endometriosis in adolescents..........
Part 4: Endometriosis outside the pelvis...........
Does endometriosis occur outside the pelvic cavity?
Treatment of endometriosis outside the pelvis
Part 5: Diagnosis of Endometriosis
Should my doctor perform a clinical examination?
What is laparoscopy?
Should I undergo laparoscopy for a definite diagnosis?
2
4
4
4
4
5
5
6
7
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
15
15
16
16
17
18
Part 6: Treatment of pain due to endometriosis
Which medication can be used before a definite diagnosis of endometriosis?
Can I take analgesics (painkillers) for pain due to endometriosis?
What are the options for hormonal treatment of pain?
How does hormonal treatment work?
Progestagens and anti-progestagens
GnRH agonists
Aromatase inhibitors
What are the side effects of hormonal treatment?
Is surgical treatment an option for relieving pain symptoms?
Part 7: Endometriosis and infertility.....
Am I infertile because I have endometriosis?
Is surgical treatment an option for enhancing the chance of getting pregnant?
Is medically assisted reproduction an option for enhancing the chance of get pregnant?
Part 8: Beyond usual treatment.........
Part 9: Menopause in endometriosis............
Part 10: Endometriosis and Cancer.....
Part 11: Dictionary
Part 12: Questions from women with endometriosis..............
Part 13: More information ....
References....
Disclaimer.....
3
...
22
22
24
26
27
27
322222∞
28
30
30
31
32
35
36
37
....
...........
38
40
42
44
45
About this booklet
The ESHRE guideline on management of women with endometriosis
Recently, a group of clinical experts in endometriosis has written a European guideline on
endometriosis in an attempt to improve clinical practice within Europe and as a result improve
the quality of life of women with endometriosis. The guideline is entitled "Management of
women with endometriosis".
Why a patient version?
This patient version is a translation of the guideline in plain language. This version aims at
involving patients in healthcare improvement, either by learning about the current standard
of care, or by enabling patients to make informed decisions on their health, supported by the
best available evidence.
How this booklet was developed
This booklet was written by Dr Nathalie Vermeulen (methodological expert), Ms Bianca de Bie
(patient representative) and Dr Gerard Dunselman (gynaecologist and chair of the Guideline
Development Group).
A number of key questions was selected based on patient enquiries received by the Dutch
endometriosis patient organisation (Endometriose Stichting). The questions of patients are
listed in the back of this booklet. Focussing on these questions, the clinicians version of the
Guideline on the management of women with endometriosis was translated to plain language
advises and answers for patients.
Further background information and answers to questions not addressed in the guideline is
added in yellow squares. Difficult terms are coloured blue and explained in the dictionary. The
chair of the guideline development group checked the accuracy of all provided information.
Finally, the booklet was sent to the guideline development group and national patient
organisations for review. The text was adapted based on comments from the following
individuals and organisations:
Helen North/Patient Advisory Group
Sandra Engstrom
Geraldine Canny Ph.D.
Prof. Dr. Carlos Calhaz - Jorge
Prof. Thomas D'Hooghe
Endometriosis UK
support group leader for EndometriosisUK in Edinburgh
Referent biologist for a local patient association (Association Suisse de
Soutien Contre l'Endométriose)
Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa (Portugal)
University Hospitals Gasthuisberg, University of Leuven (Belgium)
4
More information
More detailed information on each of the topics in the patient version can be found in the
clinicians' edition of the guideline on the ESHRE website (www.eshre.eu/guidelines).
Contact details for national patient organisations within Europe can be found at the back of
this booklet.
Who developed the ESHRE guideline on management of women with
endometriosis?
This booklet is based on the guideline on management of women with endometriosis (for
doctors) that was developed by a guideline development group set up by the ESHRE Special
Interest Group Endometriosis and Endometrium. The guideline development group
constituted of clinicians with special interest in women with endometriosis, a literature
methodological expert and a patient representative.
Dr. Gerard A.J. Dunselman
Dr. Christian Becker
Prof. Dr. Carlos Calhaz - Jorge
Prof. Thomas D'Hooghe
Dr. M. Oskari Heikinheimo
Dr. Andrew W. Horne
Prof. Dr. med. Ludwig Kiesel
Maastricht University Medical Centre (The Netherlands)
Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford (UK)
Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa (Portugal)
University Hospitals Gasthuisberg, University of Leuven (Belgium)
Helsinki University Central Hospital (Finland)
MRC Centre for Reproductive Health - University of Edinburgh (UK)
University Hospital of Münster (Germany)
Rijnstate Arnhem (The Netherlands)
Dr. Annemiek Nap
Dr. Willianne Nelen
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre (The Netherlands)
Dr. Andrew Prentice
Dr. Ertan Saridogan
Dr. David Soriano
Ms. Bianca De Bie
University of Cambridge (UK)
University College London Hospital (UK)
Endometriosis Center - Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer (Israel)
Endometriose Stichting (The Netherlands)
Dr. Nathalie Vermeulen
European Society for Human Reproduction and Embryology
The guideline on management of women with endometriosis (for doctors) is published on the
website of ESHRE (www.eshre.eu/guidelines). For more detailed information, you can contact
a patient organisation or ask your doctor.
LO
5
Part 1: The menstrual cycle
During her fertile years, a woman's body prepares for pregnancy every month in
2 phases. In the first phase, the oocytes in the follicles in the ovary mature and
get ready to be released. Also, endometrium builds up in the uterus in a reaction
to hormones (oestrogens and progesterone) produced by the follicles to form a
layer where implantation of an embryo can occur. The first phase ends with the
release of an oocyte/egg from the ovary. If the egg is fertilized with a sperm, an
embryo may develop and after implantation, a pregnancy may be established. In
cycles where there is no pregnancy, the layer in the uterus, the endometrium, will
start degrading which results in menstruation.
The processes in the menstrual cycle are regulated by hormones like follicle
stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), estrogen and progesterone.
DAYS
1
36.7°
BASAL BODY
TEMPERATURE
36.4°
HORMONE LEVEL
FSH
LH
ESTROGEN
PROGESTERONE
OVARIAN CYCLE
7
FOLLICULAR PHASE
14
21
20
LUTEAL PHASE
OVUM
OVULATION
YYYYYY
UTERINE CYCLE
MENSES PROLIFERATIVE
SECRETORY
The menstrual cycle
Wikimedia Commons (GNU Free Documentation License)
When pregnancy occurs, the hormones will adapt, making sure that the layer
within the uterus will remain in place, so the embryo can be nourished.
When the woman reaches menopause, estrogens and progesterone are not
produced any more with a consequent rise of FSH and LH. There will be no more
ovulation or building up of the layer in the uterus, and the monthly menstruation
will stop. Effects of hormonal changes during menopause are for instance hot
flushes and vaginal dryness.
6
Part 2: About Endometriosis
It is estimated that between 2 and 10% of the women within the general population have
endometriosis and that up to 50% of the infertile women have endometriosis.
Women with endometriosis often have severe complaints and significantly reduced quality of
life, including restraint of normal activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression.
What is endometriosis?
Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial-like tissue outside the uterus
(Kennedy et al., 2005). Endometriosis triggers a chronic inflammatory reaction resulting in
pain and adhesions. Adhesions develop when scar tissue attaches separate structures or
organs together. The activity and the complaints due to endometriosis may vary during the
woman's menstrual cycle as hormone levels fluctuate. Consequently, symptoms may be
worse at certain times in the cycle, particularly just prior to and during the woman's menstrual
period. While some women with endometriosis experience severe pelvic pain, others have no
symptoms at all or regard their symptoms as simply being 'ordinary menstrual pain'.
Ovary with endometriotic tissue
Endometriotic tissue
Womb with endometrium
Bladder
Pouch of
Douglas
Bowel
Cross-sectional view of abdomen from the side
7
Endometriotic tissue in the abdomen
NIH fact sheet: Endometriosis (2011)
What are the symptoms of endometriosis?
The classical symptoms of endometriosis are:
Dysmenorrhea or painful menstruation
Nonmenstrual pelvic pain or pain occurring when a woman is not menstruating.
Dyspareunia or painful intercourse
Infertility
Fatigue
Cyclical intestinal complaints: periodic bloating, diarrhoea or constipation
Cyclical dyschezia, painful or difficult defecation.
Cyclical dysuria, painful urination
Cyclical hematuria, or the presence of blood in the urine
Cyclical rectal bleeding
-
Cyclical shoulder pain
Any other cyclical symptom
Cyclical symptoms are symptoms that develop a few days before a woman's menstruation
and disappear a few days after her menstruation has stopped, or symptoms that occur only
during the menstruation. The symptoms reappear the next month, following the woman's
menstrual cycle.
If you experience one or more of these symptoms and they cause you (severe) pain, you
should go to your family doctor and ask him to consider endometriosis. Severe pain can be
measured by not doing your normal daily activities (without taking pain medication).
Recommendations in the guideline:
The GDG recommends that clinicians should consider the diagnosis of endometriosis in the presence of
gynecological symptoms such as: dysmenorrhea, non-cyclical pelvic pain, deep dyspareunia, infertility, fatigue
in the presence of any of the above. (Good Practice Point)
The GDG recommends that clinicians should consider the diagnosis of endometriosis in women of reproductive
age with non-gynecological cyclical symptoms (dyschezia, dysuria, hematuria, rectal bleeding, shoulder pain).
(Good Practice Point)
00
8
Some symptoms are frequently reported by women with endometriosis, however
it is unclear whether these symptoms are actually caused by endometriosis. Some
of these symptoms may be indicative of other diseases or be side effects of
treatment, but some may also be related to endometriosis (although these were
not yet examined in clinical studies). These symptoms include:
Heavy Menstrual Bleeding
Migraine
Vaginism
Weight Gain
Fungal Infections
Cardiac Arrhythmia
(Lower)Back Pain
Radiating pain
Pain during ovulation
Nausea
Insomnia
If you experience these symptoms, please also mention these to your doctor.
What causes endometriosis?
The cause of endometriosis remains unknown. There are several theories, but none of them
has been entirely proven. The most accepted theory is centred on the so-called retrograde
menstruation. During menstruation, pieces of endometrium arrive in the abdominal cavity
through the Fallopian tubes, adhere to the peritoneal lining and develop into endometriotic
lesions. The hormone estrogen is crucial in this process. Subsequently, most of the current
treatments for endometriosis attempt to lower estrogen production in a woman's body in
order to relieve her of symptoms.
It has been argued that endometriosis is a genetic disease, since some families show more
patients with endometriosis compared to other families. Other suggestions are an immune
response triggering inflammation
9
Endometriosis, adenomyosis, uterine fibroids and polyps?
Adenomyosis, uterine fibroids and uterine polyps have symptoms that are similar
to the symptoms of endometriosis. These symptoms are, e.g. painful menstrual
periods, painful intercourse, pelvic pain, pain during bowel movements.
Adhesions-
(scar tissue)
Fibroids
Adenomyosis
Endometriosis
Polyp
Endometriosis, adenomyosis, uterine fibroids and polyps
Illustration from http://www.fairview.org/healthlibrary/Article/85716
While endometriosis is characterized by the presence of endometrial-like tissue
outside the uterus, adenomyosis is where endometrium is present within the
walls of the uterus.
Uterine fibroids are abnormal, benign (non-cancerous) growths of muscle within
the wall of a woman's uterus. Uterine polyps are abnormal, benign (non-
cancerous) growths attached to a short stalk that protrudes from the inner
surface of a woman's uterus.
10
How can endometriosis be classified?
A staging system has been developed by the American Society of Reproductive Medicine
(ASRM) to stage endometriosis and adhesions due to endometriosis. This classification is
often used by gynaecologists to document any endometriosis and adhesions that are
visualized during surgery. While a higher stage is generally regarded as denoting a more severe
form of disease, the staging system neither predicts severity of pain nor complexity of surgery.
The classification was originally developed to predict impairment to fertility and for this
reason is focused on ovarian disease and adhesions. Patients with the same 'stage' of disease
may have different disease presentations and types. Furthermore, some forms of severe
disease are not included e.g., invasive disease of the bowels, bladder and diaphragm. The four
stages of the ASRM staging system for endometriosis are as follows:
Stages 1 & 2 (minimal to mild disease): Superficial peritoneal endometriosis. Possible
presence of small deep lesions. No endometrioma. Mild filmy adhesions, if present.
Stages 3 and 4 (moderate to severe disease): The presence of superficial peritoneal
endometriosis, deeply invasive endometriosis with moderate to extensive adhesions between
the uterus and bowels and/or endometrioma cysts with moderate to extensive adhesions
involving the ovaries and tubes.
As a patient, your stage of disease does not indicate your symptoms nor necessarily the
optimal treatment to manage those symptoms. However, the subtype(s) of disease that you
have may well be informative in deciding upon optimal treatment.
STAGE I (MINIMAL)
STAGE II (MILD)
STAGE III (MODERATE)
J b x b z k
STAGE III (MODERATE)
STAGE IV (SEVERE)
STAGE IV (SEVERE)
Schematic classification examples of extent and location of endometriosis
Adapted from the Revised American Society for Reproductive Medicine Classification of Endometriosis (1996).
11
Apart from the classification system 3 subtypes of endometriosis can be discerned according
to localization: superficial peritoneal endometriosis, cystic ovarian endometriosis
(endometrioma or 'chocolate cysts') and deep endometriosis (also referred to as deeply
infiltrating endometriosis). The different types of disease may co-occur (i.e., a patient may
have more than one type of disease present in her pelvis).
Superficial peritoneal endometriosis: The most common type is superficial peritoneal
endometriosis. The lesions involve the peritoneum, which is a thin film that cloaks the inner
surfaces of the pelvic cavity. The lesions are flat and shallow and do not invade into the space
underlying the peritoneum.
Cystic ovarian endometriosis (ovarian endometrioma): Less commonly women with
endometriosis can develop endometrioma in their ovaries. An endometrioma is a cyst in
which the wall of the cyst contains areas of endometriosis. The cyst is filled with old blood.
Because of the colour, the cysts are also referred to as 'chocolate cysts'. Most women with
endometrioma cysts will also have superficial and/or deep disease present elsewhere in the
pelvis.
Deep endometriosis: Lastly, the least common subtype of endometriosis is deep
endometriosis. An endometriosis lesion is defined as deep if it has invaded at least 5mm
beyond the surface of the peritoneum. Given the peritoneum is very thin, deep lesions always
involve tissue underlying the peritoneum (the retroperitoneal space).
Classification systems used in this document:
As the scientific literature uses several classification systems, but mostly the AFS and
ASRM classification system, the guideline group decided on using the AFS/ASRM stage
in the recommendations.
In the explanatory text of this document, the terms "peritoneal endometriosis",
"ovarian endometrioma”, and “deep endometriosis" are used.
12
How can you reduce the chances of getting endometriosis?
Doctors sometimes get questions from relatives of women with endometriosis on how they
can prevent the disease.
Studies investigating whether taking the oral contraceptive pill or regular exercise could
prevent endometriosis did not show a clear causal relation and have limitations. Therefore, it
is uncertain whether taking the combined oral contraceptive pill or having regular physical
exercise will prevent the development of endometriosis. Other interventions have not been
studied.
Up to now, there are no know ways to reduce the chance of getting endometriosis.
Recommendations in the guideline:
The usefulness of oral contraceptives for the primary prevention of endometriosis is uncertain. (based on C-level
evidence)
The usefulness of physical exercise for the primary prevention of endometriosis is uncertain. (based on C-level
evidence)
13
Part 3: Endometriosis in adolescents
Endometriosis is a disease of women of reproductive age, which is between
menarche (the first menstruation during puberty) and menopause.
Only since the 1980s and the introduction of laparoscopy, endometriosis is
recognised as a disease that can affect adolescents and young women, whereas
before it was believed that endometriosis in adolescents was rare.
In recent years, endometriosis in adolescents has been recognised as a challenging
problem in gynaecology.
A recent review on this topic showed that:
The prevailing symptom of endometriosis in adolescents is persistent chronic
pelvic pain, despite medical treatment (hormonal contraceptives and/or pain
killers)
adolescent girls with deep endometriosis had more school absences during
menstruation and more frequently, and for a longer period, used an oral
contraceptives to treat severe primary dysmenorrhoea. Serious
gastrointestinal symptoms, including constipation, diarrhoea, nausea, and
vomiting were also reported in adolescents with endometriosis
In about 60% of the adult patients with endometriosis, symptoms started
before these women reached 20 years of age
Endometriosis in adolescents may be different in appearance from adult
endometriosis, and deep lesions seem to be rare.
There is no evidence on whether treatment of endometriosis in adolescents
prevents disease progression (more severe endometriosis later in life)
Notwithstanding the difficulty in drawing any definite conclusions from incomplete
evidence and occasionally even contradictory results, recent findings indicate that an
early onset of chronic pelvic pain at the time of menarche represents a risk factor for
severe endometriosis during adolescence. In addition, when endometriosis appears
during adolescence, there is likelihood that the disease will progress and, if left
untreated, produce adverse effects that go beyond pain, and include infertility.
Finally, a majority of adolescent girls with chronic pelvic pain not responding to
conventional medical therapy have endometriosis. For all these reasons, an early
identification of the disease may go a long way in slowing or preventing progression.
Indeed a number of medical and surgical options exist today for the treatment of
endometriosis. An early mini-invasive diagnostic procedure in adolescents with
untreatable chronic pelvic pain will lead the gynaecologist to an early identification
of endometriosis, followed by a personalized treatment. Given what we know, this
seems the best way to guide and protect adolescent girls in these circumstances.
14
Part 4: Endometriosis outside the pelvis
Does endometriosis occur outside the pelvic cavity?
Although endometriosis is a gynecological disease, associated with the menstrual
cycle, it has been found in almost any tissue of the body.
Endometriosis can affect the bowel, bladder, kidney and pouch of Douglas,
especially in deep endometriosis.
In rare cases endometriosis can also be found in the lungs, in the chest on the
diaphragm, in a scar of a laparotomy, in the navel and in the groin. Endometriosis
can also lead to symptoms in women after the removal of the uterus.
The symptoms that women experience depend on the localization of the
endometriotic lesions, but are classically cyclical. Cyclical shoulder pain may
indicate endometriosis on the diaphragm. Cyclical swelling and sometimes
bleeding from the navel may be secondary to umbilical endometriosis and is
sometimes misdiagnosed as an umbilical hernia. The same applies to cyclical
swelling of the groin where an inguinal hernia is diagnosed instead of
endometriosis of the groin. Cyclical signs of bladder dysfunction should not
automatically lead to antibiotic therapy but rather to a suspicion of endometriosis.
In short all symptoms that are related to the menstrual phase of the cycle should
lead to a high suspicion of the diagnosis endometriosis.
Treatment of endometriosis outside the pelvis
The treatment of choice for pain related to endometriosis outside the pelvis (extragenital
endometriosis) largely depends on the location of the endometriosis. When possible, your
doctor can consider surgical treatment. When surgical treatment is difficult, s/he can advise
medical treatment.
Recommendations in the guideline:
Clinicians may consider surgical removal of symptomatic extragenital endometriosis, when possible, to relieve
symptoms (based on D-level evidence).
When surgical treatment is difficult or impossible, clinicians may consider medical treatment of extragenital
endometriosis to relieve symptoms (based on D-level evidence).
15
Part 5: Diagnosis of Endometriosis
Because the symptoms of endometriosis are not very specific, the diagnosis of endometriosis
cannot be made by the symptoms alone. However, symptoms can give a doctor a first hint
towards the diagnosis of endometriosis.
Should my doctor perform a clinical examination?
In addition to your symptoms, clinical examination can provide additional information to the
doctor. However, there is little scientific evidence for the value of certain clinical signs to come
to the diagnosis endometriosis.
During clinical vaginal examination the doctor looks for tenderness, nodules or swelling of the
vaginal wall especially in the deepest point of the vagina between the back of the uterus and
the rectum by inspection using the speculum and by palpation using his/her fingers. In women
with deep endometriosis or endometriosis of the ovaries, clinical examination may give
considerable information regarding the proper diagnosis, while in peritoneal disease the
clinical examination most of the time is completely normal.
16
What is laparoscopy?
Laparoscopy is a surgical technique. The surgeon makes 2 small incisions in the
abdomen, near the navel, through which a the laparoscope with a camera is
brought into the abdomen. Through a camera, the surgeon can see the organs
in the pelvis and he or she can determine whether or not endometriosis is
present. If he or she spots lesions of endometriosis, the surgeon can remove
small pieces of tissue to be examined in the laboratory (called histology).
Surgical laparoscopy
Implants
excised
Implants
removed
Implants
with
burned
away
laser
Laparoscopy
Krames Information brochure on endometriosis
Historically, laparoscopy with histological confirmation is seen as the gold
standard for the diagnosis of endometriosis. However, there are no studies
showing that a positive laparoscopy (when a doctor can see lesions during
laparoscopy) truly proves the presence of endometriosis. The guideline
development group encourages doctors to obtain small pieces of tissue for
histologic examination whenever laparoscopy is performed. If an experienced
doctor performs a laparoscopy and he or she cannot identify endometriosis, it
is likely that the woman does not have endometriosis.
17
Should I undergo laparoscopy for a definite diagnosis?
A definite diagnosis of endometriosis is considered when the doctor has seen endometriosis
during laparoscopy and this is confirmed by taking biopsies for histology.
For a definite diagnosis, laparoscopy is needed. However, if your doctor suspects
endometriosis based on your symptoms, clinical examinations and transvaginal ultrasound,
he or she may also propose to try medical treatment without establishing a definitive
diagnosis first to reduce your symptoms. Options for medical treatment are analgesics,
hormonal contraceptives or progestagens. If these treatments help relieving your symptoms,
you may decide not to undergo laparoscopy. If these treatments are not helping you, you can
still decide to undergo a laparoscopy.
In addition, in case you doctor suspects deep endometriosis, he or she may propose medical
treatment and refer you to an expert centre for further diagnosis and/or surgery.
Recommendations in the guideline:
The GDG recommends that clinicians perform a laparoscopy to diagnose endometriosis, although evidence is
lacking that a positive laparoscopy without histology proves the presence of disease. (Good Practice Point)
The GDG recommends that clinicians confirm a positive laparoscopy by histology, since positive histology
confirms the diagnosis of endometriosis, even though negative histology does not exclude it. (Good Practice
Point)
The GDG recommends that clinicians obtain tissue for histology in women undergoing surgery for ovarian
endometrioma and/or deep infiltrating disease, to exclude rare instances of malignancy. (Good Practice Point)
18
Can Ultrasound, MRI, CT-scan, or CA-125 be used for diagnosing
endometriosis?
Clinicians and researchers have been searching for other techniques to diagnose
endometriosis in a non-invasive way, meaning, with minimal pain or discomfort to the patient.
Options that have been explored are ultrasound, MRI, CT scan, 3D ultrasound and biomarkers,
like CA-125. Some of these methods are currently used when the doctor suspects
endometriosis, since they can help the doctor in making a diagnosis or in helping to assess the
extent of the disease.
Transvaginal ultrasound can be performed to diagnose ovarian endometriosis or deep
endometriosis. The latter diagnosis is not so easy to make by ultrasound, you have to have a
lot of experience to be able to do this. 3D ultrasound and MRI are not well suited to diagnose
endometriosis. In established deep endometriosis, however, MRI can be used to assess the
extent of the disease.
Some diseases can be diagnosed by a simple blood test through the detection of biomarkers.
Biomarkers are molecules in a blood or urine sample of a patient that can be found during
analysis in a laboratory. Researchers have looked for biomarkers (for instance CA125) for
endometriosis in endometrial tissue, menstrual or uterine fluids, plasma, urine or serum. So
far, no biomarkers are proven to be able to diagnose endometriosis. Therefore, the guideline
development group recommends not using biomarkers to try to diagnose endometriosis.
Recommendations in the guideline:
In women with symptoms and signs of rectal endometriosis, transvaginal sonography is useful for identifying
or ruling out rectal endometriosis. (based on level A evidence)
Clinicians are recommended to perform transvaginal sonography to diagnose or to exclude an ovarian
endometrioma. (based on level A evidence)
Clinicians should be aware that the usefulness of 3D sonography to diagnose rectovaginal endometriosis is
not well established (based on level D evidence)
Clinicians should be aware that the usefulness of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to diagnose peritoneal
endometriosis is not well established. (based on level D evidence)
Clinicians are recommended not to use biomarkers in endometrial tissue, menstrual or uterine fluids, or
immunological biomarkers, including CA-125, in plasma, urine or serum to diagnose endometriosis. (based
on level A evidence)
19
In women with deep endometriosis, there can be lesions in other organs and/or severe
adhesions. In case that your doctor suspects deep endometriosis, he can perform a Barium
enema test, ultrasound and/or MRI to get information on the severity of the disease, before
performing laparoscopy for a definite diagnosis, or starting medical treatment.
Recommendations in the guideline:
The GDG recommends that clinicians should assess ureter, bladder, and bowel involvement by additional imaging
if there is a suspicion based on history or physical examination of deep endometriosis, in preparation for further
management. (Good Practice Point)
20
Part 6: Treatment of pain due to endometriosis
Endometriosis is a chronic disease. In that sense, there is no cure for endometriosis, but the
symptoms can be reduced with the right treatment. Communication is the key to finding a
treatment that fits you. Please discuss your options with your doctor and ask any questions
you may have. Your doctor will be happy to explain the different options and answer your
questions.
Women with endometriosis have either pain, fertility problems or they have both. Treatment
of endometriosis focuses on resolving or reducing pain due to endometriosis or on improving
fertility, so a patient can get pregnant naturally or through fertility treatments. For treating
endometriosis, the doctor can prescribe medical treatment or advise surgical treatment. Both
will be explained in detail here.
Depending on the patient, the treatment will be different. Your doctor will take several factors
into consideration when prescribing medical treatment or advising surgical treatment. These
factors include:
The preferences of the woman
The type of disease (peritoneal disease, ovarian cyst or deep endometriosis)
•
The severity and type of pain symptoms
•
The wish to become pregnant immediately or at a later stage
•
The costs and side-effects of some treatments
• The age of the woman
• The treatments she has already received.
•
The doctor (country, expert centre)
This means that two women with endometriosis could receive different treatments and even
that one woman could receive different treatments over time depending on her preferences,
her age, her wish to become pregnant.
Important to remember is that medical treatment works only when they are taken as
prescribed. Stopping medical treatment often means that the symptoms recur.
In the next section, options for medical treatment and surgical treatment will be explained.
21
Which medication can be used before a definite diagnosis of
endometriosis?
When the doctor suspects a woman to have endometriosis related pain, the patient and the
doctor can decide that without a definite diagnosis (made by a laparoscopy) the pain is
treated as if the patient has endometriosis. This is called empirical treatment or treatment
without a definitive diagnosis.
For painful symptoms suspected to be caused by endometriosis, empirical treatment includes
analgesia, hormonal contraceptives or progestagens.
Since GnRH analogues have considerable side effects and are very expensive, doctors and
patients should consider not using this type of drugs for empirical treatment.
Recommendations in the guideline:
The GDG recommends clinicians to counsel women with symptoms presumed to be due to endometriosis
thoroughly, and to empirically treat them with adequate analgesia, combined hormonal contraceptives or
progestagens. (Good Practice Point)
Can I take analgesics (painkillers) for pain due to endometriosis?
Analgesics, like non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), are medical therapies that
influence how the body experiences pain. These therapies are not specific for endometriosis-
associated pain, and they do not alter any disease mechanism in the body like the hormonal
treatments do. Analgesics have little side effects, they are cheap, easily accessible and widely
used, but very little studies have investigated whether they actually help in reducing
endometriosis-associated pain. Long-term use of NSAIDs can be associated with side effects
affecting the stomach. Therefore, protection of the stomach is advisable.
Anyway, from clinical experience, the guideline development group recommends that
clinicians should consider NSAIDS or other analgesics to reduce endometriosis-associated
pain.
Recommendations in the guideline:
The GDG recommends that clinicians should consider NSAIDs or other analgesics to reduce endometriosis-
associated pain. (Good Practice Point)
22
What are the options for hormonal treatment of pain?
Medical treatments for endometriosis include hormonal treatments or pain medication
(analgesics).
Hormonal treatments in clinical use are:
hormonal contraceptives(cyclical use or continuously)
progestagens (oral or in an Intra Uterine Device)
anti-progestagens,
GnRH agonists
aromatase inhibitors
Medical treatment in endometriosis is focussed on resolving pain. Medical treatment should
not be prescribed to improve fertility.
In general, medical treatments can help to reduce pain symptoms in women with
endometriosis. Which type of medication fits best to an individual patient depends on the
complaints, the efficacy and side effects of the treatment and the preferences of the patient.
Another factor is the cost and availability of a certain treatment. In some countries within
Europe, some treatments are not available, they are very expensive, or they are not
reimbursed. This information can also influence the decision for a certain treatment
Recommendations in the guideline:
Clinicians are recommended to prescribe hormonal treatment (hormonal contraceptives, progestagens, anti-
progestagens, or GnRH agonists) as one of the options, as it reduces endometriosis-associated pain. (based on
level A and B evidence)
The GDG recommends that clinicians take patient preferences, side effects, efficacy, costs and availability into
consideration when choosing hormonal treatment for endometriosis-associated pain. (Good Practice Point)
How does hormonal treatment work?
Endometriosis is a problem associated with a woman's menstrual cycle and
dependent on the activity of estrogens.
The aim of hormonal treatment for pain in women with endometriosis is lowering
the estrogen level. It is important to know that hormonal treatment does not cure
endometriosis. Hormonal treatment suppresses the activity of the disease and
hence the pain symptoms. However, after discontinuation of the treatment
symptoms tend to recur. It is not known which patients will have a relapse of pain
symptoms.
23
Hormonal contraceptives
Hormonal contraceptives are widely used for contraception and generally accepted. They
contain low doses of hormones (estrogen and progesterone) and can reduce pain associated
with endometriosis by stopping follicular growth and hence reducing the production and
concentration of estrogens. Low estrogens stop the activity of the growth of the endometrium
in and outside the uterus, and thus pause endometriosis. The progesterone in the pill
decreases the activity of the endometrium directly.
The side effects are limited and hormonal contraceptives are not expensive. Your doctor can
prescribe different types of hormonal contraceptives:
the oral contraceptive pill (taken with or without a monthly pill-free week),
a vaginal contraceptive ring, or
a transdermal patch.
Vaginal ring
Birth
control
patch
Birth
control
pills
Healthwise, Incorporated
Options for hormonal contraceptives
Recommendations in the guideline:
Clinicians can consider prescribing a combined hormonal contraceptive, as it reduces endometriosis-
associated dyspareunia, dysmenorrhea and non-menstrual pain (based on level B evidence)
Clinicians may consider the continuous use of a combined oral contraceptive pill in women suffering from
endometriosis-associated dysmenorrhea (based on level C evidence)
Clinicians may consider the use of a vaginal contraceptive ring or a transdermal (estrogen/progestin) patch to
reduce endometriosis-associated dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia and chronic pelvic pain (based on level C
evidence)
24
Progestagens and anti-progestagens
Progestagens can be used in different forms: orally, as a 3-monthly injection or a
levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system. Different types of progestagens are
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), dienogest, cyproterone acetate or danazol.
Progestagens are also used as contraceptives, but they only contain progesterone, not
estrogen. Anti-progestagens (gestrinone) have a similar method of action. Progestagens are
relatively inexpensive.
The different types of progestagens and anti-progestagens have different side effects. Doctors
are recommended to take the side effects into account when prescribing this type of
medication and discuss them with the patient. Patients are recommended to report any side
effects with their doctor and discuss their options.
A levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system is a small device that is inserted in the uterus
and releases low levels of progesterone. A levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system is
frequently used for contraception; it has limited side effects and is user-friendly. In women
with endometriosis, the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system is an option for reducing
symptoms of pain.
p
A levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system
http://m.mirena.com/
Recommendations in the guideline:
Clinicians are recommended to use progestagens [medroxyprogesterone acetate (oral or depot), dienogest,
cyproterone acetate, norethisterone acetate or danazol] or anti-progestagens (gestrinone) as one of the
options, to reduce endometriosis-associated pain (based on level A evidence)
The GDG recommends that clinicians take the different side-effect profiles of progestagens and anti-
progestagens into account when prescribing these drugs, especially irreversible side effects (e.g. thrombosis,
androgenic side effects) (good practice point)
Clinicians can consider prescribing a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system as one of the options to
reduce endometriosis-associated pain. (based on level B evidence)
25
GnRH agonists
GnRH agonists induce a very low estrogen level by stopping the follicular growth in the ovary
completely. GnRH agonists can be taken intranasal, or through subcutaneous injection as a
depot working either one or three months. Some of the most common GnRH agonists are
nafarelin, leuprolide, buserelin, goserelin and triptorelin. GnRH agonists have more side
effects than oral contraceptives and progestagens and are more expensive.
The side effects of GnRH agonists are related to the low level of estrogens and are comparable
to the consequences of the menopausal status. These so-called hypo-estrogenic symptoms
are hot flushes and night sweats, vaginal dryness and related pain during intercourse, and
influences on the mental health up to depressive feelings. In the long term GnRH agonists are
associated with osteoporosis. To reduce these symptoms, clinicians are recommended to
prescribe hormonal add-back therapy as soon as GnRH agonists are started. Hormonal add
back means adding a combination of estrogens and progesterone (oral contraceptives). This
add back therapy takes away the side effects while the therapeutic effect is maintained. Since
adolescents and young women up to the age of 23 have not reached their optimal bone
density, it is advisable not to use GnRH agonists in these women.
Recommendations in the guideline:
Clinicians are recommended to use GnRH agonists (nafarelin, leuprolide, buserelin, goserelin or triptorelin),
as one of the options for reducing endometriosis-associated pain, although evidence is limited regarding
dosage or duration of treatment (based on level A evidence).
Clinicians are recommended to prescribe hormonal add-back therapy to coincide with the start of GnRH
agonist therapy, to prevent bone loss and hypoestrogenic symptoms during treatment. This is not known to
reduce the effect of treatment on pain relief (based on level A evidence).
The GDG recommends clinicians to give careful consideration to the use of GnRH agonists in young women
and adolescents, since these women may not have reached maximum bone density (good practice point).
26
Aromatase inhibitors
Aromatase inhibitors stop an enzyme (aromatase) that is needed in the production of
estrogens in several cells of the body. The result is a very low estrogen level. These drugs have
been used in other diseases, but they are only recently been used in endometriosis and not
well studied yet.
Due to the side effects (vaginal dryness, hot flushes, diminished bone mineral density),
aromatase inhibitors should only be prescribed to women in severe pain after trying all other
options of medical and surgical treatment.
Aromatase inhibitors are not available in some European countries.
Recommendations in the guideline:
In women with pain from rectovaginal endometriosis refractory to other medical or surgical treatment,
clinicians can consider prescribing aromatase inhibitors in combination with oral contraceptive pills,
progestagens, or GnRH analogues, as they reduce endometriosis-associated pain. (based on level B evidence)
What are the side effects of hormonal treatment?
Since the aim of treatment in endometriosis-associated pain is lowering the level
of estrogens, the side effects are related to a low estrogen level. Besides that, the
side effects are related to the drugs used to reach that low estrogen level.
Side effects are therefore related either to low estrogens (hormonal
contraception, GnRH analogues) or to progesterone (hormonal contraception,
progestagens).
Some examples of side effects of hormonal treatment for pain in endometriosis
are headaches, acne, weight gain, vaginal spotting, fatigue and hot flushes.
These side effects differ strongly between treatments and between patients. As a
result, a certain treatment can be a good option for one woman, but the same
treatment can have severe side effects in another woman. Your doctor should
discuss side effects with you when prescribing hormonal treatment.
27
Is surgical treatment an option for relieving pain symptoms?
Surgical treatment of endometriosis focuses on the elimination of peritoneal
endometriosis/endometrioma/deep endometriosis and division of adhesions.
In the past, open surgery or laparotomy was used routinely. Nowadays, laparoscopy is used
frequently and preferred since it usually results in less pain, shorter hospital stay, quicker
recovery and a smaller scar. However, laparotomy and laparoscopy are equally effective in
treating pain symptoms in women with endometriosis.
Therefore, clinicians should consider surgical treatment (elimination of endometriotic lesions)
when they see endometriotic lesions during laparoscopy for diagnosis.
If deep endometriosis is suspected, doctors are recommended to refer their patient to a
centre of expertise, as these surgeries may be difficult.
Recommendations in the guideline:
When endometriosis is identified at laparoscopy, clinicians are recommended to surgically treat
endometriosis, as this is effective for reducing endometriosis-associated pain i.e. 'see and treat' (based on
level A evidence).
Clinicians can consider performing surgical removal of deep endometriosis, as it reduces endometriosis-
associated pain and improves quality of life (based on level B evidence).
The GDG recommends that clinicians refer women with suspected or diagnosed deep endometriosis to a centre
of expertise that offers all available treatments in a multidisciplinary context. (Good practice point)
28
Hysterectomy
If a woman has completed her family and other treatments do not work, removal of the
ovaries with or without removal of the uterus (hysterectomy) can be considered. However,
removal of the ovaries is a radical solution, since it results in so called surgical menopause
with the side effects of menopause described above. It has to be mentioned that
hysterectomy alone not always solves the problem, since most of the time endometriosis is
left behind retroperitoneally and hence the pain symptoms remain present.
Recommendations in the guideline:
The GDG recommends that clinicians consider hysterectomy with removal of the ovaries and all visible
endometriotic lesions, in women who have completed their family and failed to respond to more conservative
treatments. Women should be informed that hysterectomy will not necessarily cure the symptoms or the
disease. (Good practice point)
Medical treatment before or after surgery
There is some controversy on this subject.
The guideline group does not recommend hormonal treatment before surgery to improve the
results of the surgery. Of course, many women in pain get hormonal treatment during a
waiting period before surgery. After surgery, starting with an oral contraceptive pill or using a
levonorgestrel-intrauterine device may prevent recurrence of pain.
Recommendations in the guideline:
Clinicians should not prescribe preoperative hormonal treatment to improve the outcome of surgery for pain
in women with endometriosis (based on level A evidence).
After cystectomy for ovarian endometrioma in women not immediately seeking conception, clinicians are
recommended to prescribe hormonal contraceptives for the secondary prevention of endometrioma (based
on level A evidence).
In women operated on for endometriosis, clinicians are recommended to prescribe postoperative use of a
levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) or a combined hormonal contraceptive for at least 18-
24 months, as one of the options for the secondary prevention of endometriosis-associated dysmenorrhea,
but not for non-menstrual pelvic pain or dyspareunia (based on level A evidence).
29
Part 7: Endometriosis and infertility
Am I infertile because I have endometriosis?
Probably not, women diagnosed with endometriosis are not all infertile. In medical terms,
infertility is defined as not reaching pregnancy after 1 year of regular intercourse. It is
estimated that 60-70% of women with endometriosis are fertile and can get pregnant
spontaneously and have children. Therefore, women not wanting to get pregnant should
discuss their options for contraception with their doctor.
A proportion of women with endometriosis and fertility problems will stay involuntarily
childless, but there are no exact data on how many. Of the women with fertility problems, a
proportion will get pregnant, but only after medical assistance, either surgery or medically
assisted reproduction (IUI or IVF). There is no evidence that hormonal treatment or
alternative treatment enhances the chance of spontaneous pregnancy in women with
endometriosis.
There is no best option for aiding infertile women with endometriosis to get pregnant. The
decision on which option to take, surgery of medically assisted reproduction, should be based
on type of disease, the doctor's preferences and the patient's preferences.
There is also no evidence that women with endometriosis have a higher risk of complications
in pregnancy (birth defects, miscarriages), but please inform your doctor or midwife of a
diagnosis of endometriosis.
30
Is surgical treatment an option for enhancing the chance of getting
pregnant?
Studies have shown that surgery (with removal of endometriotic lesions) can enhance the
chance of spontaneous pregnancy in women with peritoneal endometriosis.
In women with ovarian endometrioma, surgery is one of the options to enhance the chance
of spontaneous pregnancy. However, surgery in women with ovarian endometrioma can
result in damage to the ovary. Your doctor should discuss this risk with you.
There is no strong evidence that surgery improves spontaneous pregnancy rates in women
with deep endometriosis.
Recommendations in the guideline:
In infertile women with AFS/ASRM stage I/II endometriosis, clinicians should perform operative
laparoscopy (excision or ablation of the endometriotic lesions) including adhesiolysis, rather than
performing diagnostic laparoscopy only, to increase ongoing pregnancy rates. (based on level A evidence)
In infertile women with ovarian endometrioma undergoing surgery, clinicians should perform excision of the
endometrioma capsule, instead of drainage and electrocoagulation of the endometrioma wall, to increase
spontaneous pregnancy rates. (based on level A evidence)
The GDG recommends that clinicians counsel women with endometrioma regarding the risks of reduced
ovarian function after surgery and the possible loss of the ovary. The decision to proceed with surgery
should be considered carefully if the woman has had previous ovarian surgery. (Good practice point)
In infertile women with AFS/ASRM stage III/IV endometriosis, clinicians can consider operative
laparoscopy, instead of expectant management, to increase spontaneous pregnancy rates. (based on level
B evidence)
Medical treatment before or after surgery
There is no evidence that taking hormonal treatment before or after surgery helps in
increasing the chance of pregnancy in women with endometriosis associated infertility.
Recommendations in the guideline:
In infertile women with endometriosis, the GDG recommends clinicians not to prescribe adjunctive hormonal
treatment before surgery to improve spontaneous pregnancy rates, as suitable evidence is lacking. (Good
practice point)
In infertile women with endometriosis, clinicians should not prescribe adjunctive hormonal treatment after
surgery to improve spontaneous pregnancy rates. (based on level A evidence)
31
Is medically assisted reproduction an option for enhancing the
chance of get pregnant?
Although women with endometriosis can get pregnant, some women suffer from infertility.
For women with fertility problems, medically assisted reproduction can be an option.
Medically assisted reproduction includes a number of procedures with the aim of getting
pregnant, including intrauterine insemination and assisted reproductive technologies
Intrauterine insemination
In intrauterine insemination, the sperm of the partner is injected into the uterus of the woman
at the time when an egg is released and ready for fertilisation. The appropriate time is
determined by performing ultrasound, by measuring hormonal levels or regulated by injection
of synthetic hormones (controlled ovarian stimulation).
If you have minimal or mild endometriosis and decide to get pregnant, your doctor may advise
intrauterine insemination with controlled ovarian stimulation to increase your chance of
pregnancy. Some studies have shown that performing intrauterine insemination with
controlled ovarian stimulation within 6 months after surgery could increase the chance of
pregnancy.
Intrauterine insemination is also an option in women with ovarian endometrioma or
moderate or severe endometriosis, but there are no studies that have investigated this.
Intrauterine insemination is not an option in the following cases:
the woman has a problem with her fallopian tubes, meaning that the egg has problems
to reach the uterus (tubal function is compromised)
the woman's partner has fertility problems (for instance low sperm count, reduced
sperm quality)
in case other treatments have failed.
In these cases, assisted reproductive technologies should be used.
Recommendations in the guideline:
In infertile women with AFS/ASRM stage I/II endometriosis, clinicians may perform intrauterine
insemination with controlled ovarian stimulation, instead of expectant management, as it increases live birth
rates. (based on level C evidence)
In infertile women with AFS/ASRM stage I/II endometriosis, clinicians may consider performing intrauterine
insemination with controlled ovarian stimulation within 6 months after surgical treatment, since pregnancy
rates are similar to those achieved in unexplained infertility. (based on level C evidence)
The GDG recommends the use of assisted reproductive technologies for infertility associated with
endometriosis, especially if tubal function is compromised or if there is male factor infertility, and/or other
treatments have failed. (Good practice point)
32
Assisted reproductive technologies
An important proportion of women with moderate or severe endometriosis will need assisted
reproductive technologies (ART) when they decide to become pregnant.
Assisted reproductive technologies are procedures where the egg and sperm are collected
from the body and put together in a test-tube to be fertilised. Later, the fertilised egg or
embryo is transferred to the uterus. Before the eggs, which have to be mature, can be
removed from the woman's body, she receives hormonal stimulation of the follicles to
produce mature eggs. This is also known as in vitro fertilisation or IVF. Intracytoplasmic
sperm injection or ICSI is a similar technique but in the lab, a single sperm is injected into the
egg with a needle instead of putting the egg with many sperm cells in a test tube as in IVF. ICSI
is mostly performed when the sperm is of low quality.
Assisted reproductive technologies can help women with endometriosis to get pregnant.
In women with endometrioma, the use of preventative antibiotics at the time of oocyte
retrieval, to avoid infections, seems reasonable.
Recommendations in the guideline:
In infertile women with endometriosis, clinicians may offer treatment with assisted reproductive technologies
after surgery, since cumulative endometriosis recurrence rates are not increased after controlled ovarian
stimulation for IVF/ICSI (based on level C evidence).
In women with endometrioma, clinicians may use antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of oocyte retrieval,
although the risk of ovarian abscess following follicle aspiration is low (based on level D evidence).
33
Medical treatment prior to Assisted reproductive technologies
There is some evidence that taking a GnRH agonist for a period of 3 to 6 months prior to
treatment with IVF improves the chance to get of pregnant in infertile women with
endometriosis.
Recommendations in the guideline:
Clinicians can prescribe GnRH agonists for a period of 3 to 6 months prior to treatment with assisted
reproductive technologies to improve clinical pregnancy rates in infertile women with endometriosis (based on
level B evidence).
Surgery prior to Assisted reproductive technologies
There is no strong evidence that performing surgery before starting ART is effective to
increase the chance of pregnancy. However, there is also no evidence that surgery decreases
chances of pregnancy. Hence, your doctor may advise surgery if you have significant pain or if
s/he cannot reach the ovaries during ART in case of large ovarian endometrioma.
There is no evidence of increased cumulative endometriosis recurrence rates after ovarian
stimulation for IVF/ICSI in women with endometriosis, meaning that undergoing ART does not
necessarily worsen your endometriosis.
Recommendations in the guideline:
In infertile women with AFS/ASRM stage I/II endometriosis undergoing laparoscopy prior to treatment with
assisted reproductive technologies, clinicians may consider the complete surgical removal of endometriosis
to improve live birth rate, although the benefit is not well established (based on level C evidence).
In infertile women with endometrioma larger than 3 cm there is no evidence that cystectomy prior to
treatment with assisted reproductive technologies improves pregnancy rates (based on level A evidence).
In women with endometrioma larger than 3 cm, the GDG recommends clinicians only to consider
cystectomy prior to assisted reproductive technologies to improve endometriosis-associated pain or the
accessibility of follicles (Good practice point).
The effectiveness of surgical excision of deep nodular lesions before treatment with assisted reproductive
technologies in women with endometriosis-associated infertility is not well established with regard to
reproductive outcome (based on level C evidence).
34
Part 8: Beyond usual treatment
Medical and surgical treatment of endometriosis have been studied widely and are used in
clinical practice. Since these treatments have limitations, some women prefer to explore other
options.
You may have heard about complementary and alternative therapies. These therapies are
very popular, but are not often given by doctors. Examples are acupuncture, behavioural
therapy, nutrition (including dietary supplements, vitamins, and minerals), expert patient
programmes, recreational drugs, reflexology, homeopathy, psychological therapy, Traditional
Chinese Medicine, herbal medicine, sports and exercise. Several of these complementary and
alternative therapies are used by women with endometriosis to reduce pelvic pain,
dysmenorrhea, improve the chances of pregnancy and improve quality of life.
Before recommending a certain treatment for pain, doctors would like to have some objective
data collected in a high quality study showing that a certain therapy is effective and not
harmful to the patient. Up to now, there is no good proof that complementary and alternative
treatments truly help reducing pain or improving fertility in women with endometriosis.
However, the guideline development group acknowledges that some women who use
complementary and alternative treatments may feel benefit from this, meaning that they
have improved quality of life and/or can cope better with the symptoms of endometriosis.
It is important to tell your doctor if you are using any complementary or alternative treatment,
so s/he can give you additional information.
Recommendations in the guideline:
The GDG does not recommend the use of nutritional supplements, complementary or alternative medicine in
the treatment of endometriosis-associated pain or infertility, because the potential benefits and/or harms are
unclear. However, the GDG acknowledges that some women who seek complementary and alternative medicine
may feel benefit from this. (Good practice point).
35
Part 9: Menopause in endometriosis
Menopause is the point in time when women stop having menstrual periods. It is a natural
process in women of around 50 years old. Some women have hardly any problems during
menopause, while others suffer from typical menopausal symptoms like hot flushes, night
sweats, vaginal and urinary problems, mood changes, osteoporosis (decreased bone density).
These symptoms are caused by low levels of estrogen. For women with menopausal
symptoms, medical treatments exist to reduce the symptoms and discomfort from
menopause.
Women with endometriosis may have similar symptoms of menopause as women without
endometriosis. The problem in women with endometriosis is that the medical treatments
given to women to reduce the symptoms and discomfort of menopause could have a negative
effect on their endometriosis. Until now, there is no strong evidence of pain or disease
recurrence in women with endometriosis taking medication for menopausal symptoms, but it
is a possibility.
The guideline group feels that medical treatment for menopausal symptoms (combined
estrogen/progestagen or tibolone) should be discussed with women with endometriosis with
severe menopausal symptoms. Doctors should explain the positive and negative effects of this
medication.
Recommendations in the guideline:
In women with surgically induced menopause because of endometriosis, estrogen/progestagen therapy or
tibolone can be effective for the treatment of menopausal symptoms (based on level B evidence).
The GDG recommends that in postmenopausal women after hysterectomy and with a history of
endometriosis, clinicians should avoid unopposed estrogen treatment. However, the theoretical benefit of
avoiding disease reactivation and malignant transformation of residual disease should be balanced against
the increased systemic risks associated with combined estrogen/progestagen or tibolone (Good practice
point).
The GDG recommends that clinicians continue to treat women with a history of endometriosis after surgical
menopause with combined estrogen/progestagen or tibolone, at least up to the age of natural menopause
(Good practice point).
36
Part 10: Endometriosis and Cancer
Many women with endometriosis are worried about their risk of developing cancer. Several
researchers have investigated whether women with endometriosis have a increased risk of
developing cancer as compared to women without endometriosis.
From all these studies, the guideline development group concluded the following message:
there is no evidence that endometriosis causes cancer
the number of women with cancer (all types of cancer) is similar in a group of women
with endometriosis as compared to a group of women without endometriosis
some cancers (ovarian cancer and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma) are slightly more
common in women with endometriosis.
In clinical studies, researchers use terms like incidence ratio, relative risk, odds ratio and
others to explain the risk of developing cancer in women with endometriosis. If these figures
worry you, you should ask your doctor to explain the studies in absolute numbers. One
example for this is a study reporting that the incidence ratio of ovarian cancer in women with
endometriosis compared to women without endometriosis is about 1.5. Translated in plain
language; the researchers looked at a group of 100 women with endometriosis and 100
women without endometriosis. After 12 years, three women in the group of 100 women with
endometriosis developed ovarian cancer, compared to two women of the women without
endometriosis.
Another important message from the guideline development group is that there is no
information on how to lower the risk of cancer in women with endometriosis or women
without endometriosis.
Recommendations in the guideline:
The GDG recommends that clinicians inform women with endometriosis requesting information on their risk
of developing cancer that 1) there is no evidence that endometriosis causes cancer, 2) there is no increase in
overall incidence of cancer in women with endometriosis, and 3) some cancers (ovarian cancer and non-
Hodgkin's lymphoma) are slightly more common in women with endometriosis (Good practice point).
The GDG recommends that clinicians explain the incidence of some cancers in women with endometriosis in
absolute numbers (Good practice point).
The GDG recommends no change in the current overall management of endometriosis in relation to
malignancies, since there are no clinical data on how to lower the slightly increased risk of ovarian cancer or
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in women with endometriosis (Good practice point).
37
Part 11: Dictionary
Ablation: removal of diseased or unwanted tissue by surgery or other means
Add-back therapy: Hormonal therapy to minimize side effects of medications that suppress estrogen
(such as leuprolide acetate); add-back therapy usually decreases hot flashes and also helps prevent
bone loss.
Adhesions: bands of fibrous scar tissue
Assisted reproductive technology (ART): The name for treatments that enable people to conceive by
means other than sexual intercourse. Assisted reproduction techniques include intra-uterine
insemination (IUI), in vitro fertilisation (IVF), intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), donor
insemination and egg donation.
Controlled ovarian stimulation (COS): For ART: pharmacologic treatment in which women are
stimulated to induce the development of multiple ovarian follicles to obtain multiple oocytes at
follicular aspiration.
Definite diagnosis: A diagnosis that has been absolutely confirmed
Dyschezia: Painful or difficult defecation.
Dysmenorrhea: Severe pain in the lower abdomen or back, sometimes together with nausea,
depression and headache, directly before and/or during menstruation.
Dyspareunia: Recurrent or persistent genital pain directly before, during or shortly after coitus (sexual
intercourse).
Embryo: A fertilised egg.
Endometrioma: An endometrial cyst containing old blood and endometrium.
Endometrium: The layer of tissue that lines the uterus. During the menstrual cycle, the endometrium
grows to a thick, blood vessel-rich, glandular tissue layer. The main job of the endometrium is to accept
the implantation of the fertilized egg that drops into the uterine cavity several days after ovulation and
to nurture the dividing cells in the early stages of pregnancy.
Estrogen/Oestrogen: A female sex hormone produced by developing eggs in the ovaries, which
stimulates the development of female sex characteristics.
Excision: To remove tissue surgically. (Synonym of resection)
Fertility problem: Where no pregnancy results for a couple after 2 years of regular (at least every 2 to
3 days) unprotected sexual intercourse.
Heavy menstrual bleeding: Abnormally heavy and prolonged menstruation at regular intervals.
Hormone: A molecule that is produced by one tissue and carried in the bloodstream to another tissue
to cause a biological effect.
In vitro fertilization (IVF): A technique by which eggs are collected from a woman and fertilised with
a man's sperm outside the body. Usually one or two resulting embryos are then transferred to the
womb. If one of them attaches successfully, it results in a pregnancy.
Infertility: the state of being not fertile and unable to become pregnant. Clinical definition of infertility:
A disease of the reproductive system defined by the failure to achieve a clinical pregnancy after 12
months or more of regular unprotected sexual intercourse.
Intra-uterine insemination (IUI): A technique to place sperm into a woman's womb through the cervix
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI): A variation of IVF in which a single sperm is injected into an
egg.
Laparoscopy: A "keyhole" operation in which the surgeon uses uses a low diameter telescopic system,
called a laparoscope, to examine or operate on an area in a woman's pelvis. Done under general
anaesthetic.
Laparotomy or open surgery: opening the abdominal cavity with an incision made with a scalpel
Lesions: Areas of abnormal tissue or disease
Medically assisted reproduction (MAR): Reproduction brought about through ovulation induction,
controlled ovarian stimulation, ovulation triggering, ART procedures, and intrauterine, intracervical,
and intravaginal insemination with semen of husband/partner or donor.
Menstruation: The monthly discharge from the uterus; it consists of blood and endometrium sloughed
from the uterine lining.
Menorrhagia: Abnormally heavy and prolonged menstruation at regular intervals. (Synonym of Heavy
menstrual bleeding)
Natural cycle IVF: An IVF procedure in which one or more oocytes are collected from the ovaries during
a spontaneous menstrual cycle without any drug use.
Ovary: an organ in the pelvis of women containing the eggs.
Progesterone: A hormone produced by the Ovary, but only if ovulation has occurred (after the egg is
released). Its action is to prepare the endometrium for implantation of the embryo.
Randomized controlled trail (RCT): The “gold standard” of medical proof of the relative efficacy of one
treatment over another, or over using nothing at all (placebo). Patients with a disease and who are
similar to one another in most other respects (such as age, height, weight, duration of illness, and
severity of disease) are assigned to one treatment group or another by randomization. The patients
undergo treatment and are followed for a certain length of time to see if there is any difference in the
results of the treatments studied.
Ultrasound: High frequency sound waves used to provide images of the body, tissues and internal
organs.
39
Part 12: Questions from women with endometriosis
The Endometriose Stichting, the Dutch organisation for endometriosis patients
has a platform for patients to ask any questions they may have about
endometriosis. In order to document the questions, concerns and needs for
information of women with endometriosis, we collected and summarized the
questions asked by women between May 2012 and May 2013. Most of these
questions have been answered in this patient version.
Questions on endometriosis:
•
What is the difference between endometriosis and adenomyosis, uterine
fibroids and polyps?
What are the different types of endometriosis, based on severity?
Questions on symptoms of endometriosis:
•
Are the following symptoms associated with endometriosis?
Heavy menstrual bleeding, fungal infections, weight gain, nausea,
migraine, radiating pain, cardiac arrhythmia, vaginism, fatigue, insomnia,
back pain, pelvic pain, symptoms outside the menstrual period, continuous
pain, bladder pain, Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), rectal bleeding, blood in
urine
Questions on the diagnosis of endometriosis:
•
.
Can the diagnosis of endometriosis be established by ultrasound or MRI?
What are the implications of a negative diagnostic laparoscopy with
symptoms of endometriosis?
Can GnRH agonists (e.g., Lupron/Lucrin and Zoladex) be used to diagnose
endometriosis?
Questions on hormonal treatment for endometriosis:
Which hormonal treatment can be prescribed in endometriosis?
Which hormones can be prescribed empirically?
•
•
How do these hormones work?
• What are the side effects?
Questions on alternative treatment for endometriosis:
•
What are the options for alternative medicine?
Does acupuncture help in relieving symptoms of endometriosis?
Does homeopathy help in relieving symptoms of endometriosis?
• What about physiotherapy?
40
Questions on surgical treatment for endometriosis:
•
Should I take medication after surgery?
Is my case too risky? Am I inoperable?
Is hysterectomy the solution and should I take hormone-replacement
therapy after surgery?
• What is the difference between ablation and excision?
• What is the difference between laparotomy and laparoscopy?
.
What is the difference between traditional laparoscopy and robotic
laparoscopy?
Questions on small ovarian cysts:
• Should I take hormonal contraceptives?
•
•
•
Should I undergo surgery? Which type of surgery?
How long can the cyst stay?
Is an endometrioma 'damaging' to the ovary?
Will my endometrioma rupture? Is it an emergency?
What is the best option if I want to get pregnant and my suspected
endometrioma is not causing me pain symptoms?
• Should asymptomatic endometrioma be treated?
Questions on infertility and pregnancy in endometriosis:
.
How many women with endometriosis remain involuntarily childless?
Why/how might endometriosis impair my fertility?
• Am I infertile because I have endometriosis?
•
What is the best option to get pregnant?
• Do I have an increased risk for pregnancy complications, miscarriage?
•
Will pregnancy cure my endometriosis?
•
Is it wise to bring plans for pregnancy forward?
.
Should I undergo surgery prior to IVF?
Questions on extragenital endometriosis:
. Can endometriosis occur in women without a uterus?
Can endometriosis affect the following sites: diaphragm, lungs, thorax,
kidney, pouch of Douglas, bowel, bladder?
Questions on menopause in endometriosis:
Should I take Lucrin (Lupron > GnRH agonist)?
Does (pseudo)menopause cure endometriosis?
Questions on endometriosis and cancer:
What is the effect of the hormonal treatments on the risk of cancer?
Does endometriosis cause cancer?
Questions on reimbursement in endometriosis:
Which treatments are reimbursement for women with endometriosis?
41
Part 13: More information
In almost every European country, women with endometriosis have been setting
up national patient organisations specifically designed to provide support and
information to women with endometriosis and their families and improve the
awareness of the disease among healthcare professionals, employers, women with
endometriosis and their families, the public and the media.
Most of these patient organisations have a website were you can find
•
information on endometriosis
•
read real life stories
•
information on how to get in contact with other women with endometriosis
receive specific information on endometriosis treatment and specialised
clinics for your country
You can find the list of European endometriosis patient organisations and their
contact details below.
In case your country is not in the list, you can contact Fertility Europe, who can
advise you on any fertility organisations in your country. (www.fertilityeurope.eu)
42
EVA - Endometriose Vereinigung Austria
Endometriose Stichting
Endometriose Foreningen Denmark
Endometrioosiyhdistys Finland
Association EndoFrance
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Hungary
Nok az endometriózisért alapitvány
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Malta
The Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
Endometriose-Vereinigung Deutschland e.V.
Samtök kvenna með Endómetríósu
Endometriosis Association of Ireland
Endi - Endometriosis Israel
Associazione Italiana Endometriosi Onlus
Associazione Progetto Endometriosi Onlus
Endo Support (Malta)
Endometriose Stichting
Endometrioseforeningen
Polskie Stowarzyszenie Endometrioza
Stowarzyszenie Endometrioza
Pierwszy Polski Portal o Endometriozie
Associação Portuguesa de Endometriose
Asociacion de Endometriosis España (AEE)
Asociacion de Afectadas de Endometriosis
de Madrid (ADAEM)
Endometriosföreningen Sverige
Groupe Endometriosis Suisse
Association Suisse de Soutien Contre
l'Endometriose
Turkish Society of Endometriosis and
Adenomyosis
Endometriosis UK
Endometriosis SHE Trust UK
Website: www.eva-info.at
Email: office@eva-info.at
Website: www.endometriose.be
Email: info@endometriose.be
Website: www.endo.dk
Email: info@endo.dk
Website: www.endometrioosiyhdistys.fi
Email: endo@endometrioosiyhdistys.fi
Website: www.endofrance.org
Email: contact@endofrance.org
Website: www.endometriose-vereinigung.de
Email: info@endometriose-vereinigung.de
Website: www.endometriozis.hu
Email: info@endometriozis.hu
Website: www.endo.is
Email: endo@endo.is
Website: www.endometriosis.ie
Email: info@endo.ie
Website: www.endi.org.il
Email: info@endi.org.il
Website: www.endoassoc.it
Email: info@endoassoc.it
Website: www.apeonlus.com
Email: info@apeonlus.com
Website: no website
Email: endosupport@gmail.com
Website: www.endometriose.nl
Email: info@endometriose.nl
Website: www.endometriose.no
Email: post@endometriose.no
Website: www.pse.aid.pl
Email: info@pse.aid.pl
Website: www.endometrioza.aid.pl
Email: info@endometrioza.aid.pl
Website: www.endometrioza.org
Email: redkcja@endoendo.pl
Website: www.aspoendo.org
Email: aspoendo@netcabo.pt
Website: www.endoinfo.org
Email: info@endoinfo.org
Website: www.adaem.org.es
Email: adaem@adaem.org.es
Website: www.endometriosforeningen.com
Email: info@endometriosforeningen.com
Website: www.endosuisse.ch
Email: laure@endosuisse.ch
Website: www.assce.ch
Email: info@assce.ch
Website: www.endometriozisdernegi.com
Email: info@endometriozisdernegi.com
Website: www.endometriosis-uk.org
Email: admin@endometriosis-uk.org
Website: www.shetrust.org.uk
Email: shetrust@shetrust.org.uk
43
References
The body of this document
The ESHRE guideline on management of women with endometriosis (2013).
Available at www.eshre.eu/guidelines
Information on endometriosis in adolescents
Brosens I, Gordts S, Benagiano G. Endometriosis in adolescents is a hidden, progressive and severe disease that deserves
attention, not just compassion. Hum Reprod. 2013 Aug;28(8):2026-31. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det243. Epub 2013 Jun 5.
Dictionary
Reproductive medicine. A textbook for paramedics. N. De Haan, M. Spelt, R. Göbel (eds), Elsevier gezondheidszorg,
Amsterdam 2010.
100 questions and answers about endometriosis. David B. Redwine. Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2009
Mohammad Reza Razzaghi, Mohammad Mohsen Mazloomfard and Anahita Ansari Jafari (2012). Endometriosis,
Endometriosis - Basic Concepts and Current Research Trends, Prof. Koel Chaudhury (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-51-0524-4, InTech,
DOI: 10.5772/32760. Available from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/endometriosis-basic-concepts-and-current-
research-trends/endometriosis-an-overview
Illustrations
The menstrual cycle
Wikimedia Commons (GNU Free Documentation License)
Endometriotic tissue in the abdomen
NIH fact sheet: Endometriosis (2011)
Endometriosis, adenomyosis, uterine fibroids and polyps
Illustration from http://www.fairview.org/healthlibrary/Article/85716 (No copyright information)
Schematic classification examples of extent and location of endometriosis
Adapted from the Revised American Society for Reproductive Medicine Classification of Endometriosis (1996).
Surgical laparoscopy
Krames Information brochure on endometriosis
A levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system
http://m.mirena.com/
Options for hormonal contraceptives
© 1995-2013 Healthwise, Incorporated. Healthwise, Healthwise for every health decision, and the Healthwise logo are
trademarks of Healthwise, Incorporated.
44
Disclaimer
The European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) developed the current
information booklet for patients based on the clinical practice guideline. The aim of clinical practice
guidelines is to aid healthcare professionals in everyday clinical decision about appropriate and
effective care of their patients.
This booklet is in no way intended to replace, dictate or fully define evaluation and treatment by a
qualified physician. It is intended solely as an aid for patients seeking general information on issues in
reproductive medicine.
ESHRE makes no warranty, express or implied, regarding the clinical practice guidelines or patient
information booklets and specifically excludes any warranties of merchantability and fitness for a
particular use or purpose. ESHRE shall not be liable for direct, indirect, special, incidental, or
consequential damages related to the use of the information contained herein. While ESHRE makes
every effort to compile accurate information and to keep it up-to-date, it cannot, however, guarantee
the correctness, completeness and accuracy of the guideline or this booklet in every respect.
The information provided in this document does not constitute business, medical or other professional
advice, and is subject to change.
45
