The prevention of malaria in pregnancy
Green–top Guideline No. 54a
April 2010RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 54a 2o f  1 4 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsThe prevention of malaria in pregnancy
This guideline provides clinicians with information on preventing malaria in pregnancy for UK residents visiting endemic areas. It covers travel recommendations for women planning pregnancy or already pregnant. Malaria can be life-threatening and is caused by the Anopheles mosquito. In 2008, most imported infections in the UK were P. falciparum. Pregnant women are at risk of malaria complications, including reduced birth weight and maternal mortality. Pregnant women should consider postponing travel to endemic areas if possible. If travel is unavoidable, they should seek guidance on malaria risks and prevention strategies. Chemoprophylaxis can be causal or suppressive, and mefloquine is recommended for pregnant women in chloroquine-resistant areas. Awareness of malaria risk factors and prompt medical attention for symptoms are crucial. Pregnant women should be educated on preventive measures and provided with written information. The full guidelines on malaria prevention can be accessed on the Health Protection Agency website.

In pregnancy, chloroquine and proguanil are safe but not effective in chloroquine-resistant areas. Mefloquine can be used if necessary, and atovaquone and proguanil can be considered as alternatives. Doxycycline and primaquine are contraindicated. Standby emergency treatment for suspected malaria should be quinine and clindamycin for pregnant women. Antipyretics should be used for fever.

Gambian multigravidae. Prevention of anaemia in pregnancy using insecticide-treated bednets and sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in highly malarious areas. Impact of insecticide–treated bednets on malaria and anaemia in pregnancy. Randomised trial of alternative malaria chemoprophylaxis strategies among pregnant women. Community randomized controlled trial of insecticide–treated bednets for prevention of malaria and anaemia among primigravid women. Insecticide-treated nets for preventing malaria in pregnancy. Randomised controlled trials on insecticide-treated nets for prevention of malaria in pregnancy.

Grades of recommendations
At least one meta-analysis, systematic reviews or randomised controlled trial rated as 1++and directly applicable to the target population; or A systematic review of randomised controlled trials or a body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good practice point
Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group
Classification of evidence levels
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a very low risk of bias
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a low risk of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case–control or cohort studies or high-quality case–control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a high probability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies; e.g. case reports, case series
4 Expert opinion