The diagnosis and treatment of malaria in pregnancy is important for the health of the woman and fetus. Malaria, caused by various parasites, can have serious consequences if left untreated. Symptoms include fever, chills, and nausea. Diagnosis is done through microscopic examination of blood films or rapid diagnostic tests. Severe malaria poses a higher risk, especially in pregnant women, and should be treated promptly with intravenous artesunate or quinine. Uncomplicated malaria can be treated with quinine and clindamycin for P. falciparum, and chloroquine for other species. Pregnant women with malaria should be admitted to the hospital for monitoring and treatment. Expert advice should be sought for severe cases. Treatment should not be delayed to prevent complications.

Blood films are usually monitored every 24 hours, but clinical deterioration is an indication for a repeat blood film. Severe or complicated malaria should be treated with IV artesunate or quinine. Uncomplicated malaria can be treated with oral quinine or other antimalarial medications. Recurrent malaria in pregnancy should be treated with artemisinin derivatives. Severe malaria in pregnancy requires monitoring for hypoglycemia, pulmonary edema, and secondary bacterial infection. Obstetric management specific to malaria infection includes preventing preterm labor and fetal distress. Pharmacological thromboprophylaxis should be considered carefully. Peripartum malaria requires placental histology and blood films from the baby. Prompt and effective treatment of malaria in pregnancy is crucial to reduce adverse effects on the fetus. Fetal distress can be monitored with cardiotocograph monitoring. Abnormalities in fetal and placental circulation may occur in women with malaria in pregnancy.

In women with severe malaria, obstetric advice should be sought early. Fetal distress is common and may be related to malaria fever. Standard obstetric principles apply, with the life of the woman taking priority. Acute malaria can cause thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Maternal malaria close to delivery can result in congenital malaria, which may present in the first weeks to months of life. Malaria in pregnancy in the UK must be reported to public health authorities.

Ramshesh P , et al. Critically ill obstetric patients in an American and an Indian public hospital: comparison of case–mix, organdysfunction, intensive care requirements, and outcomes.Intensive Care Med 2005;31:1087–94.
56. Zeidan Z, Kojal H, Habour A, Nowary K, Hashim F , Awadelkarim M. Clinical and epidemiological features of severe malaria inchildren in four hospitals in Sudan. East Mediterr Health J2006;12:783–91.
57. Sukontason K, Karbwang J, Rimchala W , Tin T, Na-Bangchang K, Banmairuroi V , et al. Plasma quinine concentrations in falciparum malaria with acute renal failure. Trop Med IntHealth 1996;1:236–42.
58. Looareesuwan S, White NJ, Silamut K, Phillips RE, Warrell DA. Quinine and severe falciparum malaria in late pregnancy. ActaLeiden 1987;55:115–20.
59. Bunn A, Escombe R, Armstrong M, Whitty CJ, Doherty JF . Falciparum malaria in malaria-naive travellers and Africanvisitors. QJM 2004;97:645–9.
60. D’Acremont V , Landry P , Mueller I, Pecoud A, Genton B. Clinical and laboratory predictors of imported malaria in an outpatientsetting: an aid to medical decision making in returningtravelers with fever. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2002;66:481–6.
61. Melzer M. Outpatient treatment of falciparum malaria is possible. BMJ2006;333:397–8.
62. Moore DA, Jennings RM, Doherty TF , Lockwood DN, Chiodini PL, Wright SG, et al. Assessing the severity of malaria. BMJ2003;326:808–9.
63. Bunnag D, Karbwang J, Na–Bangchang K, Thanavibul A, Chittamas S, Harinasuta T. Quinine-tetracycline for multidrugresistant falciparum malaria. Southeast Asian J Trop MedPublic Health 1996;27:15–18.
64. Denis MB. Improving compliance with quinine + tetracycline for treatment of malaria: evaluation of health educationinterventions in Cambodian villages. Bull World Health Organ1998;76 Suppl 1:43–9.
65. Fungladda W , Honrado ER, Thimasarn K, Kitayaporn D, Karbwang J, Kamolratanakul P , et al. Compliance with artesunate and quinine + tetracycline treatment ofuncomplicated falciparum malaria in Thailand. Bull WorldHealth Organ 1998;76 Suppl 1:59–66.
66. Lasserre R. [The treatment of multiresistant falciparum malaria in Southeast Asia]. Bull Soc Pathol Exot Filiales1989;82:94–100.
67. Abdel-Hameed AA. Malaria case management at the communitylevel in Gezira, Sudan. Afr J Med Med Sci 2001;30 Suppl:43–6.
68. Boland ME, Roper SM, Henry JA. Complications of quinine poisoning. Lancet 1985;1:384–5.

Summary:
- Early diagnosis and treatment of malaria in pregnant women is crucial to prevent deaths
- Symptoms of malaria in pregnancy include flu-like illness with fever, chills, headache, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and general malaise
- Urgent investigations and blood films are necessary for diagnosis
- Different treatment regimens for uncomplicated and complicated malaria, with quinine and clindamycin being common choices
- IV artesunate is recommended as the first-line treatment for severe malaria in pregnancy, with quinine as an alternative if artesunate is unavailable
- Treatment should not be delayed, and expert consultation is advised before issuing artesunate
- Quinine is considered safe and efficacious in pregnancy, but combination therapy with clindamycin is more effective
- 7-day regimens of quinine are recommended for better cure rates

(Note: Scientific references have been removed from the condensed version)

Clindamycin should not be used in pregnancy. Patients may deteriorate under treatment, at which point, management should be upgraded to account for severity. WHO recommends artemisinin-based combination therapy in the second and third trimesters ahead of quinine and clindamycin due to adverse effects and non-compliance risks. Atovaquone-proguanil and atovaquone-proguanil-artesunate have been shown to be safe and efficacious for uncomplicated P. falciparum in the second and third trimesters. Artemether-lumefantrine treatment in pregnancy has shown disappointing efficacy. Chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine are no longer recommended for P. falciparum treatment due to resistance. In non-falciparum malaria, chloroquine is used for symptomatic treatment, and primaquine for radical cure is contraindicated in pregnancy. Weekly chloroquine can be given to prevent relapse of P. vivax or P. ovale before delivery. Chloroquine-resistant P. vivax should be treated similarly to chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum. Blood or plasma concentrations of antimalarial drugs are often reduced in late pregnancy, indicating under-dosing.

The persistence of Plasmodium falciparum in the placenta after apparently adequate therapy with quinine has been described. This phenomenon is described in the placenta of a woman with falciparum malaria, who was treated with a combination of quinidine and clindamycin. Although this therapy was effective, vast numbers of P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes were present in the maternal sinusoids of the placenta. Additionally, rare Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes were also seen in the fetal blood of the placenta. Malaria in pregnancy and parasitic involvement of the placenta are reviewed, emphasizing that Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes may persist in the placenta even after clearance of parasites from the peripheral blood.