Management of Suspected Ovarian Masses in Premenopausal Women
This guideline provides information on the initial assessment and management of suspected ovarian masses in premenopausal women. It clarifies when referral to a gynaecological oncological service is necessary. Most ovarian masses in premenopausal women are benign, but differentiation between benign and malignant masses can be challenging. Conservative management is often possible, and laparoscopic surgery is recommended for benign masses. Referral to a gynaecological oncologist is advised for suspected malignancies. Ultrasound is the preferred imaging modality, with additional tests such as CA-125, LDH, and hCG recommended in certain cases. The Risk of Malignancy Index (RMI) and ultrasound rules can help estimate the risk of malignancy. Referral to a gynaecological oncological service is recommended for women with suspicious ultrasound findings.

Incidental finding of simple ovarian cysts is common in clinical practice. Simple cysts less than 50 mm do not require follow-up as they usually resolve within 3 menstrual cycles. Persistent or increasing cysts may require surgical management, especially in the case of mature cystic teratomas. Combined oral contraceptives do not help in resolving functional ovarian cysts. Laparoscopic approach is preferred for elective surgical management of benign ovarian masses. Aspiration of cysts is less effective and associated with high recurrence rates. Spillage of cyst contents should be avoided to prevent potential malignancy. Discussions about oophorectomy should be held preoperatively, and removal of benign ovarian masses should be done via the umbilical port. Audit topics include unexpected malignancy after surgery, ultrasound reporting, laparotomy for presumed malignancy, and complications following laparoscopic surgery.

The management of patients with suspected ovarian cancer is influenced by the quality of gynaecological ultrasonography. Different diagnostic tools such as risk of malignancy index, ultrasonography, and magnetic resonance imaging can aid in the differential diagnosis of adnexal masses. Simple ultrasound rules can help distinguish between benign and malignant adnexal masses before surgery. Risk scores can accurately predict ovarian malignancy. Screening for early familial ovarian cancer can be done with transvaginal ultrasonography and color blood flow imaging. Logistic regression models can distinguish between benign and malignant adnexal masses before surgery. Guidelines for referral of adnexal masses are relevant for clinical practice. Risk of malignancy index based on serum CA-125, ultrasound findings, and menopausal status can aid in the preoperative diagnosis of ovarian cancer. Various risk of malignancy indices have been compared for the evaluation of pelvic masses. Laparoscopy is a preferred surgical approach for benign ovarian tumors. Expectant management can be considered for functional ovarian cysts. Laparoscopic management is feasible for large ovarian cysts. Transumbilical surgical specimen retrieval is a viable option for laparoscopic surgery for pelvic masses. 

Grades of recommendations and evidence levels are provided for reference. The guidelines are intended as an educational aid for clinical practice, based on published evidence, and should be adapted to individual patient needs and resources. Further research may be needed in areas of clinical uncertainty.