The prevention of malaria in pregnancy
Green–top Guideline No. 54a
April 2010RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 54a 2o f  1 4 © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsThe prevention of malaria in pregnancy
This guideline provides clinicians with information on preventing malaria in pregnancy for UK residents visiting endemic areas. Malaria can be life-threatening and is caused by the female Anopheles mosquito. Pregnant women are at risk of complications from malaria, including reduced birth weight in the fetus. Travel to malaria endemic areas should be avoided if possible, and if unavoidable, pregnant women should seek guidance on prevention strategies. Chemoprophylaxis is recommended for pregnant women in high-risk areas, with mefloquine as the preferred drug. Awareness of risk, bite prevention, chemoprophylaxis, and prompt diagnosis and treatment are key in preventing malaria infection. Pregnant women should be educated on preventive measures and provided with written information. The full guideline with drug recommendations can be accessed online.

In pregnancy, chloroquine and proguanil are safe but not effective in chloroquine-resistant areas. Mefloquine can be used if necessary, but atovaquone and proguanil may be considered with specialist consultation. Doxycycline and primaquine are contraindicated due to potential harm to the fetus. Standby emergency treatment for suspected malaria should be given to pregnant travelers, with quinine and clindamycin recommended for treatment. Antipyretics should be used for fever, and mefloquine can be started after treatment. Quinine, Co-artem, or atovaquone-proguanil can be used for standby emergency treatment. Written instructions for standby treatment are recommended due to the importance of correct administration.

Gambian multigravidae. Prevention of anaemia in pregnancy using insecticide-treated bednets and sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in highly malarious areas. Impact of insecticide–treated bednets on malaria and anaemia in pregnancy. Randomised trial of alternative malaria chemoprophylaxis strategies among pregnant women. Community randomized controlled trial of insecticide–treated bednets for the prevention of malaria and anaemia among primigravid women. Insecticide-treated nets for preventing malaria in pregnancy. Use of insecticide-treated clothes for personal protection against malaria. Efficacy of permethrin-treated uniforms in combination with DEET topical repellent for protection against mosquitoes.

Grades of recommendations
At least one meta-analysis, systematic reviews or randomised controlled trial rated as 1++and directly applicable to the target population; or A systematic review of randomised controlled trials or a body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++ directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+ directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
Evidence level 3 or 4; or Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
Good practice point
Recommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group
Classification of evidence levels
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a very low risk of bias
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a low risk of bias
1– Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials or randomised controlled trials with a high risk of bias
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case–control or cohort studies or high-quality case–control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a high probability that the relationship is causal
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal
2– Case–control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal
3 Non-analytical studies; e.g. case reports, case series
4 Expert opinion