Blood Transfusion in Obstetrics
Green-top Guideline No. 47 
May 2015
Executive summary of recommendations 
How can the risk of transfusion be reduced?
Optimisation of haemoglobin in the antenatal period
Diagnosis
Anaemia in pregnancy is defined as first trimester haemoglobin (Hb) less than 110 g/l, second/third 
trimester Hb less than 105 g/l, and postpartum Hb less than 100 g/l, in line with British Committee 
for Standards in Haematology (BCSH) guidance.
For normocytic or microcytic anaemia, a trial of oral iron should be considered as the first step and 
further tests should be undertaken if there is no demonstrable rise in Hb at 2 weeks and compliance 
has been checked.
Pregnant women should be offered screening for anaemia at booking and at 28 weeks. Women 
with multiple pregnancies should have an additional full blood count done at 20–24 weeks.
Treatment and management
Oral iron should be the preferred first-line treatment for iron deficiency.
Parenteral iron is indicated when oral iron is not tolerated or absorbed or patient compliance is in 
doubt or if the woman is approaching term and there is insufficient time for oral supplementation 
to be effective.
Women should receive information on improvement of dietary iron intake and factors affecting 
absorption of dietary iron.
Active management of the third stage of labour is recommended to minimise blood loss.
Women at high risk of haemorrhage should be advised to deliver in hospital.
General principles of blood transfusion
Consent for blood transfusion
Valid consent should be obtained where possible prior to administering a blood transfusion.
In an emergency, where it is not feasible to get consent, information on blood transfusion should 
be provided retrospectively.
The reason for transfusion and a note of the consent discussion should be documented in the 
patient’s case notes.
Requirements for group and screen samples and cross-matching 
All women should have their blood group and antibody status checked at booking and at 28 weeks 
of gestation.
Group and screen samples used for provision of blood in pregnancy should be less than 3 days old.
In a woman at high risk of emergency transfusion, e.g. placenta praevia, and with no clinically 
significant alloantibodies, group and screen samples should be sent once a week to exclude or 
identify any new antibody formation and to keep blood available if necessary. Close liaison with 
the hospital transfusion laboratory is essential.
Women should have a group and screen sample taken in line with clear locally agreed protocols 
for provision of blood.
Blood product specification in pregnancy and the puerperium  
ABO-, rhesus D- (RhD-) and K- (Kell-) compatible red cell units should be transfused.
If clinically significant red cell antibodies are present, then blood negative for the relevant antigen 
should be cross-matched before transfusion; close liaison with the transfusion laboratory is 
essential to avoid delay in transfusion in life-threatening haemorrhage.
Cytomegalovirus- (CMV-) seronegative red cell and platelet components should be provided for 
elective transfusions during pregnancy.
What are the strategies to minimise the use of banked blood?
Is there a role for preoperative/predelivery autologous blood deposit?
Predelivery autologous blood deposit is not recommended.
Is there a role for intraoperative cell salvage (IOCS)?
Cell salvage is recommended for patients where the anticipated blood loss is great enough to 
induce anaemia or expected to exceed 20% of estimated blood volume.
Consent should be obtained for IOCS where possible and its use in obstetric patients should be 
subject to audit and monitoring.
Cell salvage should only be performed by multidisciplinary teams who develop regular experience 
of IOCS.
Where IOCS is used during caesarean section in RhD-negative, previously nonsensitised women 
and where cord blood group is confirmed as RhD positive (or unknown), a minimum dose of 1500 iu 
anti-D immunoglobulin should be administered following the reinfusion of salvaged red cells.
A maternal blood sample should be taken for estimation of fetomaternal haemorrhage 30–40 
minutes after reinfusion in case more anti-D is indicated.
Management of obstetric haemorrhage with blood components
There should be a clear local protocol on how to manage major obstetric haemorrhage.
Are there mechanical strategies that can be employed?
Clinicians should familiarise themselves with mechanical strategies that can be employed to 
reduce postpartum blood loss.
What blood components can be used for obstetric haemorrhage?
When should red cells be used?
There are no firm criteria for initiating red cell transfusion

Iron from the diet is mainly non-haem, with vitamin C enhancing absorption and tea and coffee inhibiting it. rHuEPO is used for anaemia in end-stage renal disease and can be used in non-end-stage renal anaemia under haematological advice. Active management of the third stage of labour reduces postpartum blood loss. High-risk women should deliver in units with immediate access to care and blood products. Consent for blood transfusion should be obtained whenever possible. Group and screen samples should be less than 3 days old, with red cell antibodies tested at booking and 28 weeks of gestation. Cell salvage is recommended for significant blood loss, with specific blood components used based on antibody status. Mechanical strategies can reduce postpartum blood loss. Red cell transfusion should be based on clinical and haematological grounds, with group O RhD-negative red cells given in extreme situations. FFP should be administered during major obstetric haemorrhage. Cryoprecipitate should be used based on clotting test results.

- Regular full blood counts and coagulation screens should be performed during bleeding episodes.
- Cryoprecipitate should be administered early in major obstetric hemorrhage and subsequent transfusions guided by fibrinogen levels.
- FFP and cryoprecipitate should ideally be of the same group as the recipient.
- Platelet count should be maintained above 50 x 109/l in bleeding patients.
- Platelet transfusion trigger of 75 x 109/l is recommended for safety.
- Platelets should ideally be group compatible.
- Tranexamic acid can be considered during major obstetric hemorrhage.
- Blood transfusion should be based on careful clinical assessment and Hb levels.
- Iron therapy may reduce the need for blood transfusion in postpartum period.
- Women who decline blood products should have Hb optimized before delivery and a multidisciplinary plan in place.
- Advance directive should be completed for women declining blood transfusion.

PBM involves an approach to avoid unnecessary transfusion by optimizing preoperative/predelivery Hb, using cell salvage, accepting lower transfusion triggers, and using iron supplements. Evidence supports the use of autologous blood from IOCS in decreasing the need for allogeneic transfusion. Recommendations for future research include defining coagulation abnormalities during major obstetric hemorrhage and determining the optimal dose and timing of blood product transfusion. Auditable topics include standards for audit of documentation and practice in cases of major obstetric hemorrhage.

Recommendations for the management of bleeding and coagulopathy following major trauma, pre-anaesthetic assessment of coagulation abnormalities in obstetric patients, and the decrease of fibrinogen as an early predictor of postpartum hemorrhage are highlighted in the clinical guidelines. Additionally, the efficacy of tranexamic acid in reducing blood loss after cesarean section and the use of recombinant activated factor VII in primary postpartum hemorrhage are discussed. The guidelines emphasize the importance of patient blood management and provide recommendations for the surgical management of Jehovah's Witnesses.