Epilepsy in Pregnancy 
Diagnosis of epilepsy should be made by a neurologist. Women with epilepsy should be aware of different types of epilepsy. Immediate treatment for seizures in pregnancy should follow existing protocols for eclampsia. WWE planning pregnancy should have a clinician manage AED choices based on risk to the fetus. WWE should take folic acid to reduce malformation risk. WWE should be informed about long-term outcomes of AED exposure. WWE should be monitored for seizure risks and fetal abnormalities. WWE should be provided with safety information. WWE should have regular antenatal care with an epilepsy care team. WWE should continue AEDs postnatally. WWE should be offered effective contraception. Healthcare providers should be aware of disability legislation.

Epilepsy review services and engagement with women with epilepsy (WWE) during preconception and pregnancy are important for providing evidence-based information on risks and benefits of treatment. Diagnosis of epilepsy in pregnancy should be made by a neurologist, considering seizure history, type, and impact on the mother. Different types of seizures in pregnancy should be classified to assess risks to the mother and baby. Immediate treatment protocols for eclampsia should be followed for pregnant women with seizures of unknown cause. Prepregnancy counseling for WWE should include discussions on the risks of congenital malformations with and without antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Folic acid supplementation and minimizing exposure to certain AEDs can help reduce the risk of major congenital malformations in infants. In utero exposure to sodium valproate may negatively impact long-term neurodevelopment in offspring.

AED polytherapy in pregnancy should be discussed with an epilepsy specialist to weigh risks and benefits. WWE should be informed that most will not experience seizure deterioration during pregnancy. It is important to provide WWE with information on prenatal screening, risks of self-discontinuation of AEDs, and the effects of seizures and AEDs on the fetus. Regular antenatal care with an epilepsy care team is recommended for pregnant WWE. Monitoring for seizure risk factors, adherence to AEDs, and seizure type and frequency is crucial during pregnancy. Serial growth scans are necessary for WWE exposed to AEDs to detect small-for-gestational-age babies. Babies born to WWE taking enzyme-inducing AEDs should be offered intramuscular vitamin K to prevent hemorrhagic disease of the newborn.

Giving vitamin K to WWE to prevent postpartum haemorrhage. Enzyme-inducing AEDs are considered to competitively inhibit the precursors of clotting factors and affect fetal microsomal enzymes that degrade vitamin K, thereby increasing the risk of haemorrhagic disease of the newborn. It is reasonable to offer parenteral vitamin K supplementation routinely to all babies born to mothers on enzyme-inducing AEDs. WWE should be reassured that most will have an uncomplicated labour and delivery, and there is no indication for early delivery in well-controlled seizures. In women with non-epileptic attack disorder, inappropriate medical intervention should be avoided, and management should include access to specialist psychiatric or psychological services. In WWE taking enzyme-inducing AEDs at risk of preterm delivery, routine doubling of antenatal corticosteroid dose is not recommended. Adequate analgesia and appropriate care in labour should be provided to minimize risk factors for seizures, and benzodiazepines are the drugs of choice to terminate seizures in labour. Pain relief in labour should prioritize WWE, with options including TENS, nitrous oxide and oxygen, and regional analgesia. WWE should be advised to continue their AEDs postnatally and be supported to minimize triggers of seizure deterioration. The AED dose should be reviewed within 10 days of delivery to avoid postpartum toxicity. Neonates born to WWE taking AEDs should be monitored for adverse effects associated with AED exposure in utero, and mothers should be informed that the risk of adverse cognitive outcomes is not increased in children exposed to AEDs through breast milk.

Increasing concentrations of AED in the neonate by 25% during the follow-up period to be clinically important. Lamotrigine, levetiracetam, and topiramate transfer to the child from breast milk to a larger extent compared with sodium valproate, carbamazepine, and phenytoin. Breastfeeding does not affect cognitive outcomes at 3 years of age. Alternating breast and bottle milk could be considered. Postpartum safety advice should be discussed, including the importance of continuous observation for mothers with epilepsy at risk of seizures. Screening for depressive disorder in the postpartum period is recommended. Effective contraception should be offered to avoid unplanned pregnancies, with specific recommendations for women taking enzyme-inducing AEDs. The risks of contraceptive failure and adverse effects of each method should be explained. Driving entitlements and implications of disability legislation for pregnant women with epilepsy should be discussed. Future research recommendations include optimal monitoring strategies for pregnant women taking AEDs and the effects of AED exposure on offspring. Auditable topics and useful links for support are provided.

This text discusses the risks and outcomes associated with epilepsy and pregnancy, including the effects of antiepileptic drugs on fetal development. Studies have shown an increased risk of birth defects in children exposed to these drugs in utero. Monitoring strategies and counseling for pregnant women with epilepsy are also discussed. It is important to consider the potential risks and benefits of antiepileptic drug therapy during pregnancy to ensure the best outcomes for both mother and child.

Partial seizure in labor can affect fetal heart rate. Labor analgesia for the parturient with neurological disease is important. Seizures on emergence from sevoflurane anesthesia for Caesarean section in a healthy parturient have been reported. Postpartum depression in women with epilepsy may be influenced by antiepileptic drugs. Antiepileptic drugs and hormonal contraceptives in adolescent women with epilepsy may have interactions. It is recommended to consider the effects of antiepileptic drugs on contraception.