The purpose of this guideline is to provide an evidence-based summary for the generalist to facilitate appropriate investigation and management of women presenting for the first time with chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pelvic pain can significantly impact a woman's ability to function and may require accurate diagnosis and effective management from the first presentation to reduce disruption and avoid unnecessary referrals, investigations, and operations. The guideline aims to assist in the initial assessment of women with chronic pelvic pain, considering various possible contributory factors such as central and peripheral nervous system changes, endometriosis, adhesions, IBS, interstitial cystitis, musculoskeletal issues, nerve entrapment, and psychological and social issues. Adequate time should be allowed for the initial assessment, and a partnership between the clinician and the woman should be established to plan a management program. Referral to a specialist may be necessary if the pain is inadequately controlled or unexplained. The initial history should include questions about the pattern of pain, association with other symptoms, and the effect of movement and posture on the pain. Special attention should be paid to 'red flag' symptoms and potential history of sexual assault. Completing a pain diary may help identify provoking factors or temporal associations.

Establish the woman’s level of function at the start of treatment to monitor progress and emphasize functional goals. Consider previous drug use to aid diagnosis and plan effective management. Use symptom-based criteria for diagnosing IBS with high predictive value. Refer to relevant healthcare professionals for specific non-gynaecological components of pain. Conduct abdominal and pelvic examinations, looking for tenderness, enlargement, or prolapse. Screen for infections, including STIs, if PID is suspected. Use TVS and MRI for diagnosing adnexal masses and adenomyosis. Consider diagnostic laparoscopy if other interventions fail, weighing risks and benefits. Offer hormonal treatments, antispasmodics, diet modifications, and analgesia for pain management. Consider ovarian suppression for cyclical pain associated with endometriosis. Use non-pharmacological modalities and avoid opioids for chronic pelvic pain. Seek support from voluntary organizations and self-management techniques. Consider psychological and social factors in addition to physical causes of pain. Collaborate with the woman to develop a management plan, even if no clear diagnosis is initially found. Conduct audits on testing for STIs, ultrasound scans, and hormonal treatment trials.

Gastroenterol 2009;23:593–610. Evaluating chronic pelvic pain. A consensus recommendation. Pelvic Pain Expert Working Group. Validation study of nonsurgical diagnosis of endometriosis. Endometriosis and pelvic pain: epidemiological evidence of the relationship and implications. Characteristics indicating adenomyosis coexisting with leiomyomas: a case–control study. An update on adenomyosis in the adolescent. Pain threshold variations in somatic wall tissues as a function of menstrual cycle, segmental site and tissue depth in women. Do gastrointestinal symptoms vary with the menstrual cycle? Laparoscopic adhesiolysis in patients with chronic abdominal pain. Irritable bowel syndrome in the gynecological clinic. The prevalence of interstitial cystitis in gynecologic patients with pelvic pain. Diagnosing interstitial cystitis in women with chronic pelvic pain. Voiding symptoms in chronic pelvic pain (CPP). Lower abdominal and pelvic pain with advanced pelvic organ prolapse: a case –control study. Abdominal myofascial pain syndrome must be considered in the differential diagnosis of chronic pelvic pain. Myofascial trigger points. Reliability of physical examination for the diagnosis of myofascial trigger points. Injuries to the levator ani in unexplained, chronic pelvic pain. Botulinum toxin type A for chronic pain and pelvic floor spasm in women: a randomized controlled trial. Musculoskeletal factors in chronic pelvic pain. Physical therapy in the management of women with chronic pelvic pain. Prevalence of pelvic musculoskeletal disorders in a female chronic pelvic pain clinic. Physical therapy evaluation of patients with chronic pelvic pain. The low transverse Pfannenstiel incision and the prevalence of incisional hernia and nerve entrapment. Peripheral neuropathies causing chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pelvic pain: a meta-analytic review. Coping with emotions and abuse history in women with chronic pelvic pain. A comparative study of women with chronic pelvic pain, chronic nonpelvic pain and those with no history of pain attending general practitioners. Abuse history and chronic pain in women: I. Prevalences of sexual abuse and physical abuse. Chronic pelvic pain and previous sexual abuse. Chronic pain syndromes and their relation to childhood abuse and stressful life events. Relationship of sexual and physical abuse to pain description, coping, psychological distress, and health -care utilization in a chronic pain sample. Abuse history and chronic pain in women: II. A multivariate analysis of abuse and psychological morbidity. The association of sexual abuse with pelvic pain complaints in a primary care population. Childhood victimization and pain in adulthood: a prospective investigation. Pelvic congestion syndrome-associated pelvic pain: a systematic review of diagnosis and management. Skills for communicating with patients. How do you explain a pain that can ’t be seen?: the narratives of women with chronic pelvic pain and their disengagement with the diagnostic cycle. Attitudes of women with chronic pelvic pain to the gynecological consultation: a qualitative study. Factors influencing outcome in consultations for chronic pelvic pain. A randomized clinical trial to compare two different approaches in women with chronic pelvic pain. Efficacy of multidisciplinary pain treatment centers: a meta-analytic review. Effectiveness of an interdisciplinary pain management program for the treatment of chronic pelvic pain. Psychosomatic group treatment helps women with chronic pelvic pain. Evidence- and consensus-based practice guidelines for the diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome. Guidelines on the irritable bowel syndrome: mechanisms and practical management. Diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome. Management of acute pelvic inflammatory disease. Management of genital Chlamydia trachomatis infection. A systematic review of the accuracy of ultrasound in the diagnosis of endometriosis. The use of ultrasound-based ‘soft markers ’for the prediction of pelvic pathology in women with chronic pelvic pain – can we reduce the need for laparoscopy? Magnetic resonance imaging and transvaginal ultrasonography for the diagnosis of adenomyosis. Ultrasonography compared with magnetic resonance imaging for the diagnosis of adenomyosis: correlation with histopathology. Ultrasound scan and magnetic resonance imaging for the diagnosis of adenomyosis: systematic review comparing test accuracy. Diagnostic accuracy of transvaginal sonography for the diagnosis of adenomyosis: systematic review and metaanalysis. The investigation and management of endometriosis. Complications of laparoscopy: a prospective multicentre observational study. Surgical complications of diagnostic and operative gynaecological laparoscopy: a series of cases. Preventing entry-related gynaecological laparoscopic injuries. The role of laparoscopy as a diagnostic tool in chronic pelvic pain. People sometimes react funny if they’re not told enough: women’s views about the risks of diagnostic laparoscopy. Microlaparoscopy under local anesthesia and conscious pain mapping for the diagnosis and management of pelvic pain. Diagnosis, treatment and follow up of women

1. Surrey ES. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist and add-back therapy: what do the data show? 
2. Aslam N, Blunt S, Latthe P. Effectiveness and tolerability of levonorgestrel intrauterine system in adolescents. 
3. Soysal ME, Soysal S, Kubilay V, Ozer S. A randomized controlled trial of goserelin and medroxyprogesterone acetate in the treatment of pelvic congestion. 
4. Shokeir T, Amr M, Abdelshaheed M. The efficacy of Implanon for the treatment of chronic pelvic pain associated with pelvic congestion. 
5. Ling FW. Randomized controlled trial of depot leuprolide in patients with chronic pelvic pain and clinically suspected endometriosis. 
6. Barbieri RL. Primary gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist therapy for suspected endometriosis: a nonsurgical approach to the diagnosis and treatment of chronic pelvic pain. 
7. Gambone JC, Mittman BS, Munro MG, Scialli AR, Winkel CA. Consensus statement for the management of chronic pelvic pain and endometriosis. 
8. ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins-Gynecology. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 51. Chronic pelvic pain. 
9. Kephart W. Evaluation of Lovelace Health Systems chronic pelvic pain protocol. 
10. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Irritable bowel syndrome in adults. Diagnosis and management of irritable bowel syndrome in primary care. 
11. Jaiwala J, Imperiale TF, Kroenke K. Pharmacologic treatment of the irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review of randomized, controlled trials. 
12. Nanda R, James R, Smith H, Dudley CR, Jewell DP. Food intolerance and the irritable bowel syndrome. 
13. The British Pain Society. Opioids for persistent pain: Good practice. 
14. Wiffen P, Collins S, McQuay H, Carroll D, Jadad A, Moore A. Anticonvulsant drugs for acute and chronic pain. 
15. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Neuropathic pain. The pharmacological management of neuropathic pain in adults in non-specialist settings. 
16. Daniels J, Gray R, Hills RK, Latthe P, Buckley L, Gupta J, et al.; LUNA Trial Collaboration. Laparoscopic uterosacral nerve ablation for alleviating chronic pelvic pain: a randomized controlled trial. 
17. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Laparoscopic uterine nerve ablation (LUNA) for chronic pelvic pain. 
18. Zondervan KT, Yudkin PL, Vessey MP, Jenkinson CP, Dawes MG, Barlow DH, et al. The community prevalence of chronic pelvic pain in women and associated illness behaviour.