This guideline covers the management of post-hysterectomy vaginal vault prolapse (PHVP). Standardised classification systems should be used for assessment. Urodynamic testing is not routinely recommended. Patient assessment should address quality of life using standardised tools. Preventive techniques at hysterectomy include McCall culdoplasty and suturing ligaments to the vaginal cuff. Pelvic floor muscle training is effective for stage I-II prolapse. Vaginal pessaries are an alternative treatment for stage II-IV prolapse. Surgery should be offered to symptomatic patients, performed by a specialist, and focus on patient-reported outcomes. Different surgical procedures are available, with considerations for each. Mesh kits should only be considered after full informed consent. Colpocleisis is an option for specific cases. Concomitant surgery for stress urinary incontinence may be considered. Recurrent vault prolapse should be managed by a specialist team. National databases should document surgical outcomes and complications. Terminology and classification of complications should follow international guidelines. Complications related to devices and mesh should be reported.

Recommended for the prevention of PHVP. There is no evidence to support the role of subtotal hysterectomy in preventing PHVP. Are there preferred suture materials for vault support at the time of hysterectomy? Pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) is an effective treatment option for women with stage I–II vaginal prolapse, including PHVP. Vaginal pessaries are an alternative treatment option for women with stage II–IV PHVP. Surgical treatment should be offered to women with symptomatic PHVP after appropriate counselling. PHVP surgery should be performed by an RCOG-accredited subspecialist urogynaecologist. Patient-reported outcomes should be the primary assessment outcomes. The type of operation performed should be tailored to the individual patient’s circumstances. Women should be aware that both ASC and SSF are effective treatments for primary PHVP. HUSLS should only be offered as first-line management in women with PHVP within the context of research or prospective audit following local governance procedures.

USLS groups. Both intraoperative 
complications and postoperative complications were higher in the HUSLS versus ASC groups. An RCT has compared HUSLS versus SSF in women with PHVP and USI. The 2-year results showed no difference in success rates, serious adverse event rates, or prolapse scores at 24 months. A systematic review and meta-analysis of transvaginal uterosacral ligament suspension showed reassuring outcomes. Complications of HUSLS include ureteric injury, bladder injury, urinary tract infection, blood transfusion, and small bowel injury.

Transvaginal mesh (TVM) kits should not be considered as first-line treatment for PHVP. TVM should only be performed by a trained urogynaecologist after discussing alternative options. TVM has mesh arms that anchor the vaginal vault to achieve support. Complications of TVM include mesh erosion and reoperation rates. Colpocleisis is a safe and effective procedure for women who do not wish to retain sexual function.

Concomitant surgery for occult SUI can be effective in reducing postoperative symptomatic SUI. Colposuspension at the time of ASC does not appear to be effective treatment for SUI. Concomitant mid-urethral sling surgery may be considered when vaginal surgical approaches are used for the treatment of PHVP. The optimal treatment of recurrent vault prolapse should be managed by a specialist MDT.

National databases should be used to document surgical outcomes and complications. Complications related to the use of devices and mesh should be reported to the MHRA. Future research should focus on the role of concomitant continence surgery in patients with PHVP and the use of mesh in the treatment of PHVP.

The text contains references to various studies and guidelines related to the surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse in women.

Clinical guidelines are systematically developed statements to assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions. Each guideline is developed using a standard methodology and should be evaluated with reference to individual patient needs and resources. The evidence used in guidelines is graded to provide recommendations based on the quality of the evidence. Good practice points and recommended best practices are also included in the guidelines. The final version of the guidelines is the responsibility of the RCOG Guidelines Committee.