Female Genital Mutilation and its Management
Clinicians should be aware of the complications of FGM and the legal responsibilities regarding reporting and management. Re-infibulation is illegal, and all healthcare professionals must understand the UK laws regarding FGM. Specialized services should be available for women with FGM, offering information, assessments, and de-infibulation. Psychological sequelae and impaired sexual function can occur with all types of FGM. Referral pathways for women with FGM should be clear, and all women should be offered psychological assessment and treatment, as well as testing for various infections. De-infibulation should be considered before pregnancy, and clitoral reconstruction is not recommended. Women with FGM should receive appropriate care during pregnancy, including antenatal screening and de-infibulation if necessary. Intrapartum care should be managed sensitively, and postnatal care should include follow-up for de-infibulation if not performed during delivery. All legal and regulatory processes must be followed for women with FGM.

'Clitoridectomy' and 'defibulation'. Clinicians should be aware of the short- and long-term complications of FGM. Immediate complications include haemorrhage, urinary retention, and genital swelling. Long-term complications include urinary tract symptoms, dyspareunia, and psychological effects. FGM is illegal in the UK under the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 and the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005. Health professionals must understand the law on FGM and be able to explain it to patients. Reporting of FGM in girls under 18 is mandatory. Recording of FGM cases must be in accordance with the HSCIC FGM Enhanced Dataset. Reporting to the police or social services is required for child abuse cases, but not for non-pregnant adult women unless a related child is at risk. Patient confidentiality must be respected.

It is not mandatory to report every pregnant woman identified as having had FGM to social services or the police. Healthcare professionals must record identified FGM in antenatal notes and refer to specialist care if needed. All healthcare professionals should receive mandatory training on FGM. Women with FGM should be assessed in gynaecological practice and offered referral for psychological assessment. De-infibulation should be offered before pregnancy. Clitoral reconstruction should not be performed. Women with FGM in pregnancy should receive consultant-led care and be identified early in pregnancy. Antenatal care should include screening and de-infibulation if necessary. Intrapartum care should include de-infibulation if needed and postnatal care should include follow-up.

All women with FGM should be offered de-infibulation before pregnancy. The discharging midwife should ensure legal and regulatory processes are followed. A postnatal debrief may be considered for education on FGM. Future research is needed on stillbirth rates, de-infibulation impact, clitoral reconstruction safety, and psychological assessment. Auditable topics include screening for infections, documentation quality, and referrals to social services. Useful links and support groups are available for further information and help.

Reporting to social services or the police is only required if a related child is considered to be at risk. Additional management in pregnant women includes referral to a designated consultant obstetrician or specialist midwife with responsibility for women with FGM. Local protocols will determine which elements of care should be undertaken by the designated midwife or obstetrician. A plan of care should be discussed and clearly documented, including an individual risk assessment using an FGM safeguarding risk assessment tool. Screening for hepatitis C should be offered in addition to routine screening for hepatitis B, HIV, and syphilis. De-infibulation should be managed as high obstetric risk, with documentation of maternal history of FGM in the personal child health record. Postnatal follow-up should be offered if de-infibulation was performed intrapartum or if planned de-infibulation did not occur due to delivery by caesarean section.