Green-top Guideline No. 62 Management of Suspected Ovarian Masses in Premenopausal Women
This guideline provides information to assist clinicians with the initial assessment and management of suspected ovarian masses in premenopausal women. It clarifies when referral to a gynaecological oncological service is necessary. Most ovarian masses in premenopausal women are benign, and conservative management is often possible. Laparoscopic surgery is recommended for benign masses. Referral to a gynaecological oncologist is advised if malignancy is suspected. Ultrasound is the preferred imaging modality for evaluating ovarian masses. Risk of malignancy can be estimated using the Risk of Malignancy Index (RMI) or ultrasound parameters. Referral to a gynaecological oncology service is recommended for women with suspicious ultrasound findings. Other guidelines also recommend specific criteria for referral to a gynaecological oncologist. Women with simple ovarian cysts can be managed expectantly.

Women with simple ovarian cysts generally do not require follow-up as these cysts are likely to resolve within 3 menstrual cycles. Cysts of 50-70 mm should have yearly ultrasound follow-up, larger cysts may need further imaging or surgery. Persistent or increasing cysts may require surgical management, especially for mature cystic teratomas. The use of oral contraceptives does not help in the treatment of functional ovarian cysts. Laparoscopic surgery is preferred for elective management of benign ovarian masses, with lower morbidity and quicker recovery. Laparoscopic management should be done by experienced surgeons. Aspiration of ovarian cysts is less effective and may lead to recurrence. Spillage of cyst contents should be avoided to prevent potential malignancy. The decision to perform an oophorectomy should be discussed preoperatively. Removal of benign ovarian masses should be done via the umbilical port for better outcomes. Audit topics include unexpected malignancy post-surgery, ultrasound reporting, laparotomy for benign cysts, and postoperative complications.

Three-dimensional quantification of tumor vascularity as a tertiary test after B-mode and power Doppler evaluation for detection of ovarian cancer. Assessment of factors that affect the quality of performance and interpretation of sonography of adnexal masses. Effect of quality of gynaecological ultrasonography on management of patients with suspected ovarian cancer. Differential diagnosis of adnexal masses: risk of malignancy index, ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging, and radioimmunoscintigraphy. Simple ultrasound rules to distinguish between benign and malignant adnexal masses before surgery: prospective validation by IOTA group. The accuracy of risk scores in predicting ovarian malignancy: a systematic review. Screening for early familial ovarian cancer with transvaginal ultrasonography and colour blood flow imaging. Logistic regression model to distinguish between the benign and malignant adnexal mass before surgery: a multicenter study by the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis Group. How relevant are ACOG and SGO guidelines for referral of adnexal mass? A risk of malignancy index incorporating CA 125, ultrasound and menopausal status for the accurate preoperative diagnosis of ovarian cancer. Evaluation of a risk of malignancy index based on serum CA-125, ultrasound findings and menopausal status in the pre-operative diagnosis of pelvic masses. Risk-of-malignancy index in preoperative evaluation of clinically restricted ovarian cancer. Comparison of two malignancy risk indices based on serum CA125, ultrasound score and menopausal status in the diagnosis of ovarian masses. Prospective evaluation of three different models for the pre-operative diagnosis of ovarian cancer. Distinguishing the benign and malignant adnexal mass: an external validation of prognostic models. Comparison of three risk of malignancy indices in evaluation of pelvic masses. A risk of malignancy index in preoperative diagnosis of ovarian cancer. Risk of malignancy index in the preoperative evaluation of patients with adnexal masses. External validation of mathematical models to distinguish between benign and malignant adnexal tumors: a multicenter study by the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis Group. Terms, definitions and measurements to describe the sonographic features of adnexal tumors: a consensus opinion from the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis Group. Management of asymptomatic ovarian and other adnexal cysts imaged at US: Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound Consensus Conference Statement. Management of functional ovarian cysts after induction of ovulation. Hormonal treatment of functional ovarian cysts: a randomized, prospective study. Expectant management of functional ovarian cysts: an alternative to hormonal therapy. Is expectant management of sonographically benign adnexal cysts an option in selected asymptomatic premenopausal women? The growth pattern of ovarian dermoid cysts: a prospective study in premenopausal and postmenopausal women. Oral contraceptives for functional ovarian cysts. Laparoscopy versus laparotomy for benign ovarian tumor: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Should adnexal mass size influence surgical approach? A series of 186 laparoscopically managed large adnexal masses. Laparoscopic management of extremely large ovarian cysts. Laparoscopic management of giant ovarian cyst. Laparoscopic management of ovarian dermoid cysts: a review of 47 cases. Laparoscopic management of ovarian dermoid cysts: ten years' experience. Laparoscopic management of ovarian dermoid cysts: potential fear of dermoid spill, myths and facts. Large ovarian endometriomas. Comparison between transumbilical and transabdominal ports for the laparoscopic retrieval of benign adnexal masses: a randomized trial. Transumbilical surgical specimen retrieval: a viable refinement of laparoscopic surgery for pelvic masses.

Condensed version:

RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 62