Endometriosis: diagnosis and management NICE guideline Published: 6 September 2017 Last updated: 16 April 2024

Recommendations:
1.1 Organisation of care
1.2 Endometriosis information and support
1.3 Endometriosis symptoms and signs
1.4 Referral for women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis
1.5 Diagnosing endometriosis
1.6 Staging systems
1.7 Monitoring for women with confirmed endometriosis
1.8 Pharmacological pain management
1.9 Non-pharmacological management
1.10 Surgical management
1.11 Management if fertility is a priority

Terms used in this guideline

Overview:
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing endometriosis, raising awareness of symptoms and providing clear advice on actions to take. It updates recommendations on endometriosis in NICE's guideline on fertility problems.

Who is it for:
- Healthcare professionals
- Commissioners and providers
- Women and people with suspected or confirmed endometriosis, their families, and carers

Recommendations:
- People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care.
- Use inclusive language in healthcare for safety and equity.
- Healthcare professionals should use clinical judgment when implementing recommendations.
- Provide information and support for women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis.
- Refer women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis to appropriate services based on symptoms and signs.
- Do not exclude the possibility of endometriosis if initial tests are normal. Consider further assessment and investigation if clinical suspicion remains.

Assess the extent of deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter. Ensure that pelvic MRI scans are interpreted by a healthcare professional with specialist expertise in gynaecological imaging. Consider laparoscopy to diagnose endometriosis in women with suspected endometriosis, even if the ultrasound was normal. Consider pelvic ultrasound or MRI before an operative laparoscopy for suspected deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter. During a diagnostic laparoscopy, a gynaecologist should perform a systematic inspection of the pelvis. Consider taking a biopsy of suspected endometriosis during a diagnostic laparoscopy. Offer endometriosis treatment according to the woman's symptoms, preferences, and priorities rather than the stage of the endometriosis. Consider outpatient follow-up for women with confirmed endometriosis, particularly those with deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter or larger endometriomas. Discuss the benefits and risks of analgesics for women with endometriosis-related pain. Consider hormonal treatment for pain management in women with suspected, confirmed, or recurrent endometriosis. Consider excision rather than ablation to treat endometriomas, taking into account the woman's desire for fertility and her ovarian reserve. Discuss surgical management options with women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis. Offer laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis unless there are contraindications. Consider excision or ablation of endometriosis plus adhesiolysis for endometriosis not involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter to improve the chance of spontaneous pregnancy. Discuss the benefits and risks of laparoscopic surgery as a treatment option for women with deep endometriosis who are trying to conceive. Do not offer hormonal treatment alone or in combination with surgery to women with endometriosis who are trying to conceive.

Provide an additional or alternative treatment option for women experiencing endometriosis-related pain. Groups of particular interest are women for whom hormonal and surgical options have been exhausted, women who would prefer an alternative to a pharmacological or surgical approach, and women who may be prioritizing trying to conceive.

Is laparoscopic treatment (excision or ablation) of peritoneal disease in isolation effective for managing endometriosis-related pain?

Are specialist lifestyle interventions (diet and exercise) effective, compared with no specialist lifestyle interventions, for women with endometriosis?

What information and support interventions are effective to help women with endometriosis deal with their symptoms and improve their quality of lives?

What is the effect of different doses and durations of hormonal treatments given either before, after, or both before and after surgery on fertility outcomes in people with endometriosis where fertility is a priority?