Endometriosis: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Published: 6 September 2017 
Last updated: 16 April 2024 

The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences, and values of their patients or the people using their service. All problems related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.

1.1 Organisation of care: Set up a managed clinical network for women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis, consisting of community services, gynaecology services, and specialist endometriosis services.

1.2 Endometriosis information and support: Be aware that endometriosis can have a significant impact, assess individual information and support needs, provide information on diagnosis and treatment options, involve partners or family members in discussions.

1.3 Endometriosis symptoms and signs: Suspect endometriosis in women presenting with chronic pelvic pain, period-related pain, deep pain during intercourse, gastrointestinal or urinary symptoms, and infertility.

1.4 Referral for women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis: Consider referral to gynaecology services for an ultrasound or specialist endometriosis services for deep endometriosis.

1.5 Diagnosing endometriosis: Do not exclude the possibility of endometriosis based on normal examinations, consider further assessment if suspicion remains, consider ultrasound for investigating endometriosis, do not use serum CA125 for diagnosis, and consider pelvic MRI if needed.

Assess the extent of deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter. Ensure that pelvic MRI scans are interpreted by a healthcare professional with specialist expertise in gynaecological imaging. Consider laparoscopy to diagnose endometriosis in women with suspected endometriosis, even if the ultrasound was normal. Consider a pelvic ultrasound or MRI before an operative laparoscopy for women with suspected deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter. During a diagnostic laparoscopy, a gynaecologist with training and skills in laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis should perform a systematic inspection of the pelvis. Consider taking a biopsy of suspected endometriosis during a diagnostic laparoscopy. Offer endometriosis treatment according to the woman's symptoms, preferences, and priorities rather than the stage of the endometriosis. Consider outpatient follow-up for women with confirmed endometriosis, particularly women with deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter or 1 or more endometrioma that is larger than 3 cm. For women with endometriosis-related pain, discuss the benefits and risks of analgesics. Consider a short trial of paracetamol or a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug for first-line management of endometriosis-related pain. If a trial of paracetamol or an NSAID does not provide adequate pain relief, consider other forms of pain management and referral for further assessment. For recommendations on using neuromodulators to treat neuropathic pain, see the NICE guideline on neuropathic pain. Explain to women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis that hormonal treatment for endometriosis can reduce pain and has no permanent negative effect on subsequent fertility. Offer hormonal treatment to women with suspected, confirmed, or recurrent endometriosis. If initial hormonal treatment for endometriosis is not effective, not tolerated, or is contraindicated, refer the woman to a gynaecology service, specialist endometriosis service, or paediatric and adolescent gynaecology service for investigation and treatment options. Advise women that the available evidence does not support the use of traditional Chinese medicine or other Chinese herbal medicines or supplements for treating endometriosis. Ask women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis about their symptoms, preferences, and priorities with respect to pain and fertility to guide surgical decision-making. Discuss surgical management options with women with suspected or confirmed endometriosis. Perform surgery for endometriosis laparoscopically unless there are contraindications. During a laparoscopy to diagnose endometriosis, consider laparoscopic treatment of peritoneal endometriosis not involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter or uncomplicated ovarian endometriomas. As an adjunct to surgery for deep endometriosis involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter, consider 3 months of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists before surgery. Consider excision rather than ablation to treat endometriomas, taking into account the woman's desire for fertility and her ovarian reserve. After laparoscopic excision or ablation of endometriosis, consider hormonal treatment to prolong the benefits of surgery and manage symptoms. If hysterectomy is indicated, excise all visible endometriotic lesions at the time of the hysterectomy. Perform hysterectomy laparoscopically when combined with surgical treatment of endometriosis, unless there are contraindications. For women thinking about having a hysterectomy, discuss the possible benefits and risks. Offer excision or ablation of endometriosis plus adhesiolysis for endometriosis not involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter to improve the chance of spontaneous pregnancy. Offer laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy with excision of the cyst wall, or laparoscopic drainage and ablation, to women with endometriomas to improve the chance of spontaneous pregnancy. Discuss the benefits and risks of laparoscopic surgery as a treatment option with women who have deep endometriosis and who are trying to conceive. Do not offer hormonal treatment alone or in combination with surgery to women with endometriosis who are trying to conceive, as it does not improve spontaneous pregnancy rates. Offer pain management programmes as a clinically and cost-effective intervention for women with endometriosis to improve quality of life.

Provide an additional or alternative treatment option for women experiencing endometriosis-related pain. Groups of particular interest are women for whom hormonal and surgical options have been exhausted, women who would prefer an alternative to a pharmacological or surgical approach, and women who may be prioritizing trying to conceive.

Is laparoscopic treatment (excision or ablation) of peritoneal disease in isolation effective for managing endometriosis-related pain? Isolated peritoneal endometriosis can be an incidental finding in women who may or may not experience pain or other symptoms. Research is needed to determine whether laparoscopic treatment of isolated peritoneal endometriosis in women with endometriosis-related pain results in a clinical and cost-effective improvement in symptoms.

Are specialist lifestyle interventions (diet and exercise) effective, compared with no specialist lifestyle interventions, for women with endometriosis? Endometriosis is a long-term condition that can cause acute and chronic pain, and fatigue. Supporting self-management is critical to improving the quality of life for women living with endometriosis.

What information and support interventions are effective to help women with endometriosis deal with their symptoms and improve their quality of lives? This guideline has identified that women with endometriosis and their partners feel that information and support are not always provided in the way that best meets their needs.

What is the effect of different doses and durations of hormonal treatments given either before, after, or both before and after surgery on fertility outcomes in people with endometriosis where fertility is a priority?