Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and initial management guideline covers diagnosing and managing ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage in women with complications in early pregnancy (up to 13 weeks). Recommendations include providing support and information, early pregnancy assessment services, symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy, and initial assessment. Healthcare professionals should treat women with dignity and respect, be aware of the potential distress, and provide evidence-based information in a variety of formats. Regional services should offer early pregnancy assessment services 7 days a week. Symptoms of ectopic pregnancy include abdominal or pelvic pain, amenorrhoea, vaginal bleeding, and other reported symptoms. Signs of ectopic pregnancy may include pelvic tenderness, adnexal tenderness, and abdominal tenderness. Healthcare professionals should be aware of atypical presentations and refer unstable women directly to A&E.

In women of reproductive age, consider pregnancy even with non-specific symptoms as ectopic pregnancy can mimic other conditions. Healthcare professionals should have access to pregnancy tests. Refer women with positive pregnancy tests and specific symptoms for further assessment. Exclude ectopic pregnancy even without known risk factors. Refer women with early pregnancy complications for assessment based on clinical situation. Use ultrasound scans to diagnose viable intrauterine and tubal ectopic pregnancies. Consider different signs on ultrasound scans for ectopic pregnancy diagnosis. Use serum hCG measurements for trophoblastic proliferation assessment. Take two serum hCG measurements 48 hours apart for management of pregnancy of unknown location. Provide written information to women on what to do if symptoms worsen.

1.4.29 For a woman with an increase in serum hCG levels greater than 63% after Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and initial management:
- Inform her that she is likely to have a developing intrauterine pregnancy.
- Offer her a transvaginal ultrasound scan to determine the location of the pregnancy between 7 and 14 days later. Consider an earlier scan for women with a serum hCG level greater than or equal to 1,500 IU/litre.
- If a viable intrauterine pregnancy is confirmed, offer her routine antenatal care.
- If a viable intrauterine pregnancy is not confirmed, refer her for immediate clinical review by a senior gynaecologist.

1.4.30 For a woman with a decrease in serum hCG levels greater than 50% after 48 hours:
- Inform her that the pregnancy is unlikely to continue but that this is not confirmed.
- Provide her with oral and written information about where she can access support and counselling services.
- Ask her to take a urine pregnancy test 14 days after the second serum hCG test.

1.4.31 For a woman with a decrease in serum hCG levels less than 50%, or an increase less than 63%, refer her for clinical review in the early pregnancy assessment service within 24 hours.

1.4.32 For women with a pregnancy of unknown location, when using serial serum hCG measurements, do not use serum progesterone measurements as an adjunct to diagnose either viable intrauterine pregnancy or ectopic pregnancy.

Medical and surgical management of ectopic pregnancy: 
Offer systemic methotrexate to women with specific criteria, surgery should be offered if methotrexate is not acceptable. 
Surgery should be offered as first-line treatment to certain women with ectopic pregnancy. 
Offer the choice of methotrexate or surgical management to women with specific criteria. 
Perform laparoscopy whenever possible for surgical treatment of ectopic pregnancy. 
Consider salpingectomy for women undergoing surgery for ectopic pregnancy. 
Consider salpingotomy as an alternative to salpingectomy for women with certain risk factors. 
Offer anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis to all rhesus-negative women undergoing surgical procedures for ectopic pregnancy or miscarriage. 
Do not offer anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis to certain women.

Over the past 2 decades, there has been a shift towards outpatient or day case care and the introduction of medical and expectant management as alternatives to surgery. Despite these changes, there is a lack of research into the effects of these different approaches from the woman's perspective, particularly their psychological and emotional impact. Miscarriage is distressing for most women, and the type of management itself might affect women's need for counseling, with a resulting cost to the NHS. Because of this, it is an important area for research. The deficiency in the literature could be addressed by a comparative study of women having the different management strategies (expectant, medical, or surgical) and in a variety of clinical settings. 

Comparison between expectant, medical, or surgical management of ectopic pregnancy:
In women with ectopic pregnancy, does the type of intervention impact on women's experience, including psychological and emotional outcomes? Currently, there is no evidence exploring the psychological impact of the different treatments for ectopic pregnancy. However, the emotional impact of the condition can be significant, in some circumstances leading to post-traumatic stress disorder. A qualitative comparative study should be carried out to assess how this impact can be reduced. This would help to maximize women's emotional recovery in the short and long term, enable women and clinicians to decide the optimum treatment method, and identify what support is needed for women during and after the process. It could also reduce the cost to the NHS of providing long-term counseling for affected women.

Using ultrasound for diagnosis of a tubal ectopic pregnancy:
There was good evidence that certain features seen on ultrasound could indicate an ectopic pregnancy. The committee recommended using other scan features, clinical presentation, and serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels to confirm or rule out the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy.

Progestogens for preventing miscarriage:
The committee made recommendations based on good evidence that 400 mg twice daily of micronized vaginal progesterone increases the number of live births in women with early pregnancy bleeding and a previous miscarriage. The recommendations will increase the use of progestogens to prevent miscarriage and standardize the preparation of progesterone used to treat threatened miscarriage.

Medical management of miscarriage:
The committee recommended a combination of mifepristone and misoprostol for reducing the failure of the gestational sac to pass spontaneously and reducing the need for surgical intervention. The recommendations will be a change in practice and reduce the need for surgical intervention, thus reducing costs for the NHS.

Expectant management of tubal ectopic pregnancy:
The committee recommended that expectant management could be offered to clinically stable women with small ectopic pregnancies as an alternative to medical management. These recommendations will standardize the management of ectopic pregnancy and make expectant management available for women when clinically appropriate. More women might have expectant management of ectopic pregnancy as a result, leading to cost savings through a reduction in drug use.

Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage have an adverse effect on the quality of life of many women. Approximately 20% of pregnancies miscarry, and miscarriages can cause considerable distress. Early pregnancy loss accounts for over 50,000 admissions in the UK annually. The rate of ectopic pregnancy is 11 per 1,000 pregnancies, with a maternal mortality of 0.2 per 1,000 estimated ectopic pregnancies. About two-thirds of these deaths are associated with substandard care. Women who do not access medical help readily are particularly vulnerable. Improvement in the diagnosis and management of early pregnancy loss is therefore of vital importance, in order to reduce the incidence of the associated psychological morbidity and avoid the unnecessary deaths of women with ectopic pregnancies.