1of5
Royal College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists
Consent Advice No. 8
June 2010
LAPAROSCOPIC MANAGEMENT OF TUBAL ECTOPIC
PREGNANCY
This is the first edition of this guidance.
This paper provides advice for clinicians in obtaining consent of women undergoing laparoscopic
salpingectomy or salpingotomy for ectopic pregnancy. This paper is intended to be appropriate for a
number of procedures and combinations and the consent form should be carefully edited under the
heading ‘Name of proposed procedure or course of treatment’ to accurately describe the exact
procedure to be performed, after discussion with the woman. The paper follows the structure of
Consent Form 1 of the Department of Health, England/Welsh Assembly Government/Scottish
Government/Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety, Northern Ireland. It should be
used in conjunction with RCOG Clinical Governance Advice No. 6: Obtaining Valid Consent.1Please
refer to RCOG Green-top guideline No. 21 The Management of Tubal Pregnancy2and RCOG Patient
Information An ectopic pregnancy: information for you .3
The aim of this advice is to ensure that all women are given consistent and adequate information for
consent; it is intended to be used together with dedicated patient information. After discharge, women
should have clear direction for obtaining help if there are unforeseen problems.
Clinicians should be prepared to discuss with the woman any of the points listed on the following
pages.
The above descriptors are based on the RCOG Clinical Governance Advice, Presenting Information on Risk .4  They 
are used throughout this document.
To assist clinicians at a local level, we have included at the end of this document a fully printable page
2 of the Department of Health, England/Welsh Assembly Government/Scottish Government/Depart-
ment of Health, Social Services and Public Safety, Northern Ireland, Consent Form 1. This page can be
incorporated into local trust documents, subject to local trust governance approval.Presenting information on risk
Term Equivalent numerical ratio Colloquial equivalent
Very common 1/1   to   1/10 A person in family
Common 1/10   to   1/100 A person in street
Uncommon 1/100   to   1/1000 A person in village
Rare 1/1000   to   1/10 000 A person in small town
Very rare Less than  1/10 000 A person in large town
Consent Advice 8 © RCOG 2010CONSENT FORM
1. Name of proposed procedure or course of treatment
Laparoscopic salpingectomy or salpingotomy after confirmation of tubal ectopic pregnancy.
2. The proposed procedure
Describe the nature of laparoscopy and salpingectomy or salpingotomy. The laparoscopic approach is preferred
to an open (laparotomy) procedure unless the patient is haemodynamically unstable or either suitable
equipment or surgical expertise is not available. Salpingectomy is the preferred surgical option with the
possible exception of a diseased or absent contralateral tube. Explain the procedure as described in the patient
information.
Note: If any other procedures are anticipated, these must be discussed and consent obtained.
3. Intended benefits
To remove the ectopic pregnancy if it is confirmed by laparoscopy.
4. Serious and frequently occurring risks
It is recommended that clinicians make every effort to separate serious from frequently occurring risks. Women
who are obese, have significant pathology, have had previous surgery or who have pre-existing medical
conditions must understand that the quoted risks for serious or frequent complications will be increased.
4.1 Serious risks
Serious risks include:5,6,7
●damage to bowel, bladder, uterus or major blood vessels which would require immediate repair by laparoscopy
or laparotomy (uncommon); however, up to 15% of bowel injuries might not be diagnosed at the time of
laparoscopy
●failure to gain entry to abdominal cavity and complete intended procedure laparoscopically, requiring
laparotomy instead
●the overall risk of serious complications from diagnostic laparoscopy is approximately two in 1000
●three to eight women in every 100 000 undergoing laparoscopy die as a result of complications (very rare) .
4.2 Frequent risks
Frequent risks include:8,9
●inability to identify an obvious cause for presenting complaint
●bruising
●shoulder-tip pain
●wound gaping
●wound infection
●persistent trophoblastic tissue, when salpingotomy performed (4–8 in 100)
●hernia at site of entry.
5. Any extra procedures which may become necessary during the procedure
●Laparotomy.
●Salpingectomy.
●Repair of damage to bowel, bladder, uterus or blood vessels.
●Blood transfusion.
●Oophorectomy .
6. What the procedure is likely to involve, the benefits and risks of any available alternative
treatments, including no treatment2,8–10
Insertion of a laparoscope through a small incision to confirm the presence of the ectopic pregnancy, following
which additional instruments may be inserted through two additional small incisions to remove the tube
containing the ectopic pregnancy.
Consent Advice 8 2of5Expectant management is a useful form of treatment management for ectopic pregnancy in selected cases. It
is, however, only acceptable if it involves minimal risks to the woman. Expectant management should only be
used for women who are asymptomatic with an ultrasound diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy, with no evidence
of blood in the pouch of Douglas and decreasing serum hCG levels that are lower than 1000 iu/l at initial
presentation.
In women with an early ectopic pregnancy who are stable, treatment with a single intramuscular injection of
methotrexate is often successful without recourse to surgery. Women most suitable for methotrexate therapy
are those with a serum hCG below 3000 iu/l with minimal symptoms and no fetal heart pulsations visible.
About 14% of women will require more than one dose of methotrexate and fewer than 10% of women treated
with this regimen will require surgical intervention.
Persistent trophoblast is detected by the failure of serum hCG levels to fall as expected after initial treatment.
It is primarily a problem occurring after salpingotomy rather than following salpingectomy. Although, even in
the presence of persistent trophoblast, hCG levels may return uneventfully to normal, cases of delayed
haemorrhage owing to persistent trophoblast have been described and this provides the rationale for following
women with serial hCG measurements after treatment and administering methotrexate if levels fail to fall as
expected.
7.Statement of patient: procedures which should not be carried out without further
discussion
Other procedures which may be appropriate but not essential at the time should be discussed and the woman’s
wishes recorded.
8. Preoperative information
A record should be made of any sources of information (such as RCOG or locally produced information leaflets)
given to the woman prior to surgery. Please refer to RCOG Patient Information: An ectopic pregnancy:
information for you .3
9. Anaesthesia
Where possible, the woman must be aware of the form of anaesthesia planned and be given an opportunity to
discuss this in detail with the anaesthetist before surgery. It should be noted that with obesity there are
increased risks, both surgical and anaesthetic.
References
1. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Obtaining Valid Consent . Clinical Governance Advice No. 6. London: RCOG; 2008
[www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health/clinical-guidance/obtaining-valid-consent].
2. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The Management of Tubal Pregnancy . Green-top Guideline No. 21. London: RCOG; 2004
[www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health/clinical-guidance/management-tubal-pregnancy-21-may-2004].
3. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. An Ectopic Pregnancy: Information for You . London: RCOG [in press].
4. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Presenting Information on Risk . Clinical Governance Advice No. 7. London: RCOG; 2008
[www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health/clinical-guidance/presenting-information-risk].
5. Brosens I, Gordon A, Campo R, Gordts S. Bowel injury in gynecologic laparoscopy. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 2003;10:9−13.
6. Chapron C, Querleu D, Bruhat MA, Madelenat P , Fernandez H, Pierre F , et al . Surgical complications of diagnostic and operative
gynaecological laparoscopy: a series of 29,966 cases. Hum Reprod 1998;13:867–72. 
7. Jansen FW , Kapiteyn K, Trimbos-Kemper T, Hermans J, Trimbos JB. Complications of laparoscopy: a prospective multicentre obser vational
study. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1997;104:595–600. 
8. Lipscomb GH, Bran D, McCord ML, Portera JC, Ling FW . Analysis of three hundred fifteen ectopic pregnancies treated with singl e-dose
methotrexate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998:178:1354–8.
9. Lipscomb GH, McCord ML, Stovall TG, Huff G, Portera SG, Ling FW . Predictors of success of methotrexate treatment in women with tubal
ectopic pregnancies. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1974–8.
10. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Preventing Entry-Related Gynaecological Laparoscopic Injuries . Green-top Guideline
No. 49 London: RCOG; 2008[http://www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health/clinical-guidance/preventing-entry-related-gynaecological-
laparoscopic-injuries-green-].
3of5 Consent Advice 8 © RCOG 2010Consent Advice 8 4of5The Consent Advice review process will commence in 
2013 unless otherwise indicatedThis Consent Advice was produced by Mr M Read FRCOG, with the support of the Consent Group of the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists.
It was peer reviewed by: Mr RG Farquharson FRCOG, Liverpool; Professor JK Gupta FRCOG, Birmingham; Mr AJ Kelly MRCOG, Brighton;
RCOG Consumers’ Forum.
Final version is the responsibility of the Consent Group of the RCOG.
DISCLAIMER
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces consent advice as an aid to good clinical practice. The
ultimate implementation of a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made by the doctor or other
attendant after the valid consent of the patient in the light of clinical data and the diagnostic and treatment options
available. The responsibility for clinical management rests with the practitioner and their employing authority and should
satisfy local clinical governance probity.Patient identifier/label
Name of proposed procedure or course of treatment
(include brief explanation if medical term not clear) Laparoscopic salpingectomy (removal of a fallopian tube
containing an ectopic pregnancy)* or laparoscopic salpingotomy (removal of an ectopic pregnancy through an
incision in the fallopian tube)*.
* Delete as appropriate.
Statement of health professional (to be filled in by health professional with
appropriate knowledge of proposed procedure, as specified in consent policy)
I have explained the procedure to the patient, in particular, I have explained:
The intended benefits: To remove the ectopic pregnancy if it is confirmed by laparoscopy.
Frequent risks:
●Inability to identify an obvious cause for presenting complaint.
●Bruising.
●Shoulder-tip pain.
●Wound gaping.
●Wound infection.
●Persistent trophoblastic tissue.
Any extra procedures which may become necessary during the procedure
Blood transfusion
other procedure (please specify) :Laparotomy, repair of damage to bowel, bladder, uterus or blood
vessels, salpingectomy (when salpingotomy planned)
I have also discussed what the procedure is likely to involve, the benefits and risks of any available
alternative treatments (including no treatment) and any particular concerns of this patient.
The following leaflet/tape has been provided: Please refer to patient information An Ectopic Pregnancy:
Information for You
This procedure will involve:
general and/or regional anaesthesia          local anaesthesia          sedation
Signed .................................................................................................. Date ............................................................................
Name (PRINT)........................................................................................ Job title ......................................................................
Contact details (if patient wishes to discuss options later)
Statement of interpreter (where appropriate)
I have interpreted the information above to the patient to the best of my ability and in a way in which I
believe s/he can understand
Signed .................................................................................................. Date ............................................................................
Name (PRINT) ....................................................................................................................................................................................
Top copy accepted by patient: yes/no (please ring)Serious risks:
●Damage to bowel, bladder, uterus or major blood vessels, which would require immediate repair by
laparoscopy or laparotomy (uncommon); up to 15% of bowel injuries might not be diagnosed at the
time of laparoscopy.
●Failure to gain entry to abdominal cavity and complete the procedure.
●The overall risk of serious complications from diagnostic laparoscopy is approximately two in 1000.
●Three to eight women in every 100 000 undergoing laparoscopy could die as a result of
complications (very rare).
●Hernia at site of entry.