1 Information for you
 Published in December 2018
Outpatient hysteroscopy
About this information
This information is for you if you have been offered hysteroscopy as an outpatient . It may also be helpful if 
you are a partner, relative or  friend of someone who has been offered this procedure.
A glossary of medical terms is available on the RCOG website at: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/medical-terms .
Key points
• Outpatient hysteroscopy (OPH) is a procedure carried out in the outpatient clinic t hat 
involves examination of the inside of your uterus (womb) with a thin telescope .
• There are many reasons why you may be referred for OPH, such as to investigate and/o r 
treat abnormal bleeding, to remove a polyp seen on a scan or to remove a coil with 
missing threads.
• The actual procedure usually takes 10–15 minutes. It can take longer if you are hav ing any 
additional procedures.
• You may feel pain or discomfort during OPH. It is recommended that you take pain relie f 
1–2 hours before the appointment.
• If it is too painful, it is important to let your healthcare professional know as the proc edure 
can be stopped at any time.
• You may choose to have the hysteroscopy under general anaesthetic. This will 
be done in an operating theatre, usually as a daycase procedure.
• Possible risks with hysteroscopy include pain, feeling faint or sick, ble eding, 
infection and rarely uterine perforation (damage to the wall of the 
uterus). The risk of uterine perforation is lower during OPH than 
during hysteroscopy under general anaesthesia.
2What is outpatient hysteroscopy (OPH)?
An OPH is a procedure that involves examining the inside of your uterus (womb). This i s done by passing 
a thin telescope-like device, called a hysteroscope, that is fitted with a sma ll camera through the neck of 
your womb (cervix). The healthcare professional doing the procedure can t hen see whether there are any 
problems inside your uterus that may need further investigation or treatme nt.
3It may be possible for a minor procedure to be done at the same visit, such as:
•Endometrial biopsy – taking a sample from the lining of the uterus. This can be done thr ough the
hysteroscope or after inserting a speculum  and passing a thin tube through the cervix. You may
experience severe period-like pain during this procedure, but the pain should no t last long.
•Polyp removal – a polyp inside the uterus is a skin tag that looks like a small grape, so metimes on
a stalk. Polyps are formed as a result of overgrowth of the lining of the uterus.
•Small fibroid removal – fibroids are knots in the muscle of the uterus that are non-ca ncerous
(benign). They can sometimes bulge like a polyp into the lining of your uterus and your healt hcare
professional may advise removal to help with your symptoms.
•Insertion of a hormone-releasing intrauterine device (for example, Mir ena®).
•Removal of a coil from the uterus when the threads are not visible.
Why have I been referred for outpatient hysteroscopy?
You may have been referred for OPH for one of the following reasons:
•bleeding after the menopause (postmenopausal bleeding)
•very heavy periods
•bleeding between periods
•irregular bleeding while on hormonal treatment
•removal of a coil when the threads are not visible at the cervix
•fertility concerns
•following a miscarriage
•to investigate something seen inside the uterus on an ultrasound scan, such as an endo metrial
polyp or fibroid.
The purpose of your appointment is to find the cause of your problem and plan or undertake tre atment 
if needed.
Your healthcare professional will discuss your options and whether OPH is righ t for you.
What should I do before my appointment?
You should eat and drink normally. You do not need to fast before your appointment.
It is recommended that you take pain  relief (400 mg of ibuprofen or 1 gram of paracetamol or whatever 
pain relief you find useful for period pain) at least 1 hour before your appointment.
Bring a list of any medications that you are taking with you.
You may wish to have a friend or family member accompanying you.
Do I need to use contraception?
The procedure must not be performed if there is any chance that you are pregnant. To avo id this 
possibility, it is important to use contraception or avoid sex between your la st period and your 
appointment. You may be offered a urine pregnancy test on arrival at your appoi ntment.
Can I still have an outpatient hysteroscopy if I’m bleeding?
It is best to keep the appointment. Sometimes it can be difficult to do the test if you are b leeding heavily. 
If you have any concerns, please ring and speak to your healthcare professional .4Are there alternatives to having outpatient hysteroscopy?
There may be other things to consider when deciding whether OPH is the right choic e for you, such as:
• if you faint during your periods because of pain
• if you have experienced severe pain during a previous vaginal examination
• if you have experienced difficult or painful cervical smears
• if you have had any previous traumatic experience that might make the procedure di fficult for you
• if you do not wish to have this examination when awake.
You may choose to have your hysteroscopy with either a general or spinal anaesthet ic. This will be done 
in an operating theatre, usually as a daycase procedure. You can discuss this opti on with your healthcare 
professional. The risks and complications are lower when hysteroscop y is done as an outpatient procedure 
rather than under anaesthesia.
You may choose not to have a hysteroscopy at all, though this may make it more difficult for you r 
healthcare professional to find the cause of your symptoms and to offer the right t reatment for you. They 
may then recommend a scan and a biopsy to find out more information and/or may ask you to com e back 
if your symptoms continue.
What happens during outpatient hysteroscopy?
On arrival
You will meet your healthcare professional who will discuss the procedure and ask f or your consent. Please 
take this opportunity to ask any questions you may have.
There will be two or three healthcare professionals in the room and one of them wil l support you 
throughout the procedure. They will help you to get positioned in a special chair and w ill keep you as 
covered as possible.
The procedure
A hysteroscope is passed through the cervix to give a clear view of the inside of your ut erus. No cuts are 
needed. Fluid (saline solution) is used to help see the inner lining of your uterus and y ou will feel wet as the 
fluid trickles back out.
If no problems are found, the actual procedure will only take about 10–15 minutes. Some times, a biopsy 
(small sample) from the lining of your uterus may be taken and sent to the laboratory fo r examination. The 
biopsy can be painful, but the pain should not last long.
If a fibroid or polyp is found, it can sometimes be removed at the same time by using additi onal 
instruments. You may be offered a local anaesthetic to make you more comfortab le, particularly if a wider 
hysteroscope is to be used. Tell your healthcare professional if the procedu re is becoming painful.
During the OPH, your healthcare professional will look inside your uterus on a scr een and you can also 
watch the screen if you choose to. Photographs of the findings inside your uterus are ofte n taken and kept 
in your healthcare notes.5What are the possible risks with outpatient hysteroscopy?
• Pain during or after OPH  is usually mild and similar to period pain. Simple pain relief 
medications can help. On occasion, women may experience severe pain.
• Feeling or being sick or fainting  can affect a small number of women. However, these 
symptoms usually settle quickly. Let your healthcare professional know if you a re feeling unwell 
during or straight after the procedure.
• Bleeding  is usually very mild and is lighter than a period, settling within a few days. It is 
recommended that you use sanitary towels, not tampons. If the bleeding does not sett le and gets 
worse, contact your healthcare professional or nearest emergency dep artment.
• Infection  is uncommon (1 in 400 women). It may appear as a smelly discharge, fever or 
severe pain in the tummy. If you develop any of these symptoms, contact your healt hcare 
professional urgently.
• Failed/unsuccessful OPH  occurs if it is not possible to pass the hysteroscope inside your 
uterus. Usually this happens when the cervix is tightly ‘closed’ or scarred . If this happens, your 
healthcare professional will discuss alternative options with you.
• Damage to the wall of the uterus (uterine perforation)  – rarely, a small hole is 
accidentally made in the wall of the uterus. This could also cause damage to nearby ti ssues. This 
happens in fewer than 1 in 1000 diagnostic hysteroscopy procedures, but is sl ightly more common 
if someone has a polyp or fibroid removed at the same time. It may mean that you have to st ay in 
hospital overnight. Usually, nothing more needs to be done, but you may need a furth er operation 
to repair the hole.
Will outpatient hysteroscopy hurt?
For most women, OPH is quick and safe, and is carried out with little pain or discomfort. OPH i s 
often done without inserting a speculum, by using a thin telescope (called vaginosc opic OPH) as this is 
more comfortable.
However, everyone’s experience of pain is different and some women will find t he procedure very painful. 
If it is too painful for you, let your healthcare professional know as the procedure can b e stopped at any 
time if you wish.
Your healthcare professional may offer a local anaesthetic injection int o your cervix. This will require using a 
speculum to see your cervix and your healthcare professional will discuss this w ith you.
Some hospitals may offer nitrous oxide (Entonox or ‘gas and air’) to help with your pain . In this situation, 
you may be advised to wait a bit longer in the hospital for recovery before you can driv e.
If you feel anxious about the procedure, you should talk to your healthcare professiona l before 
your appointment.
How long does the visit take?
The actual procedure may only take 10–15 minutes. However, the total visit may t ake up to 1–2 hours 
including consultation, having the procedure and recovery. If polyps or sma ll fibroids are removed at the 
same time, this may take a bit longer.
You can rest in the outpatient clinic’s recovery area for as long as you need (usually ab out 20 minutes).6How will I feel afterwards?
You may get some period-like pain for 1–2 days. You may also have some spotting or fr esh (bright red) 
bleeding that may last up to 1 week. These symptoms usually settle very quickly. Mo st women feel able to 
go back to their normal activities on the same day.
You can shower as normal.
Normal physical activity and sex can be resumed when any bleeding and discomfo rt has settled.
If needed, you can take pain relief such as 400 mg of ibuprofen every 8 hours or 1 gram of para cetamol 
every 4 hours, or your usual period pain tablets.
If your pain is not controlled with the above medication, you should contact your healt hcare professional or 
nearest emergency department.
What happens next?
If no problems are found, you may not need any follow-up appointments. If a biopsy has bee n taken, you 
will be contacted with the results as soon as they become available. Your healthc are professional will 
discuss any further treatment with you.
About intimate examinations
The nature of gynaecological and obstetric care means that intimate examin ations are often necessary. 
We understand that for some people, particularly those who may have anxiety or who have e xperienced 
trauma, physical or sexual abuse, such examinations can be very difficult . If you feel uncomfortable, anxious 
or distressed at any time before, during, or after an examination, please let you r healthcare professionals 
know. If you find this difficult to talk about, you may communicate your feelings in writi ng. Your healthcare 
professionals are there to help and they can offer alternative options and su pport for you. Remember 
that you can always ask them to stop at any time and that you are entitled to ask for a chaperon e to be 
present. You can also bring a friend or relative if you wish.
Further information
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guideline NG88, Heavy Menstrual Bleeding: 
Assessment and Management : www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng88/informationforpublic
NHS information on hysteroscopy: www.nhs.uk/conditions/hysteroscopy/what-happens
A full list of useful organisations is available on the RCOG website at: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/other-
sources-of-help  7Making a choice
Sources and acknowledgement
This information has been developed by the RCOG Patient Information Comm ittee and the British Society for 
Gynaecological Endoscopy (BSGE) Hysteroscopy Subcommittee. It is ba sed on the RCOG/BSGE Green-top 
Guideline No. 59, Best Practice in Outpatient Hysteroscopy , published in March 2011. The guideline contains a 
full list of the sources of evidence we have used. You can find it online at: www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-
research-services/guidelines/gtg59 .
This information has been reviewed before publication by women attending clinics in Wrexham, London, Sheffield 
and Stockport, by the RCOG Women’s Network and by the RCOG Women’s Voices Involvement Panel.
 
 Your health, Your decision
•     to decide whether or not you want to
       have treatment
•     to choose between different types 
       of treatment
•     if you want to continue with the 
       same treatment
If you are asked to make a choice, you may have lots of questions 
that you want to ask. You may also want to talk over your options 
with your family or friends. It can help to write a list of the questions
you want answered and take it to your appointment.
Ask 3 Questions
To begin with, try to make sure you get the answers to three key 
questions if you are asked to make a choice about your healthcare.
1. What are my options?
2. What are the pros and cons of each option for me?
3. How do I get support to help me make a decision that is right 
    for me?"The 3 questions are a useful tool 
to help empower the patient in the 
consultation. They act as a 
catalyst for shared decision making 
by using the patient to guide the 
discussion to consider options, 
risks and benefits and then 
making a shared decision."The staff involved in your 
healthcare want to help you 
become more involved by 
giving you information 
about your options.
They want to understand 
what is important to you.
Giving you answers to these 
questions and knowing what’s 
important to you will help 
the best decision about your
found it helpful to get the 
answers to the 3 Questions.
“Knowing the possible side-effects 
of the different medications I 
could take meant I could weigh 
up the pros and cons of each 
one, and knowing the risks meant
 I made the right decision.” "Throughout my pregnancy 
I have used the 3 questions 
to find out the options 
available to me for my care. 
By finding out about each 
option, it really helped me 
decide what fitted best with 
my values and needs."
*Ask 3 Questions is based on Shepherd HL, et al. Three questions that patients can ask to improve the quality of information 
     physicians give about treatment options: A cross-over trial. Patient Education and Counselling, 2011;84: 379-85https://www.aquanw.nhs.uk/SDM
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2018