Morcellation for Myomectomy 
or Hysterectomy
RCOG Consent Advice No. 13
October 2019
Consent Advice No. 13 2 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsMorcellation for Myomectomy or Hysterectomy
This paper provides advice for healthcare professionals obtaining consent from individuals undergoing 
myomectomy or hysterectomy for benign conditions, where the use of morcellation is being considered.
There should be careful discussion with the individual, including checks on the following red flag indicators:1–9
• Post-Menopausal Bleeding (PMB) or abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) in women of reproductive age/
premenopausal)1–5
• Suspicious features on imaging - there is a limited evidence base (solid masses with inhomogeneous 
echogenicity, irregular cystic areas, fan shaped shadowing, moderately or very well vascularised on 
ultrasound); absence of these features does not exclude sarcoma1,6
• Rapidly enlarging fibroid in post-menopausal women1
• In premenopausal women: fibroids that do not decrease in size after GnRH agonist treatment (oestrogen 
deprivation) should raise suspicion7
• Family history of breast/ovarian carcinoma (or known BRCA1/2 germline mutation) and/or Lynch 
Syndrome
• Risk is stratified by age (peri and post menopause)1,2,7
• History of Tamoxifen use1,3,4,8
• Ethnicity should be considered; as the incidence of fibroids is higher in black women, so is the incidence 
of Uterine Sarcoma1,3,9
• History of pelvic irradiation1,3
It should be ensured that the individual has an up-to-date, normal cervical smear and, if indicated, an endometrial 
biopsy.1,3
Discussion of expectant management, medical and surgical management options should have been undertaken 
and documented.
The aim of this advice is to ensure that all individuals are given consistent information for consent. It is 
intended for use together with related patient information available from the Royal College of Obstetricians 
and Gynaecologists: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/morcellation-myomectomy-hysterectomy/ .
Health professionals obtaining consent should be prepared to discuss with the individual, any of the points 
listed on the following pages. Risks may be quantified using the descriptors below.
Table 1.  Presenting information on risk
Term Equivalent numerical ratio Colloquial equivalent
Very common
Common
Uncommon
Rare
Very rare1 in 1 to 1 in 10
1 in 10 to 1 in 100
1 in 100 to 1 in 1000
1 in 1000 to 1 in 10 000
Less than 1 in 10 000A person in family
A person in street
A person in village
A person in small town
A person in large town 
The descriptors are based on RCOG Clinical Governance Advice No. 7, Presenting Information on Risk10 and are used throughout 
this document.Consent Advice No. 13 3 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsIntroduction
Morcellation is a term used to describe the process of cutting tissue into smaller pieces to facilitate its removal 
from the body. In gynaecology, the practice has been used for over a century. It was first described in 1890s, 
when it was employed in vaginal surgery to remove large uteri as a means of reducing the morbidity and 
mortality associated with abdominal hysterectomies.
In the 1990s, power morcellation was introduced to allow laparoscopic removal of myomas (fibroids) and larger 
uteri. Due to the potential dissemination of tissue extracted during the morcellation process, cases of parasitic 
fibroid development and the inadvertent spread of previously unrecognised malignancies have been described.1–4
It is important for clinicians to remember that, even when surgery is being contemplated for presumed benign 
conditions, the exact nature of any specimen removed cannot be confirmed until histopathological examination 
has been undertaken. This is the case when removing fibroids, where there could be undiagnosed uterine 
sarcoma or in hysterectomy without fibroids, when there could be undiagnosed cervical, endometrial, fallopian 
tube or ovarian carcinoma.11
Currently there are no specific biomarkers for uterine sarcoma.1,12
In the UK, over 400 cases of gynaecological sarcomas are diagnosed each year.13
The uterus is the most common anatomical subsite. Leiomyosarcomas are the most common histological subtype.
There is a wide variation in the incidence of undiagnosed leiomyosarcoma in the published 
literature. Age and menopausal status are very important factors.
Premenopausal women
A number of population-based studies have reported the incidence of unexpected leiomyosarcoma among 
surgery for uterine fibroids or hysterectomy for whatever cause.
In the largest published database,14 risk figures for premenopausal women of all ages (<50 years)  range 
from 1 in 1250 (hysterectomy or myomectomy whatever cause) to 1 in 769 (women with uterine fibroids).
Mathematical modelling for age stratification of risk of an unsuspected uterine sarcoma at the time of surgery 
for a presumed benign fibroid for women under 50 years2 indicates risk figures of 2.5 per 1000 (1 in 400; this 
is average of all the incidence figures for the 5 age groups under 49 years from Table 4 in Brohl et al.2; see Appendix 2 ).
Peri- and post-menopausal women
Presumed fibroids are more likely to be sarcomas in peri and post-menopausal women, if they are rapidly 
growing and solitary, rather than multiple.1–4,6
The risk rises sharply around the menopause, with a summarised figure from several studies of around 6 cases 
per 1000 procedures (1 in 166) (derived from Brohl et al.,2 Mao et al.14 and Multinu et al.15).
The peak age of incidence of uterine sarcoma is between 50 and 55. The risk may be even higher in women 
over the age of 60  ranging from 7.5 to 15.3 per 1000 cases (i.e. 1 in 1332 to 1 in 65,14 but with less confidence 
on the incidence figures since the number of procedures is lower in this age group.1,2,14Consent Advice No. 13 4 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsTable 2 below is derived from risk ranges according to age reported in Mao et al.14 and Brohl 
et al.;2 see full table data extracted at Appendix 2.
Table 2.  Risk ranges according to Mao et al.14 and Brohl et al.2
Reference Risk by age range
<50 years 50–59 years >60 years
Mao et al.141 in 769 to 1 in 1250 1 in 172 to 1 in 303 1 in 65 to 1 in 278
Brohl et al.21 in 304 to 1 in 574 1 in 158 to 1 in 216 1 in 98 to 1 in 157
Before consideration is given to morcellation of a fibroid or breaching of a fibroid capsule (via any route) MRI 
or ultrasound imaging should have been performed to diagnose a fibroid. Neither USS nor MRI are able to 
definitively exclude sarcomatous change in a fibroid.
Any fibroid that looks suspicious on imaging or where there is concern of uterine sarcoma, should be considered 
for discussion at a multi-disciplinary forum before morcellation is performed. The guiding principle should 
be that if sarcoma is suspected (e.g. a rapidly enlarging mass in a peri or post-menopausal 
woman) then morcellation or breaching of a fibroid capsule should not be undertaken.1,3
What laparoscopic morcellation involves
Morcellation is only indicated if the uterus (with or without large fibroids) is too big to be removed vaginally 
once detached laparoscopically, if a subtotal hysterectomy is performed (where the cervix is left intact) or if 
laparoscopic myomectomy is performed.
Morcellation can be performed laparoscopically, abdominally, or vaginally. Laparoscopically, it involves the 
insertion of a surgical instrument through a port incision to electrically or mechanically cut a uterus or fibroid 
into smaller pieces after it has been detached, the fragments are then removed through the instrument. 
A uterus or fibroid can also be cut into smaller pieces by inserting a specially designed knife through a 
port incision. Morcellation of an enlarged uterus or fibroid can be performed in the vagina, during vaginal 
hysterectomy or total laparoscopic hysterectomy. It can also be performed within an abdominal incision.
Because data on complications with regard to laparoscopic or vaginal morcellation have not been reported 
separately, we recommend that patients are informed in the same manner if either is being considered.
What patient information should be available?
Women should be provided with both verbal and written information prior to admission for their procedure. 
This should include information about the risks of laparoscopic morcellation of fibroids or uteri in an easy-to-
read format, approved through local governance procedures.
Why is individualisation of care important?
Studies looking at total hysterectomy versus those procedures which injure the tumour such as myomectomy 
(either open or laparoscopic) have shown an increased risk of recurrence with morcellation/ injury.16–18 Therefore, 
en bloc resection with total hysterectomy is recommended if sarcoma is suspected. The closer a woman is to 
menopause, the more surgeons should err towards offering hysterectomy, rather than myomectomy.
All patients should receive individualised care, with the risks and benefits of laparoscopic versus open 
procedures being considered on a case-by-case basis. This will depend on significant past medical and surgical Consent Advice No. 13 5 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologistshistory, in addition to age and venous thromboembolic risks. This is particularly pertinent in modern case law 
and following the Montgomery ruling.19 All options should be clearly documented. Patients should always be 
given appropriate time to consider the options, read the recommended leaflets, reflect on any decisions and 
be encouraged to ask questions.
All women considering this procedure should receive careful explanation of the risks and benefits of laparascopic 
versus open hysterectomy or myomectomy.20,21 These depend on a range of issues, including local practice and 
availability of surgical skills, and, local interpretation of national guidelines.
The use of morcellation should be very carefully considered in women having hysterectomies during the peri 
and postmenopausal years where the risks of uterine sarcoma are higher1–5 as per Section 4 below.
CONSENT FORM
1. Name of proposed procedure or course of treatment
• Morcellation of uterine tissues or fibroids during laparoscopic myomectomy (which can include 
mechanical or electrical [using a morcellator], vaginal [through a posterior colpotomy] or through a port 
using other cutting instruments or devices).
• Morcellation of uterine tissue or fibroids during a laparoscopic hysterectomy (which can include 
mechanical or electrical [using a morcellator], vaginal [through a posterior colpotomy if a subtotal 
hysterectomy is performed or vaginally during a total laparoscopic hysterectomy] or through a port using 
other cutting instruments or devices).
2. Proposed procedure
The procedure is designed to remove fibroids or the uterus through small incisions that can facilitate a 
much quicker recovery, with less serious risks when compared to more traditional open surgery;4,20,21 see 
Section 4 . The physical outcome for the patient should be good. They may require an overnight stay in the 
hospital and may need a couple of weeks off work depending on the complexity of the operation, blood loss 
and any post-operative complications.
3. Intended benefits
The main benefit of the use of morcellation is the completion of the entire procedure laparoscopically 
or vaginally, which is associated with smaller incisions, less pain, reduced risk of infection, reduced risk of 
thromboembolism, shorter hospital stay and a quicker recovery.
4. Serious and frequently occurring risks
4.1 Unintended morcellation of a uterine sarcoma
There is a wide variation in the incidence of undiagnosed leiomyosarcoma in the published literature and age is 
an important factor. Larger and solitary lesions which are growing rapidly,15 those in peri and post-menopausal 
women1–-5 and those not responding to oestrogen withdrawal7 should raise particular suspicion of a sarcoma 
rather than a fibroid. Please refer to the data in the Introduction section of this consent advice. Mathematical 
modelling for age stratification of risk of an unsuspected uterine sarcoma at the time of surgery for a presumed 
benign fibroid has been reported.2
As anatomical relationships are lost in a morcellated specimen, malignant areas may not be sampled and 
unusual or low grade malignancies may be missed.Consent Advice No. 13 6 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists4.2 Worsening the prognosis of an existing sarcoma
Morcellation (by any means of disruption or injury at open, vaginal or laparoscopic surgery) of an unexpected 
uterine sarcoma can potentially disseminate sarcoma into the pelvis and peritoneal cavity. A diagnosis of 
metastatic sarcoma carries a poor prognosis with a median survival of 18 months. Data from national cancer 
registries have reported that sarcoma mortality was higher in the morcellated group than in the non-morcellated 
group (age-adjusted HR 1.90, CI 1.05–3.44; multivariate HR, 2.50, 95% CI 0.57–10.9). Age-adjusted 10-year 
uterine sarcoma survival was 32.2% for women treated with morcellation compared with 57.2% for the non-
morcellated group (difference 25.5%; CI -55.7 to 18.1).16,17,22
4.3 Disseminated fibroids (presence of benign fibroids within the abdominal and pelvic cavity)
The range of risk is considered to be 1 in 120 (uncommon) to 1 in 1200 (rare).18
4.4  Damage to bowel, bladder, ureters and blood vessels
There is a risk of damage to the bladder, bowel, ureters and blood vessels with laparoscopic hysterectomy.23 
These data were published in 2007. Since then, there have been advances in techniques and equipment, and 
the possibility that these rates may now be lower has been highlighted.24
Laparoscopic myomectomy, with and without morcellation also carries a risk of these injuries. However, these 
risks are unknown because the reported literature is based on case reports rather than large trials. The total 
number of cases of morcellation of fibroids is also unknown. Surgeons should declare the rate of such injuries 
from their personal or institutional data where available.
5. Any extra procedures which may become necessary
General additional procedures associated with myomectomy or hysterectomy should be detailed in local 
procedure specific consent forms where available. A laparotomy may be required if there is a major complication, 
or, if the surgeon considers that conversion is necessary for safety or access.
6. The benefits and risks of any available alternative treatments, including no treatment
6.1 Open myomectomy or hysterectomy
An abdominal (open) myomectomy or hysterectomy to remove a uterus or fibroid may be performed as 
an alternative. The benefit is that an unsuspected sarcoma would not be morcellated. However, if this was 
performed in everyone more harm may be caused overall due to the increased risks of open surgery over 
laparoscopy. These are, an increased risk of thromboembolism, wound infections, blood transfusion and 
incisional hernias, with a longer hospital stay and recovery.4,20,21,25
It should be noted that when an open myomectomy or vaginal morcellation are performed, simply cutting into 
the fibroid will cause spillage of cells and if there is an undiagnosed uterine sarcoma, upstaging can still occur.
6.2  Contained retrieval during morcellation
The use of tissue retrieval bags for the contained removal of fibroids or the uterus, once they have been 
detached has been proposed.26 However, there is no current evidence that bags reduce the incidence of 
disseminated fibroids or upstaging of an undiagnosed uterine sarcoma. There is also a theoretical risk that 
the bags obscure the laparoscopic view, with the potential of causing more intra-abdominal injuries.4 The 
decision regarding contained retrieval during morcellation should be based on local practice and individualised 
patient care.Consent Advice No. 13 7 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists6.3 Conservative measures and uterine artery embolisation
Any management option, including uterine artery embolisation, medical management and no treatment that 
results in uterine preservation, or preservation of some element of fibroid tissue, runs the risk of leaving an 
undiagnosed uterine sarcoma in situ;1 see Section 4 above.
7. Patient statement
The woman should be given the opportunity to state in writing any procedures that should not be performed 
without further discussion. If other procedures are anticipated to become necessary during the planned 
procedure these should be discussed preoperatively, and a record of the woman’s wishes made.
8. Preoperative information
A record should be made of any sources of information given to the woman prior to surgery (such as RCOG 
or locally produced information leaflets; https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/ ).
Existing information sheets for procedures need to be reviewed to ensure they reflect the available 
current evidence.
9. Information and support for women and their families
All women should be provided with relevant and up-to-date information sources. Translation services should 
be sourced if a language-specific leaflet is not available to ensure that a woman has a full understanding of the 
procedures planned.
10. This consent advice
Please note that the content herein is based on the latest evidence available at the time and will be reviewed 
again approximately one year from publication.Consent Advice No. 13 8 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsReferences
1. Sizzi O, Manganaro L, Rossetti A, Saldari M, Florio G, Loddo 
A, Zurawin R, van Herendael B, Djokovic D. Assessing the 
risk of laparoscopic morcellation of occult uterine sarcomas 
during hysterectomy and myomectomy: Literature review 
and the ISGE recommendations. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod 
Biol 2018;220:30–38.
2. Brohl AS, Li L, Andikyan V, Običan SG, Cioffi A, Hao K, Dudley 
JT, Ascher-Walsh C, Kasarskis A, Maki RG. Age-stratified 
risk of unexpected uterine sarcoma following surgery for 
presumed benign leiomyoma. Oncologist  2015;20:433–439.
3. Halaska MJ, Haidopoulos D, Guyon F, Morice P, Zapardiel I, 
Kesic V; ESGO Council. European Society of Gynecological 
Oncology Statement on Fibroid and Uterine Morcellation. Int 
J Gynecol Cancer  2017;27:189–192.
4. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 770: Uterine Morcellation 
for Presumed Leiomyomas. Obstet Gynecol  2019;133:e238–
e248.
5. Munro MG, Critchley HOD, Fraser IS; FIGO Menstrual 
Disorders Committee. The two FIGO systems for normal 
and abnormal uterine bleeding symptoms and classification 
of causes of abnormal uterine bleeding in the reproductive 
years: 2018 revisions. Int J Gynaecol Obstet  2018;143:393–408.
6. LUDOVISI M, Moro F, Pasciuto T, Di Noi S, et al. Imaging of 
gynecological disease: clinical and ultrasound characteristics 
of uterine sarcomas. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol  2019. doi: 
10.1002/uog.2027o.
7. On behalf of AAGL. Morcellation during uterine tissue 
extraction: an update. JMIG 2019;25:543–550.
8. Wickerman DL, Fisher B, Wolmark N et al. Association of 
tamoxifen and uterine sarcoma. J Clin Oncol  2002;20:2758–
2760.
9. Toro JR, Travis LB, Wu HJ, Zhu K, Fletcher CD, Devesa 
SS. Incidence patterns of soft tissue sarcomas, regardless of 
primary site, in the surveillance, epidemiology and end results 
program, 1978–2001: An analysis of 26,758 cases. Int J Cancer  
2006;119:2922–2930.
10. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Obtaining 
Valid Consent. Clinical Governance Advice No. 6 . London: RCOG; 
2015.
11. Desai VB, Wright JD, Schwartz PE, Jorgensen EM, Fan L, 
Litkouhi B, Lin H, Gross CP, Xu X. Occult Gynecologic Cancer 
in Women Undergoing Hysterectomy or Myomectomy for 
Benign Indications. Obstet Gynecol  2018;131:642–651.
12. Peters A, Sadecky AM, Winger DG, Guido RS, Lee 
TTM, Mansuria SM, Donnellan NM. Characterization 
and Preoperative Risk Analysis of Leiomyosarcomas at a 
High-Volume Tertiary Care Center. Int J Gynecol Cancer  
2017;27:1183–1190.
13. Sarcoma UK webpage: https://sarcoma.org.uk/ .
14. Mao J, Pfeifer S, Zheng XE, Schlegel P, Sedrakyan A. Population-
based estimates of the prevalence of uterine sarcoma among patients with leiomyomata undergoing surgical treatment. 
JAMA Surg  2015;150:368–70.
15. Multinu F, Casarin J, Tortorella L, Huang Y, Weaver A, Angioni 
S, Melis GB, Mariani A, Stewart EA, Laughlin-Tommaso SK. 
Incidence of sarcoma in patients undergoing hysterectomy 
for benign indications: a population-based study. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol  2019;220:179.e1–10.
16. George S, Barysauskas C, Serrano C, et al. Retrospective cohort 
study evaluating the impact of intraperitoneal morcellation 
on outcomes of localized uterine leiomyosarcoma. Cancer  
2014;120:3154–3158.
17. Park JY, Park SK, Kim DY, et al. The impact of tumor 
morcellation during surgery on the prognosis of patients 
with apparently early uterine leiomyosarcoma. Gynecol Oncol  
2011;122:255–259.
18. Perri T, Korach J, Sadetzki S, et al. Uterine leiomyosarcoma: 
Does the primary surgical procedure matter?. Int J Gynecol 
Cancer  2009;19:257–260.
19. Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board [2015] SC 11 
[2015] 1 AC 1430.
20. Aarts JWM, Nieboer TE, Johnson N, Tavender E, Garry R, 
Mol BJ, Kluivers KB. Surgical approach to hysterectomy for 
benign gynaecological disease.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev  
2015;8:CD003677.
21. Bhave Chittawar P, Franik S, Pouwer AW, Farquhar 
C. Minimally invasive surgical techniques versus open 
myomectomy for uterine fibroids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  
2014;10:CD004638.
22. Bretthauer M, Goderstad JM, Løberg M, Emilsson L, Ye W, 
Adami HO, Kalager M. Uterine morcellation and survival in 
uterine sarcomas. Eur J Cancer  2018;101:62–68.
23. NICE Interventional procedures guidance [IPG239]. 
Laparoscopic techniques for hysterectomy ; 2007. Available from: 
www.nice.org.uk/ipg239 .
24. Garry R. Re-evaluating the eVALuate study and the NICE 
guidelines: a personal review. BJOG 2016;123: 1796.
25. Siedhoff MT, Wheeler SB, Rutstein SE, Geller EJ, Doll KM, 
Wu JM, Clarke-Pearson DL Laparoscopic hysterectomy 
with morcellation vs abdominal hysterectomy for presumed 
fibroid tumors in premenopausal women: a decision analysis. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol  2015;212:591.e1–8.
26. Rousseau M, Morel A, Dechoux S, Bouet PE, Catala L, 
Lefebvre Lacoeuille C, Descamps P, Legendre G. Can the 
risks associated with uterine sarcoma morcellation really be 
prevented? Overview of the role of uterine morcellation in 
2018. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod  2018;47:341–349.
27. Reference 27: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ). Comparative Effectiveness Review . No. 195. p. 70. 
Rockville, MD: AHRQ; 2017 [ https://effectivehealthcare.
ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/cer-195-uterine-fibroids-final-
revision.pdf ]. Consent Advice No. 13 9 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAppendix 1
Definition of perimenopause referred to in this consent advice is as per https://www.imsociety.org/menopause_
terminology.php .
Menopause terminology
The International Menopause Society (IMS) and the World Health Organization (WHO), with the aim of 
standardising the terminology of menopause have put forward the following definition:
Perimenopause:  the period immediately prior to the menopause (when the endocrinological, biological, and 
clinical features of approaching menopause commence) and the first year after menopause
Appendix 2
The full extracted Table 4 from reference 2: Brohl AS, Li L, Andikyan V, Običan SG, Cioffi A, Hao K, Dudley JT, 
Ascher-Walsh C, Kasarskis A, Maki RG. Age-stratified risk of unexpected uterine sarcoma following surgery 
for presumed benign leiomyoma. Oncologist , 2015;20:433–439 [ https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4391766/table/T4/?report=objectonly ].
Appendix 3
Reference 27: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). Comparative Effectiveness Review . No. 195. 
p. 70. Rockville, MD: AHRQ; 2017 [ https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/cer-195-uterine-
fibroids-final-revision.pdf ]. This reference has been used as a resource during preparation of the consent 
advice for morcellation for myomectomy or hysterectomy.Consent Advice No. 13 10 of 10  © Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsAppendix 4: Consent to treatment form
Patient identifier/label   ...................................................................
Name of proposed procedure or course of treatment
Supplementary consent – morcellation for myomectomy or hysterectomy
Statement of health professional  (to be filled in by health professional with appropriate knowledge of proposed 
procedure, as specified in consent policy).
I have explained the procedure to the patient, in particular, I have explained:
The intended benefits
The main benefit of the use of morcellation is the completion of the entire procedure laparoscopically 
or vaginally, which is associated with smaller incisions, less pain, reduced risk of infection, reduced risk of 
thromboembolism, shorter hospital stay and a quicker recovery.
Serious risks (as detailed in Section 4 above)
• Unintended morcellation of a uterine sarcoma.
• Worsening the prognosis of an existing sarcoma.
• Disseminated fibroids (presence of benign fibroids within the abdominal and pelvic cavity).
• Damage to bowel, bladder, ureters and blood vessels.
Any extra procedures which may become necessary
General additional procedures associated with myomectomy or hysterectomy should be detailed in local 
procedure specific consent forms where available. A laparotomy may be required if there is a major 
complication, or, if the surgeon considers that conversion is necessary for safety or access.
I have also discussed what the procedure is likely to involve, the benefits and risks of any available alternative 
treatments (including no treatment) and any particular concerns of this patient.
The following leaflet has been provided: Information for you: Morcellation for Myomectomy or Hysterectomy
This procedure will involve
 General and/or regional anaesthesia    Local anaesthesia    Sedation
Signed  ........................................................    Date  ..................
Name (print)  ..............................................................................
Position  .................................................................................
Contact details  (if patient wishes to discuss options later)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Statement of interpreter (where appropriate)
I have interpreted the information above to the patient to the best of my ability and in a way in which I believe 
they can understand.
Signed  ........................................................    Date  ..................
Name (print)  ..............................................................................
Top copy accepted by patient?  Yes / No (please ring)