RECOVERING WELL  
Information for you after a
La
paroscopyHow to navigate
when viewing this information online
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015
 Contents        Previous viewContents 
From the contents page you can quickly 
and easily access all the topics listed.
T o view a topic, simply tap/click the title 
of the information you want to see.
Within individual pages  
Simply tap/click on contents,  found on 
the bottom right of all pages, to return 
to the contents page. Y ou can then  choose information on another topic.
Next to the contents button is a 
previous view option which will take you back to the previous page you looked at.Occasionally information on a topic will cover more than one page. The more button will show you further information on the topic.
Where other online information is 
available which might be useful to you a web link is given. Provided you have internet access, simply tap/click the link to be taken to this information. These additional resources are highlighted throughout.
Swiping/click left or right will take you 
to the previous or next page within the 
publication. Who is this  
 information for?
 
 About this inf
ormation
 What can I expect after a 
  
 
laparoscopy?
 
 Usual length of sta
y  
 
 in 
hospital
 
 After
-effects of general 
   
  ana
esthesia
 
  Scars
 
 Stitches and dr
essings
 
 V
aginal bleeding
 
 Pain and discomf
ort
 
 Star
ting to eat and drink
 
 W
ashing and showering
 
 F
ormation of blood clots - how 
 
  to r
educe the risk
 
   Star ting HRT  
  
  (hormone r
eplacement therapy)
 
 T
alking with your gynaecologist 
 
  after y
our operation
 
 Tir
edness
 What can help me recover?
 
 A dail
y routine
 
 Eat a health
y balanced diet
 
 Stop 
smoking
 
 A positiv
e outlook
 What can slow down my 
  
 
recovery?
 When should I seek medical 
 
 advice after a laparoscopy?
  Getting back to normal
 
 Ar
ound the house
 
 Ex
ercise
 
 Driving
 
 T
ravel plans
 
 Ha
ving sex
 Returning to workContents
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous view
This information is for you if you are about to  
have, or you are recovering from, a laparoscopy 
(keyhole surgery).You might also find it useful to share this information with your family and friends.Who is this information for?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewYou may be having, or have had, a 
laparoscopy:
• to help your gynaecologist make 
   
 a diagnosis by looking inside your pelvis 
 
 - this is known as a diagnostic  
 
laparoscopy
• as a treatment - this is known as an  
 operative laparoscopy and includes  
 procedures such as:
  sterilisation or a small amount of  
 
 treatment of endometriosis (simple  
  
procedures)
 removal of an ovarian cyst,     
 
 treatment of an ectopic pregnancy, 
  
  removal of one or both ovaries or 
  
  division of scar tissue (intermediate 
  
  
procedures) treatment of severe endometriosis or  
hysterectomy (major procedures)  
- if you are having a hysterectomy,   you may find helpful information in  
Recovering well: information for you  
after a laparoscopic hysterectomy .
This information is for you if you 
are having, or have had, a diagnostic laparoscopy and/or an operative laparoscopy where simple or  
intermediate procedures are performed.
Your operation will depend on your 
personal circumstances and will be discussed with you by your gynaecologist before your operation.About this information
You should read this information 
together with any other information 
you have been given about your choices and the operation itself. This information gives general advice based on women’s experiences and expert opinion. Every woman has different needs and recovers in different ways. Your own recovery will depend on:
•
 how fit and well you are before your 
  
 
operation
•
 the reason you are having a 
    
 
laparoscopy
•
 the exact type of laparoscopy that 
  
 you have
•
 how smoothly the operation 
   
 goes and whether there are any 
   
 
complications.Usual length of stay in hospital
If you are having a diagnostic laparoscopy, 
you should be able to go home on the same day. This operation is usually done as a day case. When you wake from the anaesthetic, your nurse will want to make sure that you are not in pain and that it is safe for you to go home before you are discharged. This usually takes between three and four hours. 
When you go home, make sure that you 
are not alone and that someone can stay with you overnight.
If you have had a simple procedure as 
part of an operative laparoscopy, you may be able to go home on the same day, though you may be asked to stay in hospital overnight.
 After-effects of general anaesthesia
Most modern anaesthetics are short 
lasting. Y ou should not have, or suffer from, any after-effects for more than a day after your operation. During the first 24 hours you may feel more sleepy than usual and your judgement may be impaired. If you drink any alcohol, it will affect you more than normal. Y ou should have an adult with you during this time and you should not drive or make any important decisions.
Scars
Y ou will have between one and four 
small scars on different parts of your abdomen - one scar will usually be in your tummy button. Each scar will be between 0.5
 cm and 1
 cm long. 
 
                           
More >
What can I expect after  
a laparoscopy?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewStitches and dressings
Y our cuts will be closed by stitches or 
glue. Glue and some stitches dissolve by themselves. Other stitches may need to be removed. This is usually done by the practice nurse at your GP surgery about five to seven days after your operation. Y ou will be given information about this.
Y our cuts will initially be covered with a 
dressing. Y ou should be able to take this off about 24 hours after your operation and have a wash or shower (see section on washing and showering).
Vaginal bleeding
Y ou may get a small amount of vaginal 
bleeding for 24 to 48 hours.Pain and discomfort
Y ou can expect some pain and 
discomfort in your lower abdomen for the first few days after your operation. Y ou may also have some pain in your shoulder. This is a common side effect of the operation. When leaving hospital, you will usually be provided with painkillers for the pain you are experiencing. Sometimes painkillers that contain codeine or dihydrocodeine can make you sleepy, slightly sick and constipated. If you do need to take these medications, try to eat extra fruit and fibre to reduce the chances of becoming constipated.Starting to eat and drink
If you have had a short general 
anaesthetic, once you are awake, you will be offered a drink of water or cup of tea and something light to eat before you go home.
     
      
   
                                              
                                                More>What can I expect after a laparoscopy?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewWashing and showering
Y ou should be able to have a shower or 
bath and remove any dressing 24 hours after your operation. When you first take a shower or bath, it is a good idea for someone to be at home with you to help you if you feel faint or dizzy. Don’t worry about getting your scars wet - just ensure that you pat them dry with clean disposable tissues or let them dry in the air. Keeping scars clean and dry helps healing.Formation of blood clots - how to reduce the risk
There is a small risk of blood clots 
forming in the veins in your legs and pelvis (deep vein thrombosis) after any operation. These clots can travel to the lungs (pulmonary embolism), which could be serious. Y ou can reduce the risk of clots by:
•
 being as mobile as y
ou can as early as 
 y
ou can after your operation
•
 doing ex
ercises when you are resting, 
  
 f
or example:
  pump each f oot up and down   
  br
iskly for 30 seconds by moving 
  
  y
our ankle
  mo ve each foot in a circular    
  motion or 30 seconds
  bend and str aighten your legs    
  - one leg at a time
, three times for 
  
  each leg.Y
ou may also be given other measures 
to reduce the risk of a clot developing, 
particularly if you are overweight or have other health issues. These may include:
•
 dail
y heparin injections (a blood-
   
 thinning agent) y
ou may need to 
   
 contin
ue having these injections daily 
 when y
ou go home; your doctor will 
 advise y
ou on the length of time you 
 should ha
ve these for
•
 gr
aduated compression stockings, 
  
 which should be w
orn day and night 
 until y
our movement has improved 
 and y
our mobility is no longer 
 significantl
y reduced
•
 special boots that inflate and 
   
 deflate to w
ear while in hospital.
 
                              
More>
What can I expect after a laparoscopy?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewStarting HRT  
(hormone replacement therapy)
If your ovaries have been removed 
during your operation, you may be offered hormone replacement therapy (HRT). This will be discussed with you by your gynaecologist and together you can decide the best way. 
Talking with your gynaecologist after 
your operation
Y our gynaecologist or another member 
of the surgical team may come and talk with you after your operation. Because you may still be coming round from the effects of the anaesthetic, it may be helpful for someone to be with you during this discussion. That way you can both ask questions and talk over what was said later on.Tiredness
Y ou may feel much more tired than 
usual after your operation as your body is using a lot of energy to heal itself. Y ou may need to take a nap during the day for the first few days. For many women this is the last symptom to improve.
What can I expect after a laparoscopy?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous view       It takes time for your body to heal and for you  
   to get fit and well again after a laparoscopy. There  
are  a number of positive steps you can take at this  
time. The following will help you recover.What can help me recover?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewA daily routine
Establish a daily routine and keep it up. 
For example, try to get up at your usual time, have a wash and get dressed, move about and so on. Sleeping in and staying in bed can make you feel depressed. Try to complete your routine and rest later if you need to.
Eat a healthy and balanced diet
Ensure that your body has all the 
nutrients it needs by eating a healthy balanced diet. A healthy diet is a high-fibre diet (fruit, vegetables, wholegrain bread and cereal) with up to two litres per day of fluid intake, mainly water. Remember to eat at least five portions of fruit and vegetables each day!
Stop smoking
Stopping smoking will benefit your 
health in all sorts of ways, such as lessening the risk of a wound infection or chest problems after your anaesthetic. By not smoking - even if it is just while you are recovering - you will bring immediate benefits to your health. If you are unable to stop smoking before your operation, you may need to bring nicotine replacements for use during your hospital stay. Y ou will not be able to  smoke in hospital. If you would like information about a smoking cessation clinic in your area, speak with the nurse in your GP surgery.
A positive outlook
Y our attitude towards how you are 
recovering is an important factor in determining how your body heals and how you feel in yourself. Y ou may want to use your recovery time as a chance to make some longer term positive lifestyle choices such as:
•
 
 star
ting to exercise regularly if you 
   
 are not doing so already and gr
adually 
  
 b
uilding up the levels of exercise that 
  
 y
ou take
• 
 eating a health
y diet - if you are  
 o
verweight, it is best to eat healthily  
 without tr
ying to lose weight for the  
 fir
st couple of weeks after the  
 oper
ation; after that, you may want to  
 lose w
eight by combining a healthy diet  
 
 with ex
ercise.It can take longer to recover from a 
laparoscopy if:
•
 y
ou had health problems before your  
operation; for example, women with 
diabetes may heal more slowly and be more prone to infection
•
 y
ou smoke - smokers are at 
increased risk of getting a chest or wound infection during their 
  reco very, and smoking can delay the  
healing process
•
 y
ou were overweight at the time of  
your operation - if you are overweight, it can take longer to recover from the effects of the anaesthetic and there is a higher risk of complications such as infection  and thrombosis•
  there w ere any complications   
dur
ing your operation.
Recovering after an operation is a very personal experience. If you are following all the advice that you have been given but do not think that you are at the stage you ought to be, talk 
with your GP .What can slow down my recovery?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewWhile most women 
recover well after a laparoscopy, complications can  occur - as with any operation. 
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewWhen should I seek medical advice 
after a laparoscopy?
Y ou should seek medical advice from 
your GP ,  the hospital where you had your operation, NHS 111 or NHS 24  if 
you experience:
•
 Burning and stinging when y
ou 
   
 pass uri
ne or pass urine frequently: 
  
 This ma
y be due to a urine infection. 
  
 T
reatment is with a course of 
   
 
antibiotics.
•
 Red and painful skin ar
ound your 
  
 
scars: This may be due to a wound 
 inf
ection. Treatment is with a course 
 of antibiotics.
•
 Incr
easing abdominal pain : If you also  
 ha
ve a temperature (fever), have lost 
 y
our appetite and are vomiting, this 
 ma
y be due to damage to your 
 bo
wel or bladder, in which case you 
 will need to be admitted to hospital.•  A painful,  red, swollen, hot leg or 
difficulty bearing weight on your 
legs: This may be due to a deep vein thrombosis (DVT). If you have shortness of breath or chest pain or cough up blood, it could be a sign 
 
that a b
lood clot has travelled to the 
lungs (pulmonary embolism). If you have these symptoms, you should seek medical help immediately.
•
 Ther
e is no improvement in 
  
y
our symptoms : Y ou should expect a 
gradual improvement in your symptoms over time. If this is not the case, you should seek medical advice.Around the house
While it is important to take enough rest, 
you should start some of your normal daily activities as soon as you feel able. Y ou will find you are able to do more as the days pass. If you feel pain, you should try doing a little less for another few days.
Remember to lift correctly by having 
your feet slightly apart, bending your knees, keeping your back straight and bracing (tightening or strengthening) your pelvic floor and stomach muscles as you lift. Hold the object close to you and lift by straightening your knees.
Exercise
The day after your operation you 
should be able to go for a short 10 to 15 minute walk in the morning and the afternoon, having a rest afterwards if you need to. Y ou should be able to increase your activity levels quite rapidly over 
the first week. There is no evidence that normal physical activity levels are 
in any way harmful and a regular and gradual build-up of activity will assist your recovery. Most women should be able to walk slowly and steadily for 30-60 minutes by the middle of the first week, and will be back to their previous activity levels by the second week. Swimming is an ideal exercise and, if you have had no additional procedure, you can start as soon as you feel comfortable. If you have had other procedures with the laparoscopy, you may need to avoid contact sports and power sports for a few more weeks, although this will depend on your levels of fitness before surgery.
Driving
Y ou should not drive for 24 hours after a 
general anaesthetic. Each insurance 
company will have their own conditions 
for when you are insured to start driving again. Check your policy.Before you drive you should be:
•
 free from the sedativ
e effects of any 
 
painkillers
•
 ab
le to sit in the car comfortably and 
  
 w
ork the controls
•
 ab
le to wear the seatbelt comfortably
•
 ab
le to make an emergency stop
•
 ab
le to comfortably look over your 
  
 shoulder to manoeuvre
.
It is a good idea to practise without the 
keys in the ignition. See whether you can do the movements you would need for an emergency stop and a three-point turn without causing yourself any discomfort or pain. When you are ready to start driving again, build up gradually, starting with a short journey.
  
 
  
                                              More>
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewGetting back to normal© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewGetting back to normal
Travel plans
If you are considering travelling during 
your recovery, it is helpful to think about:
•
 the length of y
our journey - journeys 
 o
ver four hours where you are not 
 ab
le to move around (in a car, coach, 
 tr
ain or plane) can increase your risk 
 of deep v
ein thrombosis (DVT); this 
 is especiall
y so if you are travelling  
 soon after y
our operation
•
 ho
w comfortable you will be during 
 your journey, particularly if you 
 are wearing a seatbelt
•
 o
verseas travel:
   W ould you have access to 
 
 appropr
iate medical advice at 
 
 y
our destination if you were to  
 
 ha
ve a problem after your  
  oper
ation?
  Does y our travel insurance cover 
 
  an
y necessary medical treatment in 
 
 the ev
ent of a problem after your 
  oper
ation?
•
 whether y
our plans are in line with 
  
 the lev
els of activity recommended 
  
 in this inf
ormation.
If you have concerns about your travel plans, it is important to discuss these with your GP or the hospital where you have your operation before travelling.
Having sex
It is safe to have sex when you feel ready. 
If your vagina feels dry, especially if you have had both ovaries removed, try using a lubricant. Y ou can buy this from your local pharmacy.
 
         
        Most women feel 
able to return to work one to three weeks after a laparoscopy.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewReturning to work
•If you have had a diagnostic
laparoscopy or a simple procedure
such as a sterilisation,
 you can
expect to feel able to go back
to wor
k within one week. Although
you will not be har
med by doing
light wor
k just after surgery, it would
be unwise to try to do much
within the first 48 hour
s.
 •If you ha
ve a procedure as part of
an operativ
e laparoscopy, such
as removal of an o
varian cyst, you
can expect to return two to three
weeks after y
our operation. If you
feel w
ell, you will not be harmed
by doing light w
ork on reduced
hours after a w
eek or so.When you go back to work will depend 
on the type of job you do. If you do heavy manual work, or are on your feet all day, you may need longer than someone who can sit down at work. Y ou do not need to avoid lifting or standing after this type of operation, but you may feel more tired if you have a physically demanding job.
If you are off work for less than one 
week, you should be able to complete a self-certification form for the time you have been off work. If it is longer than one week, you will need to obtain a certificate from the hospital where you have your operation.
Y ou might also wish to see your GP or 
your occupational health department before you go back and do certain jobs - discuss this with them before your operation. Y ou should not feel pressurised by family, friends or your employer to return to work before you feel ready. Y ou do not need your GP’s permission to go back to work. The decision is yours.Acknowledgements 
This information was developed by 
a multidisciplinary working party on recovery following gynaecological surgery and was peer reviewed by experts in the field and by patients and the public.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewThe production of this PDF has been funded by an  
Ethicon Educational Grant. All content has been independently developed by the RCOG  (Registered charity no. 213280). 