RECOVERING WELL  
Information for you after a
La
paroscopic HysterectomyHow to navigate
when viewing this information online
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015
 Contents        Previous viewContents 
From the contents page you can quickly 
and easily access all the topics listed.
T o view a topic, simply tap/click the title 
of the information you want to see.
Within individual pages  
Simply tap/click on contents,  found on 
the bottom right of all pages, to return 
to the contents page. Y ou can then  choose information on another topic.
Next to the contents button is a 
previous view option which will take you back to the previous page you looked at.Occasionally information on a topic will cover more than one page. The more button will show you further information on the topic.
Where other online information is 
available which might be useful to you a web link is given. Provided you have internet access, simply tap/click the link to be taken to this information. These additional resources are highlighted throughout.
Swiping/click left or right will take you 
to the previous or next page within the 
publication. Who is this  
 inf
ormation for?
 
 About this inf
ormation
 What can I e
xpect after an 
  
 la
paroscopic hysterectomy?
 
 Usual length of sta
y  
 
 in 
hospital
 
  After
-effects of general 
   
  anaesthesia
 
 Catheter
 
 Scars
 
 Stitches and dr
essings
 
 Packs
 
 V
aginal bleeding
 
 Pain and discomf
ort
 
 T
rapped wind
 
 Star
ting to eat and drink
 
 W
ashing and showering
 
 F
ormation of blood clots - how 
 
  to r
educe the risk  Ph ysiotherapy
 
 Star
ting HRT  
 
 (hormone r
eplacement therapy)
 
 Cer
vical screening (smears)
 
 Tir
edness and feeling emotional
 Y
our hospital may offer an 
  
 Enhanced Reco
very Programme 
 
 (ERP).
 What is enhanced 
  
 
recovery?
 What can help me r
ecover?
 
 Rest
	
	 A
	
pelvic
	
floor
	
muscle
	
exercise
	
	
 
 pr
ogramme
 
 A dail
y routine
 
 Eat a health
y balanced diet
 
 K
eep your bowels working
 
 Stop 
smoking
 
 Suppor
t your family and friends
 
 A positiv
e outlook  What can slo w down my   
  
recovery?
 
 When should I seek medical 
 
  advice after a la
paroscopic 
 
  
hysterectomy?
 
 Getting back to normal
 
   Ar
ound the house
	 	 	 Exercise
 
  Driving
 
  T
ravel plans
	 	 	 Having
	
sex
 
 Returning to w
ork
  
Recovery tracker
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Contents
Contents        Previous view© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Who is this information for?
 This information is for you if you are about to have, or you are  
recovering from, a laparoscopic hysterectomy (an operation to remove your 
uterus (womb) by keyhole surgery). You might also find it useful to share this information with your family and friends.
There are several different types of 
hysterectomy, including:
•
 total h
ysterectomy, where both the 
 
uter
us and cervix (neck of the 
  
w
omb) are removed
•
 subtotal h
ysterectomy, where just the 
 
uter
us is removed and the cervix is not
•
 h
ysterectomy with salpingo-
   
oophorectom
y (removal of one or 
 
both or y
our ovaries and your 
  
fallopian tubes) at the same time
.
Some laparoscopic hysterectomies 
are done entirely by keyhole surgery. Others are done partially through your vagina (sometimes called a laparoscopic assisted vaginal hysterectomy or LAVH). If you are having an LAVH, you might find helpful information in Recovering well: information for you after a vaginal hysterectomy.
The type of hysterectomy will depend on 
your personal circumstances and will be discussed with you by your gynaecologist before your operation.
Y ou will need an anaesthetic for a 
laparoscopic hysterectomy. This will be a general anaesthetic or a regional anaesthetic (spinal or epidural).
About this information
Y ou should read this information together 
with any other information you have been given about your choices and the operation itself. This information gives general advice based on women’s experiences and expert opinion. Every woman has different needs and recovers in different ways. Y our own recovery will depend on:
•
 ho
w fit and well you are before your 
 
oper
ation
•
 the reason y
ou are having a 
   
h
ysterectomy
•
 the exact type of h
ysterectomy that 
 
y
ou have
•
 ho
w smoothly the operation goes  
and whether there are any 
complications.
Contents        Previous viewUsual length of stay in hospital
In most instances, you will be admitted 
to hospital on the day of your operation. Y ou may be able to go home within 24 hours or, depending on your circumstances, you may need to stay in hospital for one to three days.
After-effects of general anaesthesia
Most modern anaesthetics are short 
lasting. Y ou should not have, or suffer from, any after-effects for more than a day after your operation. During the first 24 hours you may feel more sleepy than usual and your judgement may be impaired. Y ou are likely to be in hospital during the first 24 hours but, if not, you should have an adult with you during this time and you should not drive or make any important decisions.Catheter
Y ou may have a catheter (tube) in your 
bladder to allow drainage of your urine. This is usually for up to 24 hours after your operation until you are easily able to walk to the toilet to empty your bladder. If you have problems passing urine, you may need to have a catheter for a few days.
Scars
Y ou will have between two and four 
small scars on different parts of your abdomen. Each scar will be between 0.5
 cm and 1
 cm long.
 If you have had 
your cervix removed, you will also have a scar at the top of your vagina.
      
More >
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015What can I expect after  
a laparoscopic hysterectomy?
Contents        Previous view
Stitches and dressings
Cuts on your abdomen will be closed 
by stitches or glue. Glue and some stitches dissolve by themselves. Other stitches may need to be removed. This is usually done by the practice nurse at your GP surgery about five to seven days after your operation. Y ou will be given information about this.
Y our cuts will initially be covered with a 
dressing. Y ou should be able to take this off about 24 hours after your operation and have a wash or shower (see section on washing and showering).
Any stitches in your vagina will not 
need to be removed, as they are dissolvable. Y ou may notice a stitch, or part of a stitch, coming away after a few days or maybe after a few weeks. This is normal and nothing to worry about.Packs
Y ou may have a pack (a length of gauze 
like a large tampon) in your vagina after the operation to reduce the risk of bleeding. A nurse will remove this after your operation while you are still in hospital. Check with your nurse that this has been done before you go home.
Vaginal bleeding
Y ou can expect to have some vaginal 
bleeding for one to two weeks after your operation. This is like a light period and is red or brown in colour. Some women have little or no bleeding initially, and then have a sudden gush of old blood or fluid about 10 days later. This usually stops quickly. Y ou should use sanitary towels rather than tampons as using tampons could increase the risk of infection.
 Pain and discomfort
Y ou can expect pain and discomfort 
in your lower abdomen for at least the first few days after your operation. Y ou may also have some pain in your shoulder. This is a common side effect of laparoscopic surgery. When leaving hospital, you should be provided with painkillers for the pain you are experiencing. Sometimes painkillers that contain codeine or dihydrocodeine can make you sleepy, slightly sick and constipated. If you do need to take these medications, try to eat extra fruit and fibre to reduce the chances of becoming constipated.
Taking painkillers as prescribed to 
reduce your pain will enable you to get out of bed sooner, stand up straight and move around - all of which will speed up your recovery and help to prevent the formation of blood clots in your legs or your lungs.
  Mor
e>
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015What can I expect after a laparoscopic hysterectomy?
Contents        Previous viewTrapped wind
Following your operation your bowel 
may temporarily slow down, causing air or ‘wind’ to be trapped. This can cause some pain or discomfort until it is passed. Getting out of bed and walking around will help. Peppermint water may also ease your discomfort. Once your bowels start to move, the trapped wind will ease.
Starting to eat and drink
After your operation, you may have a 
drip in your arm to provide you with fluids. When you are able to drink again, the drip will be removed. Y ou will be offered a drink of water or cup of tea and something light to eat. If you are not hungry initially, you should drink fluid. Try eating something later on.
 Washing and showering
Y ou should be able to have a shower 
or bath and remove any dressings the day after your operation. Don’t worry about getting your scars wet – just ensure that you pat them dry with clean disposable tissues or let them dry in the air. Keeping scars clean and dry helps healing.
 
   
      
   More>
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewWhat can I expect after a laparoscopic hysterectomy?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 There is a small 
risk of blood clots 
forming in the veins in your legs and pelvis (deep vein thrombosis) after any operation. These clots can travel to the lungs (pulmonary embolism), which could be serious. Formation of blood clots - how to 
reduce the risk
Y ou can reduce the risk of clots by:•
 being as mobile as y
ou can as early 
 
 as 
 y
ou can after your operation
•
 doing ex
ercises when you are 
  
 resting,
 
 f
or example:
  pump each f oot up and down   
  br
iskly for 30 seconds by moving 
 
  
your ankle
  mo ve each foot in a circular   
  motion f
or 30 seconds
  bend and str aighten your    
  legs - one leg at a time
, three 
  
  times f
or each leg.
Y ou may also be given other measures 
to reduce the risk of a clot developing, particularly if you are overweight or have other health issues. These may include:
•
 dail
y heparin injections (a blood-
  
thinning agent) - y
ou may need to 
 
contin
ue having these injections daily 
 
when y
ou go home; your doctor will 
 
advise y
ou on the length of time you 
 
should ha
ve these for
•
 gr
aduated compression stockings,  
which should be worn day and night  
until your movement has improved and your mobility is no longer significantly reduced
•
 special boots that inflate and deflate 
 
to w
ear while in hospital.   
 
       
More>
Contents        Previous viewWhat can I expect after a laparoscopic hysterectomy?Physiotherapy
Y ou will be given advice and 
information about exercises to help you recover and about ways to move easily and rest comfortably. Y ou should be given written information on this. The ward physiotherapist may also visit you after your operation to show you some exercises and have a discussion with you about how to progress with getting out of bed and mobilising. The physiotherapist will also advise you on how to do pelvic floor muscle exercises.Starting HRT  (hormone replacement therapy)
If your ovaries have been removed 
during your operation, you may be offered hormone replacement therapy (HRT). This will be discussed with you by your gynaecologist and together you can decide the best way forward.
Cervical screening (smears)
Some women who have had a 
laparoscopic hysterectomy will need to continue to have smears from the top of the vagina. Check with your GP or gynaecologist whether this applies to you.Tiredness and feeling emotional
Y ou may feel much more tired than 
usual after your operation as your body is using a lot of energy to heal itself. Y ou may need to take a nap during the day for the first few days. A hysterectomy can also be emotionally stressful and many women feel tearful and emotional at first - when you are tired, these feelings can seem worse. For many women this is the last symptom to 
improve.
What can I expect after a laparoscopic hysterectomy?
Contents        Previous view
 © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous view     Enhanced recovery is  
 a programme that aims to 
get you back to full health 
as quickly as possible after a planned operation. If you take an active role in your treatment and are supported by your GP and the hospital enhanced recovery team, stresses caused by an operation are reduced and you will get better 
 
faster.
Being in the best possible shape before 
your operation will help. Stopping smoking, losing weight, cutting the amount of alcohol you drink and increasing the amount of exercise you do every day will make your recovery faster and safer. It is important that medical conditions such as high blood pressure and asthma are controlled before your operation. Y our GP will help you with this.
Before your operation, your health will 
be checked and a care plan for your stay in hospital and discharge home will be made. Y our views will be taken into account. Following this plan means that you are likely to go home sooner, so it is important to prepare for this. The plan aims to keep you at home for as long as possible before your operation. Y ou may be offered special carbohydrate drinks and you should be able to continue drinking water up to 2 hours before your operation to make sure your body stays properly hydrated. 
After your operation:•
 If y
ou have had a catheter, drain or 
 
vaginal packs inser
ted, they will be 
 
remo
ved as soon as possible.
•
 Y
ou will be encouraged to drink 
  
and to eat as soon as possib
le,  
maybe even while you are in the  
recovery room before you return to the ward. Eating early after surgery is  safe and, you are less likely to feel sick. If you have a drip in your arm,  this will be removed once you are eating and drinking. Without a drip, it  will be easier for you to walk about.
 
         
 
       
   More>Y our hospital may offer an   
Enhanced Recovery Programme (ERP).  
What is enhanced recovery
 ?• Y ou will have a personal programme 
to get you mobile as soon as 
possible. As soon as it is safe to do so, you will be helped out of bed so you can sit in a chair. Y ou will then be encouraged to walk short distances. Y ou may be given a diary with daily goals and space for you to write what you have managed to do.  There are good reasons for getting up and about as soon as safely possible. Y ou are less likely to suffer from blood clots in your legs and pelvis (deep vein thrombosis) or in your lungs (pulmonary embolism) and you are less likely to develop a chest infection. Y our bowel will recover faster and you are less likely to suffer from trapped wind.
•
  The team will mak
e sure you get  pain relief to allow you to do your  
activities comf
ortably.
Y our individual needs will be considered 
and you will not be discharged from 
hospital until you are ready. This will be when you are mobile, able to eat and drink, and can control your pain by taking tablets. Before you leave hospital, you will be given instructions about who to contact if you have any worries.
Enhanced recovery programmes help 
patients get better more quickly after major surgery. Patients spend less time in hospital and get back to their normal activities faster than with traditional recovery. By following an enhanced recovery programme, there are fewer complications after surgery and lower rates of re-admission to hospital than with traditional care.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Y our hospital may offer an Enhanced Recovery  
Programme (ERP). What is enhanced recovery?
Contents        Previous view It takes time for your body to heal and for 
you to get fit and well again after a laparoscopic 
hysterectomy
. There are a number of positive 
steps you can take at this time. The following will help you recover.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015What can help me recover?
Rest
Rest as much as you can for the first 
few days after you get home. It is important to relax, but avoid crossing your legs for too long when you are lying down. Rest does not mean doing nothing at all throughout the day, as it is important to start exercising and doing light activities around the house within the first few days.
A
	
pelvic
	
floor
	
muscle
	
exercise
	
pr
ogramme
Y our pelvic floor muscles span the base  of your pelvis. They work to keep your 
pelvic organs in the correct position (prevent prolapse), tightly close your bladder and bowel (stop urinary or anal incontinence) and improve sexual satisfaction.
It is important for you to get these 
muscles working properly after your operation, even if you have stitches. T o identify your pelvic floor muscles, imagine you are trying to stop yourself from passing wind, or you could think of yourself squeezing tightly inside your vagina. When you do this you should feel your muscles ‘lift and squeeze’.
It is important to breathe normally 
while you are doing pelvic floor muscle exercises. Y ou may also feel some gentle tightening in your lower abdominal muscles. This is normal. Women used to be told to practise their pelvic floor muscle exercises by stopping the flow of urine mid-stream. This is no longer recommended, as your bladder function could be affected in the longer term.
Y ou can begin these exercises gently 
once your catheter has been removed and you are able to pass urine on your own. Y ou need to practise short squeezes as well as long squeezes:
•
 shor
t squeezes are when you tighten 
your pelvic floor muscles for one 
second, and then relax
•
 long squeez
es are when you tighten 
your pelvic floor muscles, hold for
 
sev
eral seconds, and then relax.  
 
      
More>
Contents        Previous viewStart with what is comfortable and 
then gradually increase, aiming for 10 long squeezes, up to 10 seconds each, followed by 10 short squeezes.Y ou should do pelvic floor muscle exercises at least three times a day. At first you may find it easier to do them when you are lying down or sitting. As your muscles improve, aim to do your exercises when you are standing up. It is very important to tighten your pelvic floor muscles before you do anything that may put them under pressure, such as lifting, coughing or sneezing.
Make these exercises part of your 
daily routine for the rest of your life. Some women use triggers to remind themselves such as, brushing their teeth, washing up or commercial breaks on television.
Straining to empty your bowels 
(constipation) may also weaken your pelvic floor muscles and should be avoided. If you suffer from constipation or you find the pelvic floor muscle exercises difficult, you may benefit from seeing a specialist women’s health physiotherapist.A daily routine
Establish a daily routine and keep it up. 
For example, try to get up at your usual time, have a wash and get dressed, move about and so on. Sleeping in and staying in bed can make you feel depressed. Try to complete your routine and rest later if you need to.
Eat a healthy balanced diet
Ensure that your body has all the 
nutrients it needs by eating a healthy balanced diet. A healthy diet is a high-fibre diet (fruit, vegetables, wholegrain bread and cereal) with up to two litres per day of fluid intake, mainly water. Remember to eat at least five portions of fruit and vegetables each day! As long as you are exercising enough and don’t eat more than you need to, you don’t need to worry about gaining weight.
 
    
Mor
e>
Contents        Previous viewWhat can help me recover?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Keep your bowels working
Y our bowels may take time to return 
to normal after your operation. Y our motions should be soft and easy to pass. Y ou may initially need to take laxatives to avoid straining and constipation. Y ou may find it more comfortable to hold your abdomen (provide support) the first one or two times your bowels move.
If you do have problems opening your 
bowels, it may help to place a small footstool under your feet when you are sitting on the toilet so that your knees are higher than your hips. If possible, lean forward and rest your arms on top of your legs to avoid straining.
Stop smoking
Stopping smoking will benefit your 
health in all sorts of ways, such as lessening the risk of a wound infection or chest problems after your anaesthetic. By not smoking - even if it is just while you are recovering - you will bring immediate benefits to your health. If you are unable to stop smoking before your operation, you may need to bring nicotinereplacements for use during your hospital stay.  Y ou will not be able to smoke in hospital. If you would like information about a smoking cessation clinic in your area, speak with the nurse in your GP surgery.            
 
       
More>
Contents        Previous view
What can help me recover?© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Support from your family and friends
Y ou may be offered support from your 
family and friends in lots of different ways. It could be practical support with things such as shopping, housework or preparing meals. Most people are only too happy to help - even if it means you having to ask them! Having company when you are recovering gives you a chance to say how you are feeling after your operation and can help to lift your mood. If you live alone, plan in advance to have someone stay with you for the first few days when you are at home. A positive outlook
Y our attitude towards how you are 
recovering is an important factor in determining how your body heals and 
how you feel in yourself. Y ou may want 
to use your recovery time as a chance to make some longer term positive lifestyle choices such as:
•
 star
ting to exercise regularly if you 
 
are not doing so already and
 
gradually building up the levels of 
exercise that you take
•
 eating a health
y diet - if you are 
 
 o
verweight, it is best to eat 
 healthil
y without trying to lose 
 w
eight for the first couple of weeks 
 after the oper
ation; after that, you 
 ma
y want to lose weight by 
 combining a health
y diet with 
 
exercise.Whatever your situation and however you are feeling, try to continue to do the things that are helpful to your long-
term recovery.
       
  
Contents        Previous viewWhat can help me recover?It can take longer to recover from a 
hysterectomy if:
•
 y
ou had health problems before your 
 
oper
ation; for example, women with 
 
diabetes ma
y heal more slowly and 
 
ma
y be more prone to infection
•
 y
ou smoke - smokers are at 
  
increased r
isk of getting a chest 
 or wound infection during their recovery, and smoking can delay the 
healing process
•
 y
ou were overweight at the time of 
your operation - if you are overweight, it can take longer to recover from the effects of the anaesthetic and there is a higher risk of complications such as infection and  thrombosis•
  there w ere any complications during  
your operation.
Recovering after an operation is a very personal experience. If you are following all the advice that you have been given but do not think that you are at the stage you ought to be, talk 
with your GP .What can slow down my recovery?
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous view
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015When should I seek medical advice  
after a laparoscopic hysterectomy?
While most women 
recover well after a laparoscopic hysterectomy, complications can occur - as with any operation. Y ou should seek medical advice from 
your GP , the hospital where you had your operation, NHS 111 or NHS 24  if you experience:
•
Burning and stinging when you pass
urine or pass urine frequentl
y: This
may be due to a ur
ine infection.
Treatment is with a course of
antibiotics.
•Vaginal bleeding that becomes heavy
or smell
y: If you are also feeling
unwell and ha
ve a temperature
(fever), this may be due to aninfection or a small collection ofblood at the top of the vagina calleda vault haematoma. Treatment isusually with a course of antibiotics.Occasionally, you may need tobe admitted to hospital for theantibiotics to be administeredintravenously (into a vein). Rarely, thisblood may need to be drained.
•
Red and painful skin around your
scars: 
This may be due to a wound
infection. Treatment is with a courseof antibiotics.
•
Increasing abdominal pain :
 If you also
have a temperature (fever), have lostyour appetite and are vomiting, thismay be due to damage to yourbowel or bladder, in which case youwill need to be admitted to hospital.
•
A painful, r
ed, swollen, hot leg or
difficulty	bearing	w
eight	on	y
our
legs: This may be due to a deepvein thrombosis (DVT). If you haveshortness of breath or chest painor cough up blood, it could be a sign
that a blood clot has tr
avelled to the
lungs (pulmonary embolism). If youhave these symptoms, you should
seek medical help immediately.
Contents        Previous view© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Around the house
While it is important to take enough 
rest, you should start some of your normal daily activities when you get home and build up slowly. Y ou will find you are able to do more as the days and weeks pass. If you feel pain, you should try doing a little less for another few days.
It is helpful to break jobs up into 
smaller parts, such as ironing a couple of items of clothing at a time, and to take rests regularly. Y ou can also try sitting down while preparing food or sorting laundry. For the first one to two weeks, you should restrict lifting to light loads such as a one litre bottle of water, kettles or small saucepans. Y ou should not lift heavy objects such as full shopping bags or children, or do any strenuous housework such as vacuuming until three to four weeks after your operation as this may affect 
how you heal internally. Try getting down to your children rather than lifting them up to you.
Remember to lift correctly by having 
your feet slightly apart, bending your knees, keeping your back straight and bracing (tightening or strengthening) your pelvic floor and stomach muscles as you lift. Hold the object close to you and lift by straightening your knees.
Exercise
While everyone will recover at a 
different rate, there is no reason why you should not start walking on the day you return home. Y ou should be able to increase your activity levels quite rapidly over the first few weeks. There is no evidence that normal physical activity levels are in any way harmful and a regular and gradual build-up of activity will assist your recovery. If you are unsure, start with short 
steady walks close to your home a couple of times a day for the first few days. When this is comfortable, you can gradually increase the time while walking at a relaxed steady pace. Many women should be able to walk for 30-60 minutes after two or three weeks. Swimming is an ideal exercise that can usually be resumed within two to three weeks provided that vaginal bleeding and discharge has stopped. If you build up gradually, the majority of women should be back to previous activity levels within four to six weeks.
Contact sports and power sports 
should be avoided for at least six weeks, although this will depend on your level of fitness before surgery.
More>
Getting back to normal
Click to see the recovery tracker
Contents        Previous view© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015You should not drive 
for 24 hours after a general anaesthetic. Each insurance company will have its own conditions for when you are insured to start driving again. Check your policy.
Contents        Previous viewGetting back to normal
Driving
Before you drive you should be:
•
 free from the sedativ
e effects of any 
  
painkiller
s
•
 ab
le to sit in the car comfortably and 
  
w
ork the controls
•
 ab
le to wear the seatbelt comfortably
•
 ab
le to make an emergency stop•  ab le to comfortably look over your   
shoulder to manoeuvre
.
In general, it can take two to four 
weeks before you are able to do all of the above. It is a good idea to practise without the keys in the ignition. See whether you can do the movements you would need for an emergency stop and a three-point turn without causing yourself any discomfort or pain. When you are ready to start driving again, build up gradually, starting with a short journey.
Travel plans
If you are considering travelling during 
your recovery, it is helpful to think about:
•
 the length of y
our journey - journeys 
over four hours where you are not 
able to move around (in a car, coach,  train or plane) can increase your risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT); this 
  
is especiall
y so if you are travelling 
soon after your operation•  ho w comfortable you will be during  
your journey, particularly if you are wearing a seatbelt
•
 o
verseas travel:
  Would you have access to 
 
  appropr
iate medical advice at  
 
 y
our destination if you were to have 
 
 a prob
lem after your operation?
  Does y our travel insurance cover any  
  necessar
y medical treatment in the 
 
  ev
ent of a problem after your 
   
  
operation?
•
 whether y
our plans are in line with 
  
 the lev
els of activity recommended 
  
 in this inf
ormation.
If you have concerns about your travel plans, it is important to discuss these with your GP or the hospital where you have your operation before travelling.
   
        
        
More>© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Having	sex
Y
ou should usually allow four to six 
weeks after your operation to allow your 
scars to heal. It is then safe to have sex - as long as you feel comfortable. If you experience any discomfort or dryness (which is more common if your ovaries have been removed at the time of the hysterectomy), you may wish to try a vaginal lubricant. Y ou can buy this from your local pharmacy.Getting back to normal
Contents        Previous view
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Returning to work
Y ou may experience more tiredness 
than normal after any operation, so your return to work should be like your return to physical activity, with a gradual increase in the hours and activities at work. If you have an occupational health department, they will advise on this.
Some women are fit to work after two 
to three weeks and will not be harmed by this if there are no complications from surgery.Many women are able to go back to normal work after four to six weeks if they have been building up their levels of physical activity at home.
Returning to work can help your 
recovery by getting you back into your normal routine again. Some women who are off work for longer periods start to feel isolated and depressed. Y ou do not have to be symptom free before you go back to work. It is normal to have some discomfort as you are adjusting to working life. It might be possible for you to return to work by doing shorter hours or lighter duties and build up gradually over a period of time. Consider starting partway through your normal working week so you have a planned break quite soon.
Y ou might also wish to see your GP or 
your occupational health department before you go back and do certain jobs - discuss this with them before your operation. Y ou should not feel pressurised by family, friends or your employer to return to work before you feel ready. Y ou do not need your GP’s permission to go back to work. The 
decision is yours.
Everyone recovers at a different rate, so when you are ready to return to work will depend on the type of work you do, the number of hours and how you get to and from work.
Contents        Previous view© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015Recovery tracker
Time after
operationHow might I feel? What is safe to do? Fit to work?
1 - 2 
days• You are likely to be in hospital during this time
• You will have some pain and discomfort in abdomen• You may feel sore moving in and out of bed• You may have some bleeding like a light period• Get up and move about• Go to the toilet• Get yourself dressed• Start eating and drinking as usual• You may feel tired and perhaps feel like a sleep in the
  afternoon
7No
3 - 7 
days• You should be at home by now
• Your pains will slowly be reducing in intensity and    you will be able to move about more comfortably• You will still tire easily• Continue as for days 1 - 2• Go for short walks• Continue with exercises that have been    recommended to you• Wash and shower as normal• Have a sleep or rest in the afternoon if you need to
7No
1 - 2 
weeks• There will be less pain as you move about and you  
  will find your energy levels slowly returning• Bleeding should have settled or be very little• Build up your activity slowly and steadily• You are encouraged to go for longer and more   frequent walks• Restrict lifting to light loads
7Not just yet
2 - 4 
weeks• There will be even less pain now as you move 
  more and more 
• You will find your energy levels returning to normal• You should feel stronger every day• Continue to build up the amount of activity you are    doing towards your normal levels• You can start to do low-impact sport• Make a plan for going back to work3 Yes, 
possibly on reduced 
hours or lighter duties at first. Some women will be fit for full-time work after 4 weeks
4 - 6 
weeks• Almost back to normal
• You may still feel tired and need to rest more than usual• All daily activities including lifting• Usual exercise• Driving• Have sex if you feel ready3Yes, 
but if you don’t 
feel ready to go to work, talk to your GP or employer about the reasons for this
Contents        Previous viewAcknowledgements 
This information was developed by 
a multidisciplinary working party on recovery following gynaecological surgery and was peer reviewed by experts in the field and by patients and the public.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2015 Contents        Previous viewThe production of this PDF has been funded by an  
Ethicon Educational Grant. All content has been independently developed by the RCOG  (Registered charity no. 213280). 