1 Information for you
 Published in August 2010 (next review date: 2014)
An ectopic pregnancy
What is an ectopic pregnancy?
An ectopic pregnancy is when a pregnancy starts to grow outside the uterus (wom b). In the UK, one in 90 
(just over 1%) pregnancies is an ectopic pregnancy.
When you become pregnant, the sperm and egg meet in the fallopian tube (the tube that c arries the egg 
from the ovary to the uterus). Usually, the fertilised egg moves into the uter us for the pregnancy to grow 
and develop. If this does not happen, an ectopic pregnancy may start to develop i n a fallopian tube 
(sometimes known as a tubal pregnancy). An ectopic pregnancy can occur in places o ther than a fallopian 
tube, such as in the ovary (rarely) or inside the abdomen (very rarely).
This information is about an ectopic pregnancy in the fallopian tube. A pregn ancy 
cannot survive in this situation and – sadly – cannot lead to the birth of a baby. 
This is because as the pregnancy gets bigger it can:
 run out of space to grow in the fallopian tube
 rupture (burst) the fallopian tube, causing severe pain and internal 
bleeding. This is a potentially life-threatening situation for you.
2What are the symptoms of an ectopic pregnancy?
Most women get physical symptoms in the sixth week of pregnancy – about two week s after a missed 
period. You may or may not be aware you are pregnant if your periods are irregular or if the contr aception 
you are using has failed.
Each woman is affected differently by an ectopic pregnancy. Some women hav e no symptoms, some have 
a few symptoms while others have many symptoms. Because symptoms vary so much, i t is not always 
straightforward to make a diagnosis of an ectopic pregnancy. The symptom s of an ectopic pregnancy 
may include:
Abnormal bleeding
You may have some spotting or bleeding that is different from your normal period. The blee ding may be 
lighter or heavier than normal. The blood may be darker and more watery.
Pain in your lower abdomen
This may develop suddenly for no apparent reason or may come on gradually over se veral days. It may be 
on one side only.
Pain in the tip of your shoulder
This occurs due to blood leaking into the abdomen. This pain is there all the time and may be w orse when 
you are lying down. It is not helped by movement and may not be relieved by painkillers.
Upset tummy
You may have diarrhoea or pain on opening your bowels.
Severe pain/collapse
If the fallopian tube ruptures and causes internal bleeding, you may develop inte nse pain or you may 
collapse. This is an emergency situation. In rare instances, collapse is t he first sign of an ectopic pregnancy.
Should I seek medical advice immediately?
Yes! An ectopic pregnancy can pose a serious risk to your health. If you have had sex with in the last 3 to 
4 months (even if you have used contraception) and are experiencing these sympto ms, get medical help 
immediately. Seek advice even if you do not think you could be pregnant.
You can get medical advice from:
 your general practitioner or midwife
 the A&E department at your local hospital
 an Early Pregnancy Unit (details of the unit nearest to you can be found at www.earlypregnancy.
org.uk/FindUsMap.asp )
 N H S on 111.3Am I at increased risk of an ectopic pregnancy?
Any woman of childbearing age who is having sex could have an ectopic pregnancy. Y ou are at an increased 
risk of an ectopic pregnancy if:
 you have had a previous ectopic pregnancy
 you have a damaged fallopian tube. The main causes of damage are:
{ {previous surgery to your fallopian tubes, including sterilisation
{ {previous infection in your fallopian tubes (see RCOG patient information Acute pelvic 
inflammatory disease: tests and treatment )
 you become pregnant when you have an intrauterine device (IUD/coil) or if you are o n the 
progesterone-only contraceptive pill (mini-pill)
 your pregnancy is an in vitro fertilisation (IVF) or intracytoplasmic sp erm injection (ICSI) 
pregnancy
 you are over 40 years old
 you smoke.
How do I get a diagnosis?
Most ectopic pregnancies are suspected between 6 and 10 weeks of pregnancy. So metimes the diagnosis is 
made quickly, but if you are in the early stages of pregnancy, it can take longer (a wee k or more) to make a 
diagnosis of an ectopic pregnancy.
Your diagnosis will be confirmed by the following:
Consultation and examination
The doctor will ask about your medical history and symptoms. The doctor will exami ne your abdomen 
and may also do a vaginal (internal) examination. You should be offered a female chape rone (someone to 
accompany you) for this. You may also wish to bring someone to support you during your exa mination.
If you have not already had a positive pregnancy test, you will be asked for a urine samp le so this can be 
tested for pregnancy. If the pregnancy test is negative, it is very unlikel y that your symptoms are due to an 
ectopic pregnancy.
Ultrasound scan
Most women are offered a transvaginal scan (where a probe is gently inserte d into your vagina) to look 
at the uterus, ovaries and fallopian tubes. If you are in the early stages of pregnanc y, you may be offered 
another scan after a few days when it may be easier to see the pregnancy.
Blood tests
 A test for the level of the pregnancy hormone human chorionic gonadotrophin (h CG) or a change 
in this level every few days may help to give a diagnosis.
 A test for the level of the hormone progesterone may be taken.
Laparoscopy
If the diagnosis is still unclear, an operation called a laparoscopy may be nece ssary. This operation takes 
place under a general anaesthetic. The doctor uses a small telescope to look at your pe lvis by making a tiny 
cut usually into the umbilicus (tummy button). This is also called keyhole surgery .
If an ectopic pregnancy is detected, treatment may take place during the sa me operation.4What are the options for treatment?
Because an ectopic pregnancy cannot lead to the birth of a baby, all options end the pr egnancy in order to 
reduce the risks to your own health. Your options depend on:
 how many weeks pregnant you are
 your symptoms
 if there has been a lot of bleeding inside your abdomen
 the level of hCG
 your scan result
 your general health
 your personal views and preferences – this should involve a discussion about your future 
pregnancy plans
 the options available at your local hospital.
The options for treatment are listed below – not all will be suitable for you.
Expectant management (wait and see)
Ectopic pregnancies sometimes end on their own – similar to a miscarriage. Depend ing on your situation, it 
may be possible to monitor the hCG levels with blood tests every few days until these ar e back to normal 
(see Follow-up appointments: what happens next? ). Although you do not have to stay in hospital, 
you should go back to hospital if you get any symptoms. You should be given a direct contact numbe r for 
the emergency or gynaecology ward at your hospital.
Expectant management is not an option for all women. It is usually only possible wh en the pregnancy is still 
in the early stages and when you have a few or no symptoms. Up to 29 in 100 (29%) women undergo ing 
expectant management may require additional medical or surgical mana gement.
Medical treatment
In certain circumstances, an ectopic pregnancy may be treated by medica tion (drugs). The fallopian tube 
is not removed. A drug (methotrexate) prevents the pregnancy from develop ing and so the ectopic 
pregnancy gradually disappears. The drug is given as an injection. If your p regnancy is beyond the very 
early stages or the hCG level is high, methotrexate is less likely to succeed. Man y women experience some 
pain in the first few days, but this usually settles with paracetamol or similar p ain relief. Although long-term 
treatment with methotrexate for other illnesses can cause significant si de effects, this is rarely the case with 
one or two injections to treat ectopic pregnancy.
You may need to stay in hospital overnight and then return to the clinic or ward a few days later. It may 
be sooner if you have any symptoms. It is very important that you attend your follow-up appointments 
(see Follow-up appointments: what happens next? ).
 Fifteen in 100 (15%) women need to have a second injection of methotrexate.
 Seven in 100 (7%) women will need surgery, even after medical treatment.
Surgery
The aim of surgery is to remove the ectopic pregnancy. The type of operation you ha ve will depend on 
your wishes or plans for a future pregnancy and what your surgeon finds during the ope ration (laparoscopy).
To have the best chance of a future pregnancy inside your uterus, and to reduce the ris k of having another 
ectopic pregnancy, you will usually be advised to have your fallopian tube remo ved (salpingectomy).5If you only have one tube or your other tube does not look healthy, this already affects you r chances of 
getting pregnant. In this circumstance, you may be advised to have a differen t operation (salpingotomy). 
This operation aims to remove the pregnancy without removing the tube. It carrie s a higher risk of a future 
ectopic pregnancy but means you retain the possibility of a pregnancy in the ut erus in the future. Some 
women may need to have a further operation to remove the tube later if the pregnanc y has not been 
completely removed.
An operation to remove the ectopic pregnancy will involve a general anaes thetic. The surgery will be either:
 Laparoscopy – the stay in hospital is about 1 to 2 days and the recovery is about 2 to 4 weeks 
(see RCOG patient information Recovering Well: information for you after a laparoscopy ).
 Open surgery – known as a laparotomy – is performed through a larger cut in your lower 
abdomen. It is usually done if severe internal bleeding is suspected. You will nee d to stay in 
hospital for 2 to 4 days. It usually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to recover.
There are risks associated with any operation. This may be due to the use of an anaest hetic or the 
operation itself. Your surgeon and anaesthetist will discuss these with you.
What do I need to know to make an informed decision?
When an ectopic pregnancy is confirmed, and if the fallopian tube has not ruptured , your doctor should 
discuss your options with you.
Make sure you:
 fully understand all your options
 ask for more information if there is something you do not understand
 raise your concerns
 understand what each option means for your fertility (see What about future pregnancies? )
 have enough time to make your decision.
In an emergency situation
If the fallopian tube has ruptured, emergency surgery is needed to stop the bleeding. This is achieved by 
removing the ruptured fallopian tube and pregnancy. This operation is often life-saving. Your doctors will 
need to act quickly and this may mean that they have to make a decision on your behalf to operate. In this 
situation you may need a blood transfusion (see RCOG patient information Blood transfusion, pregnancy 
and birth ).
Follow-up appointments: what happens next?
It is important that you attend your follow-up appointments. The check-ups and test s you have will depend 
on the treatment you received.
Expectant management
Your doctor will need to check your blood levels of hCG every few days until normal levels ar e reached. 
This is to ensure that the pregnancy has completely ended. You may need further ult rasound scans.
Medical management
You will need to return twice in the first week and then once a week to check your blood levels of 
hCG. It may take a few weeks to ensure the pregnancy has completely ended and you may nee d further 
ultrasound scans. During this time, you should not have sex. You should avoid getting pregnan t by using 
reliable contraception for at least 3 months.6Surgical management
You may be offered a follow-up appointment with your gynaecologist, partic ularly if you have had an 
emergency operation. If you have not had your fallopian tube removed, you will nee d to have your hCG 
level checked until this is back to normal.
What about future pregnancies?
For most women an ectopic pregnancy occurs as a ‘one off’ event and does not occur agai n. The chance of 
having a successful pregnancy in the future is good.
Even if you have only one fallopian tube, your chance of conceiving is only slightl y reduced. The overall 
chance of having an ectopic pregnancy next time is between 7 and 10 in 100 (7–10%). H owever, this 
depends on the type of surgery you had and any underlying damage to the remaining tube (s).
In a future pregnancy, you may be offered an ultrasound scan at 6 to 8 weeks to confirm that th e 
pregnancy is developing in the womb.
If you do not want to become pregnant, seek further advice from your doctor or family p lanning clinic as 
some forms of contraception may be more suitable after an ectopic pregnancy.
How will I feel afterwards?
The impact of an ectopic pregnancy can be very significant. It can mean coming to t erms with the loss of a 
baby, with the potential impact on future fertility or with the fact you could have los t your life. Each woman 
copes in her own way – an ectopic pregnancy is a very personal experience. This exp erience may affect 
your partner and others in your family as well as close friends.
It is important to remember that the pregnancy could not have continued without causi ng a serious risk to 
your health.
Before trying for another baby, it is important to wait until you feel ready emotio nally and physically.
However traumatic your experience of an ectopic pregnancy has been, it may he lp to know that the 
possibility of a normal pregnancy next time is much greater than the possibilit y of having another ectopic 
pregnancy. If you have any questions, make sure you speak with your midwife, gene ral practitioner 
or gynaecologist.7 7Sources and acknowledgements
This information is based on the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaeco logists (RCOG) guideline The 
Management of Tubal Pregnancy  (published by the RCOG in 2010). This information will also be reviewed, 
and updated if necessary, once the guideline has been reviewed. The guideline co ntains a full list of the 
sources of evidence we have used. You can find it online at: www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health/clinical-
guidance/management-tubal-pregnancy-21-may-2004 .
The RCOG produces guidelines as an educational aid to good clinical practic e. They present recognised 
methods and techniques of clinical practice, based on published evidenc e, for consideration by obstetricians and 
gynaecologists and other relevant health professionals. This means t hat RCOG guidelines are unlike protocols 
or guidelines issued by employers, as they are not intended to be prescriptiv e directions defining a single course 
of management.
This information has been reviewed before publication by women attend ing clinics in Kilmarnock, London 
and Wrexham.
A glossary of all medical terms is available on the RCOG website at http://www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health/
patient-information/medical-terms-explained .
A final note
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists produces patie nt information for the public. The 
ultimate judgement regarding a particular clinical procedure or trea tment plan must be made by the doctor or 
other attendant in the light of the clinical data presented and the diagnosti c and treatment options available. 
Departure from the local prescriptive protocols or guidelines should be fu lly documented in the patient’s case 
notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
All RCOG guidelines are subject to review and both minor and major amendments o n an ongoing basis. Please 
always visit www.rcog.org.uk  for the most up-to-date version of this guideline.
© Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2010