The UH Sussex Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy (ICP) Guideline provides evidence-based guidance for staff in the maternity unit on the diagnosis and management of ICP. This document supports the RCOG 2022 Green top guideline No 43. The guideline is for use by Obstetric Medical staff and Midwives. It was approved by the JOGG on 18th October 2023 and the Medicines Governance Committee on 11th July 2023. Its expiry date is May 2026 and the review date is November 2025.

The guideline covers the aim, scope, responsibilities, abbreviations used, introduction, diagnosis, history and examination, investigations, discussion of maternal and perinatal risks, management of ICP (including antenatal care, drug treatment, timing of birth/induction of labour, intrapartum care, postnatal care, and subsequent pregnancies), audit, and useful links. 

The guideline states that the interpretation and application of clinical guidelines remain the responsibility of the individual clinician. If in doubt, clinicians should contact a senior colleague or expert. 

ICP affects 0.7% of pregnancies in multi-ethnic populations and 1.2% –1.5% of women/people of Indian-Asian or Pakistani-Asian origin. ICP is characterized by pruritus (itching) in the absence of a rash, and deranged liver function tests (LFTs) and/or raised bile acids (BA), which resolve spontaneously after birth and which have no alternative cause. The diagnosis of ICP should be considered in pregnant women and people who have itching in skin of normal appearance and raised peak random total bile acid concentration of 19 micromol/L or more. The diagnosis is more likely if it is confirmed that itching and raised bile acids resolve after birth.

Liver function tests and bile acid measurement should be conducted in individuals with persistent itch and no apparent cause. If itching resolves with normalisation of bile acids and liver function tests during pregnancy, the diagnosis of Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy (ICP) is unlikely. 

If ICP is suspected, a structured history and examination should be carried out to exclude other causes of itching and liver dysfunction. A skin rash may indicate Polymorphic Eruption of Pregnancy (PEP) or Pemphigoid Gestationis, requiring referral or treatment. 

Raised peak random total bile acid concentration of 19 micromol/L or more is indicative of ICP. Additional investigations for other causes of liver disease should be considered in individuals with an atypical or uncertain picture of ICP. 

The diagnosis of ICP should be confirmed in the postnatal period at least 4 weeks after birth, with resolution of itching and liver function tests returning to normal. 

Individuals with ICP may have a higher chance of developing pre-eclampsia or gestational diabetes and should be monitored accordingly. The risk of stillbirth in ICP increases with serum bile acid concentration of 100 micromol/L or more. 

Individuals with ICP should receive antenatal care under consultant led care and should be managed within the Day Assessment Unit. Regular checks should be made for other conditions that may alter liver function tests. 

There are no treatments that improve pregnancy outcome or reduce bile acid concentration for ICP. Topical emollient and antihistamine agents may be considered for relief of pruritus. Ursodeoxycholic acid should not be prescribed routinely. If the prothrombin time is elevated, consider water soluble vitamin K. 

Timing of birth should be planned by a Consultant obstetrician, taking into account co-morbidities and peak bile acid concentration.

The risk of stillbirth is higher than the background risk in late preterm gestation. The presence of co-morbidities such as gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, and multifetal pregnancy increase the risk of stillbirth and may influence the timing of planned birth. Intrapartum care does not impact the choice around mode of birth. Continuous electronic fetal monitoring (CEFM) should be offered to pregnant individuals with peak bile acids 100 micromol/L or more. The presence of risk factors may increase the risk of adverse perinatal outcomes and influence decision-making around labor monitoring. Standard analgesia and anaesthesia options should be offered for birth and there is no increased risk of postpartum haemorrhage in uncomplicated ICP. 

Postnatal care includes informing individuals that the itch usually stops after birth and liver function tests (LFTs) and bile acids (BAs) should return to normal within a few weeks. LFTs and BAs should be checked at 4 weeks post birth. Ongoing abnormalities indicate no ICP and should be investigated for other causes of abnormal liver function. In subsequent pregnancies, individuals should be advised about the risk of recurrence and perform a baseline liver function test and bile acid concentration with booking blood investigations. 

Audit questions include the proportion of pregnant individuals with raised bile acid concentrations offered timing of birth in line with RCOG Green-top Guideline, having additional investigations routinely performed, offered ursodeoxycholic acid in line with RCOG Green-top Guideline, and with severe ICP offered continuous electronic fetal monitoring during labour.