Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy Guideline

1.0 Aim
To provide evidence-based guidance for staff in the diagnosis and management of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP).

2.0 Scope
Obstetricians and Midwives

3.0 Responsibilities
Midwives and Obstetricians are responsible for accessing, understanding, and following this guidance. Management is responsible for ensuring the guideline is reviewed as required.

4.0 Abbreviations used in the guideline
ICP - Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy, OC - Obstetric Cholestasis, LFTs - Liver Function Tests, IOL - Induction of Labour, AST - Aspartate aminotransferase, ALT - Alanine Aminotransferase, PEP - Polymorphic Eruption of Pregnancy, LKM - Liver-Kidney Microsomal, DAU - Day Assessment Unit, URSO - Ursodeoxycholic acid, COCP - Combined Oral Contraceptive Pill, INR - International Normalisation Ratio, BA - Bile Acids

5.0 Introduction
ICP affects a percentage of pregnancies and the aetiology is still unknown. Characteristics include pruritus and deranged liver function tests.

6.0 Diagnosis
Consider ICP in pregnant individuals with itching and raised bile acid concentrations. Confirm diagnosis postnatally.

7.0 History and examination
Conduct a structured history and examination to exclude other causes of itching and liver dysfunction.

8.0 Investigations
Bile acid measurement is indicative of ICP. Consider additional investigations for atypical cases.

9.0 Discussion of maternal and perinatal risks
Discuss risks of stillbirth and other complications with pregnant individuals with ICP.

10.0 Management of ICP
Includes antenatal care, drug treatment, and timing of birth/Induction of Labour (IOL). Topical treatments and antihistamines may provide relief from itching. Ursodeoxycholic acid may be considered in severe cases. Plan timing of birth based on peak bile acid concentration and other risk factors.

Advise pregnant women and people that giving birth at a late preterm gestation will require their hospital stay to be lengthened to 3 days minimum to monitor their baby. The presence of co-morbidities such as gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, and multifetal pregnancy may increase the risk of stillbirth and influence decision-making around timing of planned birth. Intrapartum care should include continuous electronic fetal monitoring for pregnant women with peak bile acids 100 micromol/L or more. Meconium-stained liquor is more common in moderate and severe cases of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, influencing decision-making around monitoring during birth. Postnatal care includes monitoring liver function tests and bile acids post-birth and advising on contraception choices. Subsequent pregnancies should be monitored for recurrence of symptoms. Audit recommendations include offering timely birth, additional investigations, ursodeoxycholic acid, and continuous fetal monitoring for severe cases. Useful links for healthcare professionals and patients are provided for further information.