Management of Bartholin’s cyst/abscess

Bartholin’s cyst is the accumulation of sterile mucous within the Bartholin’s gland following blockage of the gland duct. Bartholin’s abscess is infection of the sterile mucous that leads to an acute inflammatory reaction and abscess formation within the gland. Presentation may include a soft, fluctuant painless mass for cysts, and acute onset of pain, inflammation, and swelling for abscesses. Management of a Bartholin’s cyst is not essential unless there is a risk of it becoming an abscess. Surgical intervention will be required for women with a Bartholin’s abscess. Outpatient management with the Word catheter may be appropriate for women aged less than 40, while marsupialisation under general anaesthetic is recommended for women over 40 due to the increased risk of adenocarcinoma. Discharge planning and follow-up care should include removing the catheter at a follow-up appointment and discussing any concerns with the on-call registrar or consultant. Marsupialisation of Bartholin’s cyst should be done by a trained clinician, and routine antibiotics are not indicated unless there is cellulitis or suspected co-existing PID/STI. Excision of the gland should only be attempted by a consultant. Vulval abscesses should be managed conservatively with analgesia and warm compress for small abscesses, while larger abscesses should be managed with incision and drainage. Monitoring compliance with the protocol is essential.

Surgery Unit ext 7242  
Do you give permission for a nurse led discharge post op?  Yes No GYNAECOLOGY 
CEPOD PATHWAY  
Management of Bartholin’s cyst/abscess  
Word Catheter vs Marsupialisation:  
- Word Catheter: Can be performed as an outpatient, no waiting time, does not require patient to starve, potentially less time off work, possible pain during procedure, reduced pain score following procedure, catheter may fall out, 97% success rate at 6 months  
- Marsupialisation: Requires general anaesthetic, often performed on CEPOD, patient must be starved, will require time off work following general anaesthetic, no pain during procedure as under GA, higher pain score following procedure, no catheter, long term data available, 5-15% of Bartholin's abscesses reoccur after marsupialisation