Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) is a clinical syndrome associated with ascending infection from the endocervix, causing various complications. The incidence of PID is likely underestimated and is associated with risk factors such as sexually transmitted infections. Diagnosis can be challenging due to nonspecific symptoms and signs, but testing for gonorrhoea and chlamydia is recommended. Treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics is crucial to prevent long-term sequelae. Inpatient management may be necessary for severe cases. Patients should be advised on rest, abstaining from sexual contact, and the importance of compliance to treatment. Antibiotic regimens vary based on patient characteristics and allergies. Switching from IV to oral antibiotics is recommended if certain criteria are met. Follow-up and patient education on potential sequelae are essential.

TIS, formerly the National 
Teratology Information Service [NTIS]), reviewed safety data of NSAIDs from 
Brighton & Sussex University Hospitals NHS Maternity Protocol: GP003 Pelvic Inflammatory Disease. They concluded that 'the available data do not indicate that exposure to ibuprofen before 30 weeks of pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of congenital defects or spontaneous abortions' [NTIS, 2004]. Antibiotics: The RCOG recommends that the risk of giving any of their recommended antibiotic regimens in very early pregnancy (before a positive pregnancy test) is low, since significant drug toxicity results in failed implantation [RCOG, 2009], and BASHH states that the risk of giving any of the recommended antibiotic regimens in very early pregnancy (prior to a pregnancy test becoming positive) is justified by the need to provide effective therapy and the low risk to the fetus [BASHH, 2011a]. CEFTRIAXONE has not specifically been studied during pregnancy. However, the risk associated with use of cephalosporins during pregnancy is thought to be low and, although data are limited for individual agents such as ceftriaxone, the cephalosporins as a class are considered to be an appropriate choice during pregnancy [NTIS, 2008b]. DOXYCYCLINE is contraindicated beyond the 15th week of gestation because, from the 16th week of pregnancy it causes tooth and bone discoloration and inhibits bone growth. However, it can be used in the first trimester. Inadvertent first-trimester use of tetracyclines occurs frequently and has not been associated with an increased risk of congenital malformations [Schaefer et al, 2007]. METRONIDAZOLE has been in clinical use for a long time, and experience suggests that it is not teratogenic in humans [Schaefer et al, 2007]. OFLOXACIN has only limited pregnancy-exposure data. Quinolones have caused arthropathy in animal studies. However, a recent study did not find that quinolone use in the first trimester of pregnancy was associated with an increased risk of malformations or other adverse effects on pregnancy outcome [Schaefer et al, 2007]. There are fewer published data on the use of AZITHROMYCIN rather than ERYTHROMYCIN during pregnancy and breastfeeding. The limited published data and follow-up data collected by the UK Teratology Information Service (UKTIS, formerly the National Teratology Information Service [NTIS]), do not demonstrate an increased risk of congenital malformations following exposure to azithromycin in human pregnancy [NTIS, 2008a]. Removal of IUCD should be considered and may be associated with better short term clinical outcomes. The decision to remove the IUCD should be balanced against the risk of pregnancy in those who have had otherwise unprotected intercourse in the preceding seven days. Hormonal emergency contraception may be appropriate for some women in this situation (BASHH). NICE guidance on IUCD and PID: Evidence on whether or not to remove intrauterine contraception in a woman who has pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is limited and conflicting. There are no long term data on the effects on fertility. Expert opinion differs regarding the management of women with PID who have intrauterine contraception. The Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare (FSRH) does not routinely recommend the removal of intrauterine contraception. The Faculty's Clinical Effectiveness Unit supports the continued use of intrauterine contraception and appropriate antibiotic treatment if PID is suspected; there is no need to remove the device unless symptoms fail to resolve within 72 hours, or the woman wants it removed [FFPRHC, 2006; FSRH, 2007]. The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists [RCOG, 2009] advises that consideration should be given to removing the device, especially if symptoms have not resolved within 72 hours. The British Association for Sexual Health and HIV recommends considering removing the device if the woman develops PID. They advise balancing the decision to remove the device against the risk of pregnancy if the woman has had sexual intercourse in the preceding 7 days [BASHH, 2011a]. The World Health Organization - selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use state that: There is no need for removal of the intrauterine contraception if the woman wishes to continue its use. If the woman wishes removal, it should be removed after antibiotic treatment has been started. If the infection does not improve, generally the course would be to remove the device and continue antibiotic treatment. If the device is not removed, the antibiotic should also be continued. In both cases, the woman should be monitored closely. All patients with a suspected diagnosis of PID should be referred