Management of Bartholin’s cyst/abscess

Bartholin’s cyst is the accumulation of sterile mucous within the Bartholin’s gland following blockage of the gland duct. Bartholin’s abscess is infection of the sterile mucous that leads to an acute inflammatory reaction and abscess formation within the gland.

Bartholin’s cyst presents as a soft, fluctuant painless mass, while Bartholin’s abscess presents with acute onset of pain, inflammation, and swelling of the gland. Examination findings may include a warm, tender, soft, or fluctuant mass in the lower medial labia majora or lower vestibular area.

Management of a Bartholin’s cyst is not essential unless there is a risk of it becoming an abscess. Surgical intervention will be required for women with a Bartholin’s abscess. Outpatient management with the WORD catheter may be appropriate for women under 40, while women over 40 should have marsupialization and biopsy of the gland under G.A due to the increased risk of adenocarcinoma. 

Surgical intervention will be required for women with a Bartholin’s abscess. Outpatient management with the WORD catheter using local anesthetic or marsupialization under general anesthesia should only be offered to women under 40. For women showing signs of cellulitis, admission for IV antibiotics should be considered.

The Word Bartholin’s Gland Catheter is made of medical-grade silicone and provides an accessory duct to permanently drain an obstructed gland. The method for insertion involves infiltrating the skin over the cyst or abscess with local anesthetic, making a stab incision, inserting the sterile catheter, and leaving it in place for 4-6 weeks.

Discharge planning includes formulating a discharge letter, providing a patient information leaflet, and scheduling a follow-up appointment. Marsupialization of Bartholin’s cyst should be done by a trained clinician and may require drainage and biopsy of the gland for post-menopausal women. Wound packs/wicks should not be used, and routine antibiotics are not indicated unless in the presence of cellulitis or suspected co-existing PID/STI. Recurrent Bartholin’s abscess may require screening for diabetes mellitus and operation by a senior clinician. Excision of the gland should only be attempted by a consultant.

Surgery Unit ext 7242  
Do you give permission for a nurse led discharge post op?  Yes No GYNAECOLOGY 
CEPOD PATHWAY  
Management of Bartholin’s cyst/abscess: Word Catheter vs Marsupialisation  
Word Catheter: Can be performed as an outpatient, no waiting time, does not require patient to starve, potentially less time off work, possible pain during procedure, catheter may fall out, 97% success rate at 6 months.  
Marsupialisation: Requires general anaesthetic, often performed on CEPOD, patient must be starved, will require time off work following general anaesthetic, no pain during procedure as under GA, higher pain score following procedure, no catheter, long term data available, 5-15% of Bartholin's abscesses reoccur after marsupialisation.