 
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 1 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Guideline Development  in Maternity  
Summary statement: How does the 
document support patient care?  The purpose of this document is to provide guidance for the 
development and quality monitoring of clinical guidelines 
within maternity  services to ensure care is provided 
according to national best practice standards.  
Staff/stakeholders involved in 
development:  
 Clinical Governance Lead  
Clinical Effectiveness Team  
Division:  Women and Children’s  
Department:  Maternity  
Responsible Person:  Chief of Service  
Author:  Clinical Effectiveness Team  
For use by:  All staff involved in the develop ment and quality monitoring of 
clinical guidelines in Maternity.  
Purpose:  To provide clear guidance on the standards for development 
& monitoring of clinical guidelines for Maternity.  
This document supports:  
 UH Sussex Clinical Guidelines  
CQC Fundamental  Standards  
Key related documents:  uhstw001 -policy -for-the-development -and-management -of-
trust-policies.pdf  
Approved b y:  Joint Obstetric guideline Group  
Approval date:  20th December 2023       Date uploaded:  20th December 2023  
Ratified by Board of Directors/ 
Committee of the Board of Directors  Not Applicable – Divisional Ratification only required  
Ratification Date:  Not Applicable – Divisional Ratification only required  
Expiry Date:  December 2026  
Review date:  July 2026  
If you require this document in another format such as Braille, large print, 
audio or another language please contact the Trusts Communications Team  
Reference Number:  UHS -CG-0021 -2023   
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 2 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
Version  Date  Author  Status  Comment  
1.0 Dec JOGG  CE Team  LIVE  New Trust wide guideline 
replacing:  
 MP081 Guideline for 
producing protocols (Legacy 
East)  
 CG15026 Maternity Clinical 
Guideline Development  
Legacy West)  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 3 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
1.0 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  4 
1.1 Abbreviations used within this guideline  ................................ ................................ ..........  4 
2.0 Roles and responsibilities  ................................ ................................ ................................  4 
3.0 Process for development, review and update of clinical guideli nes and  patient 
information documents  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 5 
3.1 Stage 1a - For update or three yearly review  ................................ ................................ ... 5 
3.2 Stage 1b - For development of new guidance  ................................ ................................ . 6 
3.3  Stage 1c – Escalation of review  ................................ ................................ .......................  6 
3.4 Stage 2 – Consultation and agreement  ................................ ................................ ...........  6 
3.5  Stage 3 - Additional Approval Process  ................................ ................................ ............  6 
3.6 Stage 3 – Divisional/Board ratification – polices only  ................................ .......................  7 
3.7 Stage 4 – Dissemination  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 7 
4.0  Process for quality monitoring of clinical guidelines and reporting  ................................ ... 7 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 8 
Appendix 1: Maternity guideline review & approval responsibilities  ................................ .............  9 
Appendix 2: Due Regard Assessment Tool  ................................ ................................ ...............  10 
Appendix 3: Template dissemination, implementation  and access plan  ................................ .... 11 
 
   
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 4 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
Maternity Clinical Guideline  Development  
 
 
1.0 Introduction   
 
This document provides guidance on the development, review and update of clinical guidelines . 
Policies, SOPs  and patient information documents in University Hospitals Sussex . 
 
This document applies to all staff involved in the development, review and monitoring of clinical 
guidelines and patient information within UH Sussex  West Maternity  department and should be 
read in conjunction with the current UH Sussex  uhstw001 -policy -for-the-development -and-
management -of-trust-policies.pdf  
 
1.1 Abbreviations used within this guideline  
 
UH Sussex - University Hospitals Sussex  JOGG - Joint Obstetric Gynaecological 
Guideline Group  
NICE - National Institute of clinical 
Excellence  RCOG - Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists  
SOP - Standard Operating Procedure  TMC - Trust Management Committee  
ICB - Integrated Care Board   
 
 
2.0 Roles and responsibilities  
 
The key roles with responsibility for Clinical Guideline and Patient Information Development and 
Quality Monitoring within Maternity  are as follows:  
 
Chief of Service - The Chief of Service has overall responsibility for fostering a climate in which 
quality and safety is recognised as an integral part of Maternity  and for ensuring that the Clinical 
Guideline Development is completed as per the agreed departmental plan, wi th actions and 
recommendations acted upon and for communicating these to the Trust Board and Executive 
Committee.  
 
Maternity Clinical Governance Lead, Head of Midwifery and Obstetric Clinical Director  - 
These roles have an overarching responsibility for monitoring the progress of Maternity  Clinical 
Guideline Development,   for supporting the implementation of agreed action plans resulting from 
findings and for reporting progress on a regular basis to the C hief of Service.  
 
Joint Obstetric Gynaecological Guideline Group (JOGG)  - has responsibility for ensuring 
that clinical guidelines and patient information reflect local and national best practice 
recommendations (including recommendations from local and na tional patient safety, complaints 
and claims) are developed, regularly reviewed and updated as required as per uhstw001 -policy -
for-the-development -and-management -of-trust-policies.pdf . JOGG is also responsible for the 
overall management of the guideline, policy and SOP development and for the guideline status 
monthly to the Safety and Quality meeting.  
  
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 5 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
 
Trust Management Committee  has overall responsibility for the Divisional ratification of 
policies.  
 
Medicines Governance Committee - has responsibility for approving guidelines that contain 
medicines for the Trust and report to UH Sussex Clinical Outcome and Effectiveness G roup, 
and the Patient Safety Group.  
 
 
3.0 Process for development, review and update of clinical guidelines and 
 patient information documents  
 
Pre-existing guidelines , policies, SOPs  and patient information documentation require review 
and update every three years and a database of expiry dates is maintained and managed within 
the JOGG meeting to identify those due for update six months prior to date of expiry.  
 
This nominated review er has responsibility for management, development and reviewing  against 
NICE guidance and other national recommendations , therefore learning or new best practice 
information which require early update of a clinical guideline or patient information document  
can be readily identified and actioned.   
 
Where review or development of new guidance is identified from new national or local guidance 
or learning, or where guidelines or patient information documents have reached their three 
yearly review period, the pr evious document author or reviewer or other key stakeholder is 
contacted and requested to undertake review and update/develop the guideline or patient 
information document.  
 
The Library Service staff can assist with literature searching on request  at KnowledgeShare .  
 
References should be cited using the Harvard referencing  style, for e xample:  
 
Pears, R. and Shields, G. (2019)  Cite them right: The essential referencing guide.  11th edn. 
London: MacMillan.   
 
Following a local review, any guideline put forward for approval that identifies the service has 
deviated either positively or negatively with regards to NICE guidance, will be put forward to the 
Safety & Quality Meeting and will be monitored via the Risk Register. They will also n eed to be 
escalated to the Quality Review Group, chaired by the Integrated Care Board . 
 
The proces s is as follows :  
(See Appendix 1 ) 
 
3.1 Stage 1 a - For update or three yearly review  
 
Using the UH Sussex  guideline  template of the current guideline or patient information 
document in Word format , the nominated document author should review the previous 
document and any new national or local information to identify any amendments or alterations 
required. Alterations and amendments should be made and highlighted text and the  
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 6 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
guideline/patient information version in the footer updated to reflect the new version. Either a  
DRAFT watermark can be added or the footer marked as DRAFT until the guideline is fully 
completed befo re moving to Stage 2.  
 
3.2 Stage 1 b - For development of new guidance  
 
The nominated author should review current local and national best practice relevant to the topic 
in question and other clinical guidelines that may be associated with the new guidance.  Using 
the UH Sussex  guideline/patient information template they should write the first version of the 
guideline/patient information document ensuring that version 1 is identified in the footer and 
DRAFT watermark  added or footer is marked as DRAFT  until t he guideline is fully completed 
before moving to Stage 2.  
 
3.3  Stage 1c – Escalation of review  
 
When the author is allocated a guideline/policy/SOP to review, the CE Team will send a draft for 
the author to review and give a date for it to be completed by. 
 
If the agreed timescale is not achieved and the guideline/policy/SOP expires without  satisfactory 
communication with reasons for why is not received, the Governance Lead will escalate this to 
the clinicians line manager. The line manager is responsibl e for following up with the clinician.  
 
Outcomes may be as follows:   
 A new timeframe for completion of the protocol is agreed with the Governance Lead .  
 If a new timeframe is agreed but not achieved the Governance Lead will escalate this 
to the Line Manager and the Head of M idwifery and Clinical Director.  
 
3.4 Stage  2 – Consultation and agreement  
 
If specialist trainee is reviewer they must  ensure educational supervisor has reviewed before 
submitting for wider circulation.  
 
Once the new DRAFT document  is completed  by the author, the author should circulate to 
relevant stakeholders for comment  including any cross speciality guidelines/policies/SOPs eg 
neonatal, pharmacy . Once comments have been actioned and all questions answered, the final 
draft should  be submitted to JOGG.   
 
This will then be circulated  to the JOGG membership ideally  two weeks before the JOGG 
meeting.  
 
3.5  Stage 3 - Additional Approval Process  
 
Guidelines/Policies/SOPs/Patient information that discuss  medicines, should be submitted to the 
Medicines Governance Committee via T RELLO for review and approval  by the Trust . If there 
are significant changes as a result of this, the guideline/policy/SOP may need to return to 
JOGG.   
  
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 7 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
Joint neonatal and maternity  guidelines need to go to the Neonatal and Maternity Guideline 
Review Meeting  (SRH&WH)  for neonatal approval.  
 
Any delay with the processes which fall outside of the department should be raised to the 
appropriate leads within the department concerned i.e. clinical director, chief pharmacist etc  
 
 
3.6 Stage 3 – Divisional /Board  ratification  – polices only  
 
Policies  that have agreement to proceed for TMC  ratification following discussion at J OGG 
meeting should have any highlighted  text changed to black and are forwarded to the next TMC  
Meeting .  
 
Any guideline put forward for approval that identifies the service has deviated either positively or 
negatively with regards to NICE guidance, will be put forward to the Safety & Quality  Meeting 
and will be monitored via the Risk Register.  They will also need to be escalated to the Quality 
Review Group, chaired by the Integrated Care Board.  
  
Policies, guidelines  or SOPs  that require further development following discussion at JOGG or 
Divisional level should be returned to the nominated author for amendment with comments.  The 
relevant meeting chair will recommend if the document requires a further consultation period or 
if minor amendments can be made. They will also recommend if the docu ment  requires re 
submission to JOGG, the TMC  Meeting or Trust Board  if it can be ratified through Chairs Action.  
 
3.7 Stage 4 – Dissemination   
 
Policies,  guidelines  or SOPs  that have completed Stage 3 with agreement and ratification 
should have DRAFT watermark or Draft in the footer removed . The document will then be 
converted to PDF format and uploaded to the relevant staff access point eg Trust intranet  or 
OneShare  and the previous version of the document archived.   
 
On a monthly basis notify  the Clinical Outcomes and Effectiveness Team  of amended/new 
guideline s, policies or SOP s.  
 
4.0  Process for quality monitoring of clinical guidelines and reporting  
 
Guidelines, polices and SOPs are monitored via a rolling programme managed within the 
framework of the monthly Joint Obstetric Guideline Group.  
 
Guidelines, policies, SOPs and patient information documents are required to conform to up to 
date best practic e standards of care and reflect the recommendations and quality monitoring 
metrics where available, from national organisations such as NICE - clinical guidelines and 
quality standards, RCOG green top guidance, etc.  
 
Patient information documents should be  reviewed by Maternity Voices Partnership (MVP) and 
Carer and Patient Information Group (CPIG) for user friendliness.  
 
  
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 8 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References  
 
Department of Health (2005) Promoting Equality and Human Rights in the NHS – a guide for 
non-executive directors of NHS  Boards. Department of Health and Social Care - GOV.UK 
(www.gov.uk)  
 
NHS Digital (2016). Records Management Code of Practice for Health and Social Care 2016. 
Home - NHS Digital   
 
Care Quality Commission (Regulations)  Care Quality Commission (cqc.org.uk)  
 
Equality Act 2010 Legislation.go v.uk 
  
uhstw001 -policy -for-the-development -and-management -of-trust-policies.pdf  
  
 
 
   
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 9 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before use . 
 
Appendix 1:  Maternity guideline review & approval responsibilities  
Step 1a & b  
Clinical Effectiveness (CE) Team -  
 CE Team will send a draft for the author to review and give a date for it to be completed by.  
Reviewer  - 
Check national guidance:  
 Does the guideline topic already exist in NICE ? 
 RCOG  / RCoA  or other professional body (NMC, GMC etc. relevant to topic).  
 Think LMS – is there a regional guideline to facilitate standardisation?  
 If specialist trainee is reviewer ensure educational supervisor has reviewed before submitting for wider 
circulation.  
 Review relevant patient information and any existing links in the document to ensure they are up to date.  
 Circulate draft  to relevant sta keholders and ensure all comments and questions are answered prior to 
sending final draft to Clinical Effectiveness Team.  
Is this a guideline that crosses other Dept. or Divisions?  
 If yes : co-author with other Department (e.g. neonates, pharmacy)  
 Ensu re it is shared with other Dept /Divisional leads that this guideline crosses (i.e. neonates ).  
 C&W Pharmacist to be asked to review any guidance that contains medicines.  
Step 1c 
Clinical Effectiveness (CE) Team -  
 If there is no acknowledgement by the author  allocated to review the document  after three attempts to 
contact the reviewer by the CE Team, this will be escalated to the Clinical Governance Lead.  
 If a document  expires without the review being completed this will be escalated to the relevant Lead eg 
Clinical Governance Lead, Clinical Director, HoM.  
Step 2 
Reviewer  - 
 Submit Draft version to Clinical Effectiveness Team , with changes clearly marked.  
Clinical Effectiveness (CE) Team -  
 CE Team  will circulate via email to Joint Obstetric Guideline Group (JOG) members for comments pre -
JOGG meeting 2 weeks.  
 CE team adds to JOGG agenda for approval.  
Reviewer  - 
 Author presents a s ummary at JOGG meeting and answers questions from the JOGG members.   
 Group decides if changes accepted or whether further amendments required.  
Step 3 
Clinical Effectiveness (CE) Team -  
 Guidelines approved at JOGG will be finalised by the CE Team.  
 If indicated, document is taken for further approval eg Neonatal &  Maternity Guideline Review meeting or  
Medicines Governance Committee (MGC) post JOGG . 
 List of approved guidelines for each month submitted to Maternity Safety & Quality meeting (this feeds 
upwards to divisional governance meetings).  
 Policies for Division al ratification post JOGG approval  should be submitted  to the next TMC Meeting.   
Clinical Governance Lead -  
 Guidelines that deviate from NICE, should be put on the Risk Register by Safety & Quality Meeting and 
ICB notified.  
Step 4 
Clinical Effectiveness (CE) Team -  
 CE team completes approval process audi t trail and uploads to the relevant staff access point eg Trust 
intranet or OneShare and ensure the previous version of the document archived .  
 Updates can also be shared via staff newsletter , summaries emailed to staff,  staff facebook page , safety 
board  and safety huddles . 
 CE team to notify  Trust Clinical Outcomes and Effectiveness Team of amended /new guideline.   
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 10 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before 
use. 
 
Appendix 2 : Due Regard Assessment  Tool 
 
To be completed for Polices  and placed at the end of the document.  
 
To be used to analyse the effect of your policy or service on the protected groups in 
equality law, resulting in either:  
1. Removing or minimizing disadvantages suffered by people due to the ir 
protected group characteristics (i.e. age, race/ethnicity, disability, gender 
reassignment/identity, sex, sexual orientation, marriage & civil partnership, 
pregnancy, maternity/paternity, religion/ belief, human rights).  
2. Taking steps to meet the needs of people from protected groups where these 
are different from the needs of other people.  
3. No further action required.  
 
 
Click link for due regard assessment tool : 
 
 uhstw001 -policy -for-the-development -and-management -of-trust-policies.pdf  
 
 
 
   
Maternity Clinical Guideline Development in Maternity v1.0 DEC  2023  Page 11 of 11 
Please check on the intranet  that this printout is the most recent issue  of this document  before 
use. 
 
Appendix 3 : Template dissemination, implementation and access plan 
 
The checklist MUST be completed for any Policy . The completed checklist MUST be 
submitted to the TMC  with the final document.  
 
 Dissemination Plan  Comments  
1. Identify:   
  Which members of staff or staff groups 
will be affected by this policy?   
  How will you confirm that they have 
received the policy and understood its 
implications?   
  How have you linked the dissemination 
of the policy with induction training, 
continuous professional development 
and clinical supervision as appropriate?   
2. How and where will staff access the 
document (at operational level)?   
 
  Yes/No  Comments  
3. Have you made any plans to remove old 
versions of the policy or related documents 
from circulation?    
4.  Have you ensured staff are aware the 
document is logged on the organisation’s 
register?    
 
 
 