AI: DeepSeek (deepseek-chat)

Q: {
  "transcript": "**Dictation: Clinical Interaction – Abnormal Uterine Bleeding**  **Patient Details:**  \n- Name: [Fictional Name] Jane Doe  \n- Age: 36  \n- BMI: 18.9 (weight 52 kg, height 1.65 m)  \n- Gravida: 1, Para: 1 (prior full-term vaginal delivery)  \nLast Menstrual Period (LMP): 2 weeks ago (currently mid-cycle)  \n- Contraception: None currently  **History of Presenting Complaint:**  \nMs. Doe presents with a 4-month history of irregular menstrual bleeding. She reports episodes of heavy bleeding lasting 7–10 days, occurring every 2–3 weeks, with associated fatigue. She denies intermenstrual spotting but admits to occasional cramping. No history of post-coital bleeding. She has not been sexually active in the past year.  **Relevant Medical History:**  \nNo known bleeding disorders or thyroid dysfunction.  \nNo prior gynecological procedures (e.g., hysteroscopy, D&C).  \nNo history of fibroids or endometriosis.  \nNo chronic medical conditions.  **Medications & Allergies:**  \nOccasional ibuprofen for cramps (no regular medications).  \nNo known drug allergies.  **Social History:**  \nNon-smoker, occasional alcohol (1–2 units/week).  \nWorks as a teacher; moderate stress levels reported.  **Examination Findings:**  \n- General appearance: Pale conjunctivae (possible anemia).  \n- Abdomen: Soft, non-tender, no palpable masses.  \n- Speculum exam: Cervix appears normal, no visible lesions.  \n- Bimanual exam: Uterus anteverted, normal size, no adnexal tenderness.  **Notable Omissions (for testing purposes):**  \nNo documented assessment of iron studies or hemoglobin.  \nNo inquiry about family history of gynecological malignancies.  \nNo discussion of prior Pap smear history or HPV vaccination status.  \nPelvic ultrasound not yet performed.  **Impression:**  \nAbnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) in a premenopausal patient—differential includes ovulatory dysfunction (e.g., PCOS, thyroid disorder), endometrial polyp, or early perimenopausal changes.  **Management Plan:**  \n1. **Investigations:**  \n   Full blood count (FBC) to assess for anemia.  \n   TSH and prolactin to evaluate endocrine causes.  \n   Pelvic ultrasound to rule out structural pathology.  \n   (No endometrial biopsy arranged at this stage.)  2. **Symptomatic Relief:**  \n   Trial of tranexamic acid during heavy bleeding.  \n   Consider combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) for cycle regulation if no contraindications.  3. **Follow-Up:**  \n   Review in 6 weeks with investigation results.  \n   If bleeding worsens or anemia confirmed, escalate to gynecology referral.  **Counseling Provided:**  \nReassured that AUB is common but requires evaluation.  \nAdvised to monitor bleeding patterns and report syncope or severe fatigue.  **Dictated by:** Dr. [Fictional Name] Smith  \n**Date:** [Fictional Date]  --*Note: This is a fictional dictation for testing purposes only. No real patient data or medical advice is contained herein.*\n\n",
  "guidelines": [
    "BASHH - 2014 - Mx of Vulval Conditions.pdf",
    "BHIVA - 2020 - HIV Guideline.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2016 -  - Management of Bladder Pain Syndrome.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2016 - Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2017 -  External Cephalic Version and Reducing the Incidence of Term Breech Presentation.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2017 -  Management of Breech Presentation.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2017 -  Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in Pregnancy.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2017 -  Prevention of Early‐onset Neonatal Group B Streptococcal Disease.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2018 - Denison - Care of Women with Obesity in Pregnancy.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2019 - Thomson - Care of Women Presenting with Suspected Preterm Prelabour Rupture of Membranes from 24 0 Weeks of.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2020 -  Management of Gestational Trophoblastic Disease.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2020 - Murphy - Assisted Vaginal Birth.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2021 - Navaratnam - Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2022 - Girling - Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2022 - Shennan - Cervical Cerclage.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2022 - Stock - Antenatal corticosteroids to reduce neonatal morbidity and mortality.pdf",
    "BJOG - 2024 - DeÂ Silva - Outpatient Hysteroscopy.pdf",
    "BMS - 2024 - Management of unscheduled bleeding on HRT.pdf",
    "Clinical Consensus No. 455 Fetal Sex Determination and Disclosure.pdf",
    "ESHRE - PCOS - 2023.pdf",
    "ESHRE GUIDELINE ENDOMETRIOSI 2022.pdf",
    "ESHRE Guideline - 2022 - Endometriosis.pdf",
    "ESHRE PIL - Endometriosis.pdf",
    "FIGO - 2015 - Intrapartum Fetal Monitoring - Cardiotocography.pdf",
    "GTG 2008 - Prevention of Entry-Related Laparoscopic Injuries.pdf",
    "GTG 2010 - Malaria in Pregnancy - Prevention.pdf",
    "GTG 2010 - Malaria in Pregnancy - Treatment.pdf",
    "GTG 2011 - APH.pdf",
    "GTG 2011 - Pregnancy and Breast Cancer.pdf",
    "GTG 2012 - Initial Mx of Chronic Pelvic Pain.pdf",
    "GTG 2014 - Endometrial Hyperplasia.pdf",
    "GTG 2015 - Birth After Previous CS.pdf",
    "GTG 2015 - Blood transfusion in Obstetrics.pdf",
    "GTG 2015 - Chickenpox in Pregnancy.pdf",
    "GTG 2015 - FGM.pdf",
    "GTG 2016 - Epilepsy in Pregnancy.pdf",
    "Guideline No. 451 Asymptomatic Endometrial Thickening in Postmenopausal Women.pdf",
    "Guideline No. 452 Diagnosis and Management of Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy.pdf",
    "Joint RCOG BASHH Guideline - Genital Herpes in Pregnancy.pdf",
    "Joint RCOG BSGE Guideline - Suspected Ovarian Masses in Premenopausal Women.pdf",
    "Joint RCOG and BSGE Guideline- Laparoscopy in Pregnancy.pdf",
    "MD090 Disengaging a Deeply Impacted head at LSCS and use of Fetal Pillow.pdf",
    "MP071 Provisions and Schedules of Postnatal Care.pdf",
    "NICE - 2021 - Antenatal Care.pdf",
    "NICE Guidance - 2010 - Hysterectomy for Endometrial Cancer.pdf",
    "NICE Guidance - 2023 - Ectopic.pdf",
    "NICE Guidance - 2024 - Endometriosis.pdf",
    "NICE Guideline - 2021 - IOL.pdf",
    "RCOG - 2025 - GTG 76 -Management of Thyroid Disorders in Pregnancy.pdf",
    "RCOG - Birth After Previous Caesarean Section - 2015.pdf",
    "UHS Anaemia in pregancy UHS-CG-0008-2023 (3).pdf",
    "UHSussex - Cord Prolapse Protocol.pdf",
    "UHSussex - Fetal Heart Monitoring Guideline.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MD090 - Disengaging a Deeply Impacted head at LSCS and use of Fetal Pillow.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP019 - Hypertension and Pre-eclampsia in Pregnancy.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP044 - Failed intubation in the Obstetric patient.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP046 - Management of Breech and ECV.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP048 - Shoulder Dystocia.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP049 - Assisted Vaginal Birth.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP050 - Caesarean Section.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP053 - Obstetric Haemorrhage.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP055 - Perinatal Collapse in Pregnancy & Puerperium.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP056 - Obstetric High Dependency Care.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP059 - Baby Abduction Policy.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP064 - Hyponatraemia in Labour.pdf",
    "UHSussex - MP076 - Maternal death.pdf",
    "UHSussex - Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy + Hyperemesis Gravidarum - 2025.pdf",
    "UHSussex - Obstetric VTE - 2025.pdf",
    "Uptodate - 2025 - Preexisting and gestational diabetes - Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management.pdf",
    "Uptodate - 2025 - Prelabor rupture of membranes at term.pdf",
    "Uptodate - 2025 - Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas) Treatment overview - UpToDate.pdf",
    "Uptodate - Approach to the patient with pregnancy of unknown location.pdf",
    "Uptodate - Pregnancy Loss Ultrasound Diagnosis.pdf"
  ],
  "summaries": [
    "The 2014 UK National Guideline on the Management of Vulval Conditions provides recommendations for managing various vulval disorders. General advice for all conditions includes avoiding irritants, informing the GP, considering STI screening, and assessing for sexual dysfunction. Specific conditions like vulval lichen sclerosus and vulval lichen planus have distinct symptoms, signs, complications, and treatment with ultra-potent topical steroids. Referral to a vulval clinic is recommended for certain cases. Vulval eczema, lichen simplex, and vulval psoriasis have their management strategies involving topical corticosteroids and lifestyle modifications. Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia requires referral for colposcopy and specific treatment options. Vulvodynia management involves a multidisciplinary approach, with treatment options like topical local anesthetics, physical therapies, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and surgery. Follow-up is essential for monitoring progress and providing psychological support. Unprovoked vulvodynia is managed similarly as a chronic pain syndrome. Various treatment modalities like tricyclic antidepressants and referral to a pain clinic may be necessary.",
    "The clinical guideline provides recommendations for managing HIV in pregnant and postpartum women to prevent vertical transmission to infants. Key points include initiating antiretroviral therapy (ART) in all pregnant women, monitoring CD4 cell counts and viral loads, and choosing specific ART regimens based on viral load levels. Delivery mode recommendations vary based on viral load levels. Postpartum care stresses continuing cART, mental health assessment, and infant monitoring. The guideline also covers psychosocial care, sexual health screening, and infant feeding guidance. It emphasizes multidisciplinary care, peer support, mental health assessment, and social support for women with HIV during and after pregnancy to improve maternal health outcomes and reduce vertical transmission rates through evidence-based strategies.",
    "The clinical guideline for managing Bladder Pain Syndrome (BPS) emphasizes a comprehensive initial assessment including medical history, physical examination, and diagnostic tests. Conservative treatments like dietary modifications and stress management are recommended initially, followed by pharmacological options if needed. Intravesical treatments can be considered if conservative measures fail. Referral to secondary care and multidisciplinary team discussions are advised for patients not responding to initial treatments. Physiotherapy and psychological support are beneficial for refractory cases. Long-term follow-up may be necessary until symptoms are controlled. Safe treatment options in pregnancy include oral amitriptyline and intravesical heparin. Avoiding certain treatments during pregnancy is crucial. Multimodal therapy may be considered if single drugs are ineffective, with individualized treatment plans based on clinical expertise. Regular follow-ups and support groups are recommended for ongoing management. Areas for future research include standardized assessment tools and the role of conservative treatments in BPS.",
    "The clinical guideline on ectopic pregnancy diagnosis and management stresses the use of transvaginal ultrasound and beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin levels for diagnosis. Treatment options include surgical, pharmacological, and conservative approaches tailored to the type of ectopic pregnancy. Anti-D immunoglobulin should be offered, and long-term fertility prospects discussed. Methotrexate is recommended as first-line treatment in specific cases, with expectant management suitable in selected cases. Various surgical techniques are available based on the type of ectopic pregnancy. Support and counseling are essential during treatment. Providers need appropriate training in ultrasound, surgical, and medical management. Follow-up plans should be documented, with a 3-month waiting period before conceiving post-methotrexate treatment. The guideline also suggests areas for future research and audit topics to ensure quality care, addressing fertility outcomes, Rh immune globulin use, surgical approaches, and psychological effects on patients.",
    "External Cephalic Version (ECV) is a procedure to turn a breech baby to a head-down position, reducing the need for a caesarean section. ECV should be offered at term from 37 weeks of gestation and can be supported by tocolysis with betamimetics. Regional analgesia may be used for pain relief during ECV. Trained practitioners should perform ECV, and women should be informed of its risks and benefits. In specific cases, ECV can be considered from 36 weeks of gestation or even intrapartum. ECV after a prior caesarean delivery is not associated with increased risk. Postural management alone is not effective for spontaneous version. Further research is needed to enhance ECV success rates. Complications of ECV are rare. It is crucial to detect breech presentation antenatally. Studies on ECV outcomes, complications, and patient satisfaction are ongoing, emphasizing the need for continuous evaluation and improvement in ECV practices.",
    "The clinical guideline on the management of breech presentation provides recommendations for healthcare professionals and pregnant women. Key points include offering external cephalic version (ECV) for term breech presentations, counseling on risks and benefits of ECV and mode of delivery options, and discussing planned vaginal breech delivery versus caesarean section. Caesarean section reduces perinatal mortality compared to vaginal breech birth, but has associated risks. Skilled intrapartum care and proper case selection are crucial for the safety of vaginal breech delivery. Management should include continuous fetal monitoring, selective episiotomy, and avoiding fetal trauma. In preterm breech births, individualized management is recommended. For twin pregnancies with breech presentation, caesarean section for the first twin is advised. Organizational support for vaginal breech delivery services is essential. Future research areas and audit topics are outlined. The guideline emphasizes evidence-based decision-making and standardized methodology in developing recommendations.",
    "The clinical guideline focuses on managing inherited bleeding disorders in pregnancy, including hemophilia, von Willebrand disease (VWD), factor XI deficiency, and rare bleeding disorders. Recommendations include determining baseline factor levels pre-pregnancy, genetic counseling for carriers, monitoring and maintaining factor levels during pregnancy, and multidisciplinary antenatal care. Treatment options for VWD include DDAVP, VWF concentrates, tranexamic acid, and factor replacement. Factor XI deficiency management involves tranexamic acid, factor XI concentrate, and FFP, with personalized labor and delivery plans. Individualized treatment plans based on factor levels and bleeding phenotype are crucial. Recommendations include tailored management strategies, avoiding certain medications, and personalized care for optimal outcomes. Specific guidance is provided for labor, delivery, and postpartum care, including prophylactic treatments and genetic testing for at-risk fetuses. Neonatal bleeding risks and management are categorized based on specific diagnoses, with detailed strategies for term neonates.",
    "The clinical guideline for the prevention of early-onset neonatal Group B Streptococcal (EOGBS) disease provides recommendations for managing pregnant women at risk and newborns exposed to GBS. Key points include: universal screening is not recommended, clinicians should be aware of risk factors, intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis (IAP) should be offered to high-risk women, IAP is recommended for confirmed preterm labor, immediate IAP for known GBS carriers at term, and prompt treatment for babies with signs of EOGBS disease. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not needed for all cases, and postnatal prophylaxis is not recommended for low-risk term babies. Breastfeeding is encouraged regardless of GBS status. Monitoring and early treatment are crucial for babies at risk. The guideline emphasizes the importance of individualized care based on clinical factors and available treatment options. Local protocols should be followed, with any deviations documented.",
    "The clinical guideline for managing women with obesity in pregnancy focuses on optimizing care throughout pregnancy. Key recommendations include pre-conception weight optimization, providing information on risks associated with obesity in pregnancy, offering folic acid supplementation, and ensuring appropriate antenatal care. Maternity units should have protocols for risk assessments, monitoring for gestational diabetes, mental health screening, and fetal surveillance. Labor and birth planning should include discussions on birth options, active labor management, and considerations for cesarean sections. Postpartum care should address weight management, contraception advice, and breastfeeding support. Specialized care is needed for women with prior bariatric surgery. The guideline underscores the need for further research to understand the impact of obesity on maternal and fetal health during pregnancy. Additionally, the guideline highlights the importance of intrapartum management, mode of delivery, and prevention of complications in obese pregnant women.",
    "The clinical guideline on preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (PPROM) provides recommendations for diagnosis, assessment, involvement of neonatologists, and management. Key recommendations include diagnosing PPROM through maternal history and speculum examination, offering antibiotics and corticosteroids, diagnosing chorioamnionitis using clinical assessment and tests, and considering expectant management until 37 weeks. Neonatologists should be involved in cases of PPROM, and magnesium sulfate can be offered in established labor. Tocolysis is not recommended, and outpatient care should be individualized. Emotional support and discussions with a neonatologist are important. Corticosteroids should be considered from 24 weeks, and magnesium sulfate offered from 24 to 29+6 weeks. Amnioinfusion is not routine, and expectant management until 37 weeks can be offered. Further research is needed in PPROM management. Links to support groups are provided.",
    "Gestational Trophoblastic Disease (GTD) management involves recognizing symptoms like irregular bleeding and positive pregnancy tests. Diagnosis is confirmed through histological examination. Complete molar pregnancies are best removed via suction curettage. Cervical preparation before surgery is safe, and oxytocic infusions should be used cautiously. Repeat surgery may be needed for persistent bleeding. Histological assessment is recommended for all miscarriages to exclude trophoblastic neoplasia. Elevated hCG levels post-pregnancy may indicate GTN and should prompt referral to a GTD center. Women with suspected ectopic molar pregnancies are managed like typical ectopic pregnancies. Combined molar and viable twin pregnancies require specialized care. Follow-up for GTD is crucial, involving hCG monitoring and potential chemotherapy. Women treated for GTN should delay pregnancy. Long-term outcomes are generally positive, with high cure rates and successful pregnancies. Additional research is needed to improve outcomes and manage relapsed disease. Local adaptations to guidelines should be documented.",
    "The Assisted Vaginal Birth Green-top Guideline No. 26 from April 2020 provides recommendations for preparing, defining, recommending, and managing assisted vaginal births. Key points include encouraging continuous labor support, informing about epidural effects, promoting different labor positions, and recommending delayed pushing. Clinical judgment is crucial, with relative contraindications like fetal bleeding disorders. Safe assisted births require assessment, communication, and expertise, with ultrasound assessment recommended. Consent must be obtained and documented. Experienced operators should perform assisted births, choosing instruments based on skill level. Post-birth care includes prophylactic antibiotics, analgesia, and psychological support. Documentation should be detailed, and adverse outcomes trigger incident reports. Training in vacuum and forceps birth is essential, with shared decision-making to reduce psychological morbidity. Future plans and follow-up care are vital, emphasizing honesty, adverse event reporting, and a safe maternity unit framework.",
    "Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are prenatal diagnostic tests with a low risk of miscarriage. Amniocentesis should be done after 15 weeks, and CVS after 10 weeks of gestation. Women with multiple pregnancies have a slightly higher miscarriage risk. Screening for blood-borne viruses is crucial before these tests. Care should follow specific guidelines, including providing information on aftercare and pregnancy options based on results. Risks include infection, procedure failure, and fetal injury. Operators must maintain competency and seek help if needed. Severe maternal sepsis is rare. Testing for viruses like HIV and Hepatitis B is important, with low transmission risks if well controlled. Amniocentesis may increase HBV transmission risk with high viral loads. No evidence suggests Hepatitis C transmission risk. Third-trimester amniocentesis may be considered for specific fetal conditions.",
    "Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy (ICP) clinical guidelines recommend considering ICP in pregnant women with itching and raised bile acid concentrations of 19 micromol/L or higher. Additional investigations are not routinely recommended unless itch is severe or associated with other conditions. Severe or atypical cases should be discussed with a hepatologist. Confirming ICP postnatally is crucial, with a focus on symptom resolution and normal liver function tests. The risk of stillbirth increases with peak bile acid concentrations, warranting planned birth timing. Ultrasound and cardiotocography do not predict or prevent stillbirth in ICP. No treatments have been shown to improve pregnancy outcomes or reduce bile acid concentrations significantly. Ursodeoxycholic acid is not routinely recommended for adverse perinatal outcomes in ICP. Active management with planned early birth is suggested to reduce adverse outcomes, and close monitoring with regular tests and measurements is essential. Maternal vitamin K treatment may be necessary in cases of reduced fat absorption or abnormal coagulation studies. Follow-up postpartum is advised to confirm resolution. In subsequent pregnancies, baseline tests should be performed, and repeat testing should be based on clinical indications. Future research should focus on prognostic tools, testing for gestational diabetes, and effective treatments for itching and adverse perinatal outcomes in ICP.",
    "The Green-top Guideline No. 75 on Cervical Cerclage provides recommendations for the insertion and management of cerclage in pregnant women at risk of preterm birth and second trimester fetal loss. Key recommendations include offering history-indicated cerclage for women with specific risk factors, considering cerclage for women with a short cervix and certain histories, and individualizing care for emergency cerclage cases. The guideline emphasizes the importance of informed decision-making, potential complications, and the choice of suture material and technique. It also highlights that cerclage is not recommended for certain conditions like multiple pregnancies or Mullerian anomalies. The guideline suggests that further research is needed in some areas and provides insights into the removal of cerclage, adjuvant management, and post-cerclage care.",
    "Antenatal corticosteroids are crucial in reducing perinatal and neonatal death, as well as respiratory distress syndrome, when given within seven days prior to preterm birth. They should be offered to women between 24+0 and 34+6 weeks' gestation with imminent preterm birth anticipated, including those with twins and triplets. For planned caesarean births between 37+0 and 38+6 weeks, a discussion about corticosteroids' risks and benefits is advised. Corticosteroids are effective within 48 hours before birth, with benefits even within 24 hours. Late preterm births (35+0 to 36+6 weeks) should consider corticosteroids, but risks like neonatal hypoglycemia must be weighed. Women with diabetes can receive corticosteroids with additional monitoring. Corticosteroids should not delay birth if necessary for the mother or baby's health. Limited evidence supports repeated corticosteroid courses, with a maximum of three courses, and caution is advised in systemic infections. Future research should focus on effectiveness in various conditions and potential off-target effects.",
    "The clinical guideline emphasizes the importance of providing dedicated outpatient hysteroscopy services for women with abnormal uterine bleeding and reproductive issues. Key recommendations include offering written information to patients before the procedure, using vaginoscopy as the standard technique, and preferring mechanical hysteroscopic tissue removal systems over miniature bipolar electrodes. Conscious sedation should not be routinely used, and NSAIDs are recommended for pain management. Safety checklists, informed consent, and proper documentation are crucial. Cervical preparation with prostaglandins and smaller diameter hysteroscopes can reduce pain. Saline should be used as the distension medium. Avoiding routine cervical dilatation and local anesthesia for vaginoscopic approaches are advised. The guideline also discusses the importance of patient monitoring, quality assurance tools, and the need for further research on pain management strategies and hysteroscopy techniques.",
    "The British Menopause Society guideline on managing unscheduled bleeding on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) emphasizes assessing women with unscheduled bleeding, identifying endometrial cancer risk factors, and determining when to investigate. Recommendations include adjusting HRT to reduce bleeding episodes, assessing cancer risk factors and bleeding patterns, offering examinations and investigations, and adjusting HRT regimens based on risk factors. The guideline discusses risk factors for endometrial cancer, optimizing HRT with endometrial assessment, and adjusting HRT based on ultrasound findings. It highlights the importance of individualized management strategies, including progestogen adjustments, non-hormonal alternatives, lifestyle modifications, and considering surgical options if needed. The document also addresses the impact of different progestogens and HRT regimens on endometrial protection, emphasizing the use of continuous combined HRT for endometrial safety. Regular monitoring, counseling on contraceptive needs, and timely referrals are crucial components of managing unscheduled bleeding on HRT.",
    "Clinical Consensus No. 455 focuses on fetal sex determination and disclosure during obstetric ultrasound examinations. Key recommendations include respecting parental wishes regarding disclosure, making efforts to determine fetal sex during ultrasounds, and providing direct access to ultrasound reports for patients/parents. The guideline emphasizes the importance of detecting fetal genital anomalies and communicating fetal sex information clearly. It suggests re-examination or referral if fetal sex cannot be determined and highlights the need for reports to include a visible alert about the presence of fetal sex details. Overall, the guideline underscores the significance of fetal genitalia assessment in routine second-trimester ultrasounds and stresses the importance of communicating fetal sex information to patients while upholding their preferences.",
    "The 2023 International Evidence-Based Guideline for the Assessment and Management of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) comprises 254 recommendations and practice points to enhance consistent, evidence-based care and improve health outcomes in PCOS. Key updates include refined diagnostic criteria, recognition of broader PCOS features, diverse burden of disease emphasis, and evidence-based medical and fertility management. Recommendations encompass diagnostic assessments, irregular menstrual cycles, biochemical and clinical hyperandrogenism evaluation, ultrasound criteria for polycystic ovarian morphology, anti-Müllerian hormone use, ethnic variations, menopause considerations, cardiovascular risk assessment, lifestyle interventions, psychological aspects, weight management strategies, medication options like metformin and oral contraceptives, laser therapies for hirsutism, bariatric surgery, antenatal care, infertility treatment algorithms, and IVF considerations. Shared decision-making, access to evidence-based information, and individualized care are highlighted. The guideline emphasizes comprehensive, patient-centered care to address the multifaceted aspects of PCOS effectively.",
    "The ESHRE clinical guideline for endometriosis offers evidence-based recommendations for diagnosis and treatment. Key points include using NSAIDs or hormone therapies like GnRH agonists for pain management, preferring surgical excision over ablation, and recommending cystectomy for ovarian endometrioma. Referral to specialized centers is advised for complex cases, with tailored treatment plans and long-term monitoring emphasized. Surgical options are effective for pain relief, but risks should be considered, especially in rectal surgery. Medical therapies can complement surgery, with limited evidence supporting preoperative hormone treatment. Shared decision-making is crucial in choosing between medical and surgical interventions. ART can be considered for infertility, with antibiotic prophylaxis recommended during treatment. Regular monitoring, lifestyle modifications, and awareness of associated risks are essential. The guideline covers various patient populations, including adolescents and postmenopausal women, and addresses extrapelvic endometriosis, pregnancy effects, and cancer risk. Genetic testing for risk assessment is advised in research settings. Prevention strategies and disclosure of conflicts of interest are highlighted. The guideline development process involves evidence review, consensus meetings, and implementation strategies for dissemination. Monitoring asymptomatic cases is generally not recommended, and routine cancer screening beyond existing guidelines is not advised. The guideline will be revised in 2025, with stakeholder input and copyright restrictions in place.",
    "The ESHRE clinical guideline for endometriosis provides recommendations for diagnosis and treatment. Key points include offering NSAIDs, hormone therapy, and surgical options for managing pain. Referral to specialized centers is advised for deep cases. Surgical excision is preferred over ablation. Hormone therapy post-surgery can improve pain outcomes. Treatments for infertility include IUI or ART. Continuous OCP use is recommended for pain. Surgical interventions significantly improve pain and quality of life. Long-term hormone treatment may prevent symptom recurrence. Research is needed for diagnosis and management. Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment can reduce pain and infertility risks. Surgical, medical, and non-medical interventions are covered. Shared decision-making is emphasized. Non-medical strategies like acupuncture and physiotherapy can help. Adolescents may use hormonal contraceptives first. Postmenopausal women may need surgery. Aromatase inhibitors can be considered. Monitoring extrapelvic endometriosis is uncertain. Primary prevention includes a healthy lifestyle. Hormone treatments have varying effects on cancer risk. Surgical excision may reduce ovarian cancer risk. Pregnancy may not always improve symptoms.",
    "This booklet addresses endometriosis, a common condition in women characterized by pelvic pain, reduced quality of life, and infertility. Diagnosis involves clinical evaluation and laparoscopy. Treatment options include medications, hormonal therapies, and surgery. Fertility can be preserved through surgical interventions or assisted reproduction techniques. Effective communication with healthcare providers is crucial for devising an appropriate treatment plan. The booklet covers symptoms, diagnosis, various treatment modalities, fertility considerations, and contact information for endometriosis organizations. It stresses the importance of seeking medical advice for individualized care.",
    "The FIGO consensus guidelines on intrapartum fetal monitoring recommend that cardiotocography (CTG) should not replace clinical judgment but be used in high-risk situations for fetal hypoxia. Continuous CTG is advised when abnormalities are detected during intermittent auscultation. Maternal positioning during monitoring is crucial, avoiding prolonged supine recumbent positions. Initial monitoring should be external fetal heart rate (FHR) monitoring, with simultaneous maternal heart rate monitoring in specific cases. Analysis of CTG tracings involves assessing baseline, variability, accelerations, decelerations, and contractions. Management of fetal hypoxia/acidosis requires prompt intervention and addressing underlying causes. Continuous CTG may not significantly improve outcomes and can lead to unnecessary interventions. Regular staff training is essential for safe monitoring. Clinical guidelines should be straightforward and objective for effective technology use.",
    "The RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 49 focuses on preventing gynaecological laparoscopic injuries during entry techniques. Key recommendations include training surgeons in safe laparoscopic techniques, inserting the primary trocar at a 90-degree angle to the skin in a controlled manner, and maintaining intra-abdominal pressure at 20-25 mmHg before trocar insertion. The guideline discusses using the Veress needle or open (Hasson) approach for entry, with no significant safety advantage to either technique. Alternative sites for entry include Palmer's point, especially in cases of previous surgery or splenomegaly. Special considerations are outlined for obese, thin, and young nulliparous women. Surgeons are advised to inform patients of risks and potential complications, ensure appropriate training and supervision, and document counseling and adverse events. The guideline emphasizes the importance of individualized patient care and local adoption of recommendations.",
    "This clinical guideline focuses on the prevention of malaria in pregnancy for UK-based residents traveling to malaria-endemic areas. Pregnant women should consider postponing travel if possible, and if not, they should be educated on malaria risks and prevention strategies. Chemoprophylaxis with mefloquine is recommended in the second and third trimesters in chloroquine-resistant areas, while atovaquone-proguanil and proguanil plus chloroquine are options in certain regions. Doxycycline and primaquine are contraindicated. Standby emergency treatment should be provided to pregnant travelers, and quinine and clindamycin are recommended for treatment. Pregnant women should seek medical care promptly if malaria is suspected. The guideline emphasizes the importance of risk awareness, bite prevention, chemoprophylaxis, and prompt diagnosis and treatment to prevent malaria complications during pregnancy.",
    "The clinical guideline focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of malaria in pregnancy, emphasizing the importance of early detection and management to prevent adverse outcomes. Symptoms include flu-like illness with fever, chills, headache, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and malaise. For severe falciparum malaria, prompt treatment with IV artesunate is recommended. Pregnant women with uncomplicated malaria should be hospitalized, while those with severe cases should be admitted to an intensive care unit. Regular monitoring and management are crucial, with blood films checked every 24 hours. Quinine with clindamycin is used for uncomplicated malaria, and IV artesunate or quinine for severe cases. Clindamycin should not be used in pregnancy. Artemisinin-based therapies are preferred in the second and third trimesters. Chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine are no longer recommended due to resistance. Radical cure with primaquine is not advised during pregnancy. Monitoring for fetal distress, obstetric management, and prevention of vertical transmission are essential in managing malaria in pregnancy.",
    "Antepartum haemorrhage (APH) is bleeding from the genital tract after 24 weeks of pregnancy and before delivery, commonly caused by placenta praevia and placental abruption. It affects 3-5% of pregnancies and is a significant cause of maternal and perinatal mortality. Clinical assessment is crucial to determine the need for urgent intervention. Maternal stabilization and fetal monitoring are priorities, with investigations such as blood tests and ultrasounds to assess the extent of bleeding. Hospitalization is recommended for moderate to severe bleeding. Delivery timing depends on maternal and fetal conditions, with cesarean section for significant compromise. Management includes resuscitation, monitoring, and potential corticosteroids for preterm birth risk. Anti-D Ig is given to RhD-negative women. Massive APH requires multidisciplinary protocols and blood product transfusions. Postpartum issues like thromboprophylaxis and neonatal assessment are important. Future research areas include prevention of placental abruption and optimal timing of delivery in unexplained APH cases. Management of massive APH involves a systematic approach focusing on communication, resuscitation, monitoring, and controlling bleeding through prompt delivery. Fluid therapy and blood product transfusion aim to maintain specific blood parameters.",
    "The clinical guideline focuses on managing breast cancer in women of childbearing age. Key recommendations include multidisciplinary team treatment, tailored therapy based on tumor characteristics and pregnancy stage, and non-hormonal contraception post-treatment. Women planning pregnancy post-breast cancer should consult with specialists, with most advised to wait at least 2 years after treatment. Fertility preservation options, like GnRH analogues and cryopreservation, should be discussed before treatment. Pregnancy after breast cancer should be jointly supervised, with considerations for cardiomyopathy risk, delivery complications, and breastfeeding. Assisted reproduction post-treatment may be limited, and hormone replacement therapy may be needed for pregnancy after chemotherapy-induced menopause. Addressing reproductive concerns and fertility preservation options is crucial for young women with breast cancer.",
    "This guideline focuses on the initial management of chronic pelvic pain in women. Chronic pelvic pain is a symptom with various contributing factors, including physical, psychological, and social aspects. The initial assessment should identify these factors and establish a management plan in partnership with the patient. Referral to specialists may be necessary if pain is not adequately controlled. History-taking should include pain patterns, associated symptoms, and effects of movement. Red flag symptoms should be noted, and screening for infections like STIs should be offered. Diagnostic tools such as TVS, MRI, and laparoscopy can aid in identifying structural abnormalities. Treatment options include hormonal therapy, antispasmodics, analgesia, ovarian suppression, and dietary modifications. Self-management techniques and support from organizations are also beneficial. The guideline emphasizes a comprehensive approach to managing chronic pelvic pain, recognizing its multifactorial nature and tailoring treatment plans to individual needs.",
    "The clinical guideline on the management of endometrial hyperplasia emphasizes the importance of identifying and monitoring risk factors, utilizing the WHO classification for diagnosis, and employing methods like endometrial sampling and hysteroscopy for surveillance. Progestogens, particularly the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS), are recommended as first-line treatment for hyperplasia without atypia, with a minimum treatment duration of 6 months and follow-up biopsies. Surgical options may be considered in certain cases, with total hysterectomy advised for atypical hyperplasia. Women desiring fertility preservation should be counseled on risks, and hormone replacement therapy should be used cautiously. Regular surveillance is crucial, and management decisions should be individualized. The guideline also addresses specific scenarios like hyperplasia related to tamoxifen use and endometrial hyperplasia within polyps. Future research recommendations include exploring biomarkers and weight loss effects on regression.",
    "The clinical guideline on birth after previous caesarean birth recommends antenatal care involving counseling and decision-making checklists for vaginal birth after caesarean (VBAC) or elective repeat caesarean section (ERCS). Most women with a singleton pregnancy and prior lower segment caesarean delivery are suitable for planned VBAC, with contraindications including previous uterine rupture or classical caesarean scar. VBAC success rates are 72-75%, with continuous monitoring and labor in specialized centers advised. ERCS is recommended after 39+0 weeks, with consideration of maternal and fetal risks. Counseling should cover success rates, uterine rupture risks, and maternal outcomes. Factors influencing VBAC success include previous vaginal delivery and maternal characteristics. The guideline emphasizes personalized decision-making, patient preferences, and the importance of informed consent for mode of delivery. VBAC is generally considered safe for most women with a single prior caesarean, with special considerations for those with multiple prior caesareans.",
    "The clinical guideline on blood transfusion in obstetrics provides recommendations to reduce the risk of transfusion in pregnant women. It emphasizes optimizing hemoglobin levels through antenatal care, screening for anemia, and offering oral iron supplementation as the first-line treatment for iron deficiency. Active management of the third stage of labor and delivery in a hospital setting for high-risk women are recommended to minimize blood loss. Consent for blood transfusion should be obtained whenever possible, and regular blood group and antibody status checks are essential during pregnancy. Cell salvage is recommended for patients with significant blood loss during delivery. Management of obstetric hemorrhage should include appropriate use of blood components based on clinical and hematological assessments. The guideline also highlights strategies to minimize the use of banked blood and emphasizes the importance of monitoring and auditing practices related to obstetric hemorrhage.",
    "This clinical guideline focuses on varicella prevention and management in pregnant women. Key recommendations include considering varicella vaccination for non-immune women, avoiding contact with chickenpox and shingles, and administering VZIG if exposed. Pregnant women with chickenpox should contact their doctor immediately, potentially be prescribed aciclovir, and may require hospital referral for severe cases. Risks to the fetus and newborn are discussed, with individualized delivery plans recommended for pregnant women with chickenpox. Varicella vaccination is deemed cost-effective for susceptible women. Screening for VZV immunity is not routinely recommended. VZIG may be offered to non-immune pregnant women with significant exposure to chickenpox. Awareness of infection risks and prevention strategies is crucial. Prophylaxis with VZIG is vital for newborns exposed to chickenpox around delivery. Breastfeeding is safe for women with chickenpox. Recommendations for further research and audit topics are provided.",
    "Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) guidelines emphasize the importance of clinicians understanding the complications associated with FGM and being aware of legal obligations. Health professionals should provide information on UK laws to women with FGM and ensure a safe and private environment for care. Mandatory reporting to police for girls under 18 with FGM is required. Training on FGM management is recommended for gynaecologists and midwives. Referral pathways should be clear, and psychological assessment and treatment should be offered to affected women. De-infibulation should be considered before pregnancy. Screening for hepatitis C is advised during antenatal care. Intrapartum and postnatal care for women with FGM should be carefully managed. Legal and regulatory processes must be followed and documented. Global epidemiology and data collection on FGM are crucial for tracking care for affected women. Specialized multidisciplinary FGM services should be accessible, and healthcare professionals should offer sensitive and appropriate care to women with FGM.",
    "The clinical guideline on epilepsy in pregnancy emphasizes the importance of accurate diagnosis by a neurologist, assessment of risks to the mother and baby, and consideration of differential diagnoses for seizures in pregnant women. Management includes individualized care for antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) based on fetal risk and seizure control, folic acid intake, and minimizing AED exposure to reduce congenital malformations. Regular antenatal care with an epilepsy care team, monitoring for fetal abnormalities, and managing seizures in labor are critical. Postnatal care involves continued AED use, monitoring neonates for adverse effects, and ensuring effective contraception. Healthcare providers should be knowledgeable about disability legislation protecting individuals with epilepsy. The guideline underscores the importance of preconception counseling, monitoring AED exposure, and optimizing outcomes for women with epilepsy during pregnancy.",
    "The SOGC Clinical Practice Guideline No. 451 on Asymptomatic Endometrial Thickening in Postmenopausal Women provides recommendations for managing postmenopausal women with endometrial thickening. Key points include: not routinely screening with pelvic ultrasound for endometrial cancer, most cases present with postmenopausal bleeding, low malignancy risk with endometrial thickness <11 mm, individualized further investigations based on ultrasound findings and risk factors, and no need for routine screening ultrasounds in asymptomatic women on hormone therapy. Recommendations include endometrial tissue sampling for women with thickness >11 mm or positive ultrasound findings, consideration of individual risk factors for further investigations, and the use of hysteroscopy or dilation and curettage for monitoring or assessment. The guideline also discusses the impact of hormone therapy on endometrial health, management of cervical stenosis, and preoperative considerations for hysteroscopy.",
    "Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is a common liver condition in late pregnancy characterized by itching and elevated bile acids, posing risks such as preterm birth and stillbirth. Treatment involves ursodeoxycholic acid for itching and planned early birth based on bile acid levels. Recurrence in future pregnancies is common. Clinicians should suspect ICP in pregnant individuals with itching, confirm with bile acid testing, offer ursodeoxycholic acid, and monitor based on bile acid levels. Continuous fetal monitoring during labor is recommended. Maternal and fetal risks include pre-eclampsia, preterm birth, and neonatal complications. Ursodeoxycholic acid is the main treatment, with potential benefits in reducing preterm birth risk. Referral to a specialist may be needed for refractory cases. Postpartum follow-up, contraception considerations, and recurrence risk should be addressed. The World Health Organization recommends combined contraception postpartum for those with ICP. Further research is needed to enhance understanding and management of ICP.",
    "The clinical guideline on the management of genital herpes in pregnancy provides recommendations for healthcare professionals caring for pregnant women with genital herpes infections. Key points include treating first episodes with aciclovir, considering symptomatic relief options, and offering vaginal delivery with suppressive aciclovir therapy from 36 weeks gestation. Caesarean section is advised for third trimester acquisitions to prevent neonatal transmission. Type-specific HSV antibody testing can guide management decisions. Recurrent genital herpes in pregnant women generally has a low risk of neonatal transmission, allowing for vaginal delivery in most cases. Daily suppressive aciclovir should be considered for recurrent infections. For HIV-positive women with HSV, daily suppressive aciclovir is recommended. Neonates born to mothers with HSV should be monitored and treated appropriately to prevent postnatal transmission. The guideline emphasizes the importance of multidisciplinary team discussions and appropriate testing and treatment strategies.",
    "The RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 62 focuses on the management of suspected ovarian masses in premenopausal women. Key recommendations include conservative management and laparoscopic techniques for benign masses, referral to a gynaecological oncologist for suspicious cases, and the use of serum CA-125 levels and ultrasound findings to assess malignancy risk. Expectant management is suitable for asymptomatic women with small simple cysts. Surgical intervention is recommended for persistent or increasing cysts, especially in cases of mature cystic teratomas. Laparoscopic approach by experienced surgeons is preferred for elective surgical management, with careful consideration to avoid spillage of cyst contents. The guideline emphasizes early diagnosis and referral for improved outcomes and highlights the importance of accurate risk assessment using tools like the Risk of Malignancy Index (RMI) and ultrasound rules.",
    "The clinical guideline focuses on the laparoscopic management of non-obstetric abdominal conditions in pregnancy, such as appendicitis, gallbladder disease, and adnexal tumors. It underscores the safety of laparoscopy for both the mother and fetus when performed by experienced professionals. Laparoscopic surgery offers advantages like faster recovery and lower infection rates. Maternal and fetal outcomes are generally good, and surgery can be performed up to 34 weeks gestation if necessary. Surgeons should be skilled in laparoscopy to reduce complications, and a multidisciplinary team should manage pregnant women needing surgery. Factors like expertise, gestation, and patient preference should guide the choice between laparoscopic and open surgery. Intraoperative monitoring and careful anesthesia management are crucial. The guideline emphasizes the importance of timely surgical intervention for conditions like appendicitis to prevent complications. More high-quality evidence is needed, and national databases could aid in research due to challenges in conducting randomized trials for these conditions.",
    "This guideline focuses on managing deeply impacted fetal heads during lower segment Caesarean sections (LSCS) in pregnant women with a cephalic presentation. The key recommendations include using the Fetal Pillow as the first-line action to disengage the head, followed by reverse breech extraction if needed. For first stage LSCS, reverse breech extraction is recommended as the first-line action. The guideline provides a decision flowchart for managing impacted fetal heads and instructions for inserting the Fetal Pillow. It emphasizes the risks associated with second-stage LSCS and the importance of systematic management to reduce maternal and neonatal complications. The guideline also includes an audit proforma to assess the use of the Fetal Pillow and document delivery outcomes.",
    "The clinical guideline outlines the postnatal care provisions and schedules for women and individuals in the postnatal period. Key recommendations include encouraging skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding, performing routine observations, assessing VTE risk, providing postnatal information, and developing individualized postnatal care plans. Communication support, transitional care, and postnatal support in cases of poor outcomes for the term neonate are emphasized. Other critical management steps include coordinating care between settings, conducting newborn checks within 6-72 hours, offering mental health support, arranging follow-up appointments, administering vaccinations and screenings, and ensuring proper documentation. The guideline also covers topics like care of the perineum, infant feeding, parenting support, discharge criteria, bloodspot screening, and coordination of follow-up appointments and community visits.",
    "The NICE Antenatal Care Guideline provides recommendations for organizing and delivering antenatal care, addressing routine clinical care, information provision, and managing common pregnancy issues. Key points include involving partners in care decisions, assessing risks such as domestic abuse and female genital mutilation, monitoring fetal growth and well-being, discussing fetal movements, and identifying breech presentation. Recommendations emphasize individualized care, clear communication, and support for pregnant women's needs and preferences. Antenatal appointments should include assessing risks for conditions like gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia, monitoring blood pressure and urine protein levels, and discussing birth preferences. The guideline also covers interventions for issues like nausea and vomiting, heartburn, pelvic girdle pain, and vaginal discharge. Additionally, it addresses the importance of sleep position after 28 weeks to reduce the risk of stillbirth. Overall, the guideline aims to enhance antenatal care quality and outcomes for pregnant women and their babies.",
    "Laparoscopic hysterectomy for endometrial cancer is a safe and effective procedure when conducted by a multidisciplinary team with advanced laparoscopic skills. Proper patient selection and additional training are crucial. The surgery offers a less invasive alternative with faster recovery times than open surgery. Conversion to laparotomy rates may vary, but overall postoperative complications are lower with laparoscopic hysterectomy. However, more data on long-term outcomes are needed for future assessments. It is essential to have appropriate clinical governance, consent procedures, and audit mechanisms in place to ensure the success and safety of laparoscopic hysterectomy for endometrial cancer.",
    "The clinical guideline on Ectopic Pregnancy and Miscarriage focuses on diagnosing and managing early pregnancy complications, including ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage. Key recommendations include offering pregnancy tests to women of reproductive age with non-specific symptoms, prompt referral for suspected ectopic pregnancy, and utilizing ultrasound scans for diagnosis. For cases of increasing serum hCG levels, a transvaginal ultrasound scan is recommended, with subsequent management based on the findings. Methotrexate or surgical options are advised for unruptured tubal ectopic pregnancies, with specific criteria for each treatment modality. Anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis is recommended for Rh-negative women undergoing surgery. The guideline emphasizes the need for further research into the psychological impact of different management approaches and suggests standardizing practices based on evidence to improve outcomes and reduce costs. Early diagnosis and appropriate management are crucial to minimize psychological distress and prevent adverse outcomes associated with early pregnancy complications.",
    "The NICE guideline on endometriosis diagnosis and management covers various aspects of care. Key recommendations include assessing deep endometriosis extent, interpreting MRI scans by a specialist, considering laparoscopy for diagnosis even with normal ultrasound, offering treatment based on symptoms rather than stage, and discussing surgical options with patients. Management may involve hormonal or surgical treatment, with excision preferred over ablation for endometriomas. Laparoscopic surgery is recommended for endometriosis, especially in cases involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter. Hormonal treatment alone is not advised for women trying to conceive. Research recommendations include exploring pain management programs, assessing the effectiveness of lifestyle interventions, and determining optimal hormonal treatment doses for fertility outcomes in endometriosis patients prioritizing fertility. The guideline emphasizes the impact of endometriosis on quality of life and the need for tailored information and support interventions for patients and their partners.",
    "The NICE guideline on inducing labor provides recommendations for healthcare professionals and pregnant women regarding the circumstances, methods, assessment, monitoring, pain relief, and management of complications related to labor induction. Key recommendations include discussing birth preferences early in pregnancy, offering induction for specific circumstances like post-term pregnancy or preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, monitoring uterine activity and fetal well-being, providing pain relief options, and managing complications like hyperstimulation or unsuccessful induction. The guideline emphasizes shared decision-making, individualized care, and regular monitoring during the induction process. It also highlights the importance of considering factors such as fetal well-being, maternal preferences, and previous obstetric history when determining the most appropriate method of induction. Healthcare professionals are encouraged to provide information and support to help pregnant women make informed decisions about labor induction.",
    "The clinical guideline for the management of thyroid disorders in pregnancy emphasizes the importance of using trimester- and manufacturer-specific pregnancy reference ranges for thyroid function tests. Recommendations include iodine supplementation, targeted testing for high-risk populations, and levothyroxine treatment for hypothyroidism. Women on levothyroxine should increase their dose upon pregnancy confirmation and undergo regular monitoring. Testing for thyroid peroxidase antibodies is not recommended unless there is thyroid dysfunction. Antithyroid drugs should be used cautiously in hyperthyroidism during pregnancy, with propylthiouracil preferred. Postpartum thyroiditis management involves monitoring and possible levothyroxine replacement. The guideline also addresses the impact of iodine deficiency on fetal development and the importance of maintaining optimal thyroid function for maternal and fetal health. Postpartum thyroid dysfunction can have lasting consequences like hypothyroidism. Monitoring thyroid function in pregnant women with thyroid antibodies is crucial to prevent postpartum depression. Selenium supplementation may impact postpartum thyroid status in women with thyroid antibodies. Safety of iodine supplementation in these women needs further investigation. These guidelines are meant as general recommendations, not prescriptive directions. Deviations from local protocols should be documented in the patient's case notes.",
    "The clinical guideline on Birth After Previous Caesarean Birth recommends offering planned vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) to most women with a single lower segment cesarean delivery, with contraindications being previous uterine rupture or classical cesarean scar. VBAC success rates are around 72-75%, with previous vaginal delivery predicting success. Induction or augmentation of labor increases uterine rupture risk. Elective repeat cesarean sections (ERCS) should be done after 39 weeks with appropriate care. VBAC may not be suitable for certain complications. Antenatal care should be structured, with counseling by the maternity team. ERCS has a higher neonatal respiratory morbidity risk compared to VBAC. Consideration should be given to VBAC in women with multiple future pregnancies. Decision aids, personalized tools, and risk-benefit discussions are crucial for choosing the delivery mode. Various studies have explored outcomes and risks associated with different delivery methods post-cesarean. Factors like uterine rupture, placenta previa, and maternal morbidity have been studied in relation to VBAC and ERCS.",
    "The clinical guideline focuses on the management of anaemia during pregnancy and the postnatal period. Key recommendations include screening for anaemia at booking and 28 weeks, providing dietary advice to meet increased iron requirements, and initiating treatment if hemoglobin levels are below certain thresholds. Management strategies include dietary advice, oral iron replacement, and intravenous iron therapy. Iron deficiency is a common cause of anaemia in pregnancy, with symptoms such as fatigue, dizziness, and shortness of breath. Consequences of anaemia include increased risks of perinatal and neonatal mortality, low birth weight, and preterm birth. Monitoring hemoglobin levels, offering prophylactic iron to high-risk individuals, and considering intravenous iron therapy in specific cases are essential components of care. Prioritizing iron infusion for pregnant individuals with low hemoglobin levels approaching term and postpartum monitoring are critical for reducing complications. Blood transfusion should be considered after careful evaluation and exploring alternative treatments, with thorough documentation and informed consent from patients.",
    "Cord prolapse management involves the descent of the umbilical cord past the presenting part in the presence of ruptured membranes. Immediate action is crucial, with methods like bladder filling to relieve cord compression. In the hospital setting, a category 1 caesarean birth within 30 minutes is recommended for non-reassuring fetal heart rate patterns. Training for staff, monitoring through incident forms, and postnatal debriefing are crucial. Risk factors include long cord, breech presentation, and iatrogenic factors like artificial rupture of membranes. The incidence ranges from 0.1% to 0.6%, with higher rates in breech presentations. Immediate transfer to a labor ward is advised in community settings. This protocol aims to ensure timely and appropriate management of cord prolapse to optimize maternal and fetal outcomes.",
    "The Fetal Heart Monitoring clinical guideline provides recommendations for antenatal and intrapartum fetal monitoring. Antenatally, intermittent auscultation is recommended over routine listening, with electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) reserved for high-risk pregnancies. Computerised CTG (cCTG) with DR analysis is advised at 26/40 for severe pre-term pregnancies. During labor, intermittent auscultation is recommended for low-risk pregnancies, while continuous monitoring is suggested for increased-risk pregnancies. Actions include hourly reviews, systematic assessments, and documentation. Interpretation of intrapartum CTG involves assessing contractions, baseline fetal heart rate, variability, decelerations, and accelerations. Classifications include normal, suspicious, and pathological, with corresponding actions for each. Conservative measures may be initiated based on underlying causes. Continuous CTG reviews and fresh eyes assessments are crucial. The guideline emphasizes a holistic approach to fetal monitoring and individualized care based on clinical findings and preferences.",
    "The clinical guideline focuses on the disengagement of a deeply impacted fetal head during a lower segment Caesarean section (LSCS) using a Fetal Pillow. The Fetal Pillow, a soft silicone balloon, is inserted into the vagina before LSCS to elevate the fetal head in cephalic presentation. It is recommended as the first-line action for disengaging a deeply impacted fetal head. If the head remains impacted, a reverse breech extraction technique can be considered. Indications for Fetal Pillow use include failed instrumental delivery, full dilatation cesarean with the fetal head at or below the ischial spines, and severe caput or molding. Proper operator training is essential, and various assessments before and during the procedure are crucial. Documentation of key parameters such as delivery difficulty, Apgar score, injuries, blood loss, and other outcomes is emphasized. The guideline aims to improve clinical practice based on current evidence and best practices.",
    "The clinical guideline for hypertension and preeclampsia in pregnancy focuses on the management of hypertensive disorders in pregnant individuals. Key recommendations include assessing proteinuria in hypertensive disorders, immediate referrals for high-risk individuals, and considering antihypertensive drugs like labetalol, nifedipine, and methyldopa. For chronic hypertension, pre-pregnancy advice on weight management and antihypertensive drug considerations are crucial. Planned early birth before 37 weeks is not recommended unless medically necessary. Labetalol infusion is the first-line treatment for hypertension in pregnancy, with monitoring of blood pressure and fetal well-being essential. Fetal monitoring recommendations vary based on the type of hypertension. Intrapartum care should align with NICE guidelines, with close blood pressure monitoring and fluid balance control. A flowchart for midwives in community antenatal settings aids in the assessment and management of pregnant individuals with hypertension.",
    "The clinical guideline addresses failed intubation in obstetric patients undergoing general anesthesia in the peri-partum period. It emphasizes the need for a protocol with measurable standards and the use of professional judgment in its application. The responsibility lies with anaesthetists, midwives, and obstetricians to follow the guidance and utilize their expertise. Key considerations include physiological changes in pregnancy, the importance of maternal and fetal well-being, and human factors affecting practice. An algorithmic approach is recommended for managing difficult airways in pregnant patients, with specific algorithms provided by OAA/DAS for unanticipated difficult airways. The guideline aims to ensure safe and effective management of failed intubation in obstetric patients.",
    "Breech presentation refers to a fetus positioned with the buttocks, legs, or feet closest to the cervix. Perinatal risks are higher with breech presentation compared to cephalic presentation. Management includes monitoring and offering external cephalic version (ECV) at 36-37 weeks. ECV success rate is around 50%. Contraindications include certain conditions like placenta previa. Options for persistent breech presentation include planned caesarean section or vaginal breech birth. Vaginal breech birth requires thorough risk assessment and a detailed birth plan. Continuous monitoring, pain relief options, and a multidisciplinary team approach are essential. In labor, interventions may be needed if progress is slow. Delivery maneuvers depend on experience and preference. Cord compression is common during delivery. Planned caesarean section is recommended for preterm breech or twin pregnancies. Vaginal breech birth requires organizational support and skills training. Individualized risk assessment is crucial, and in some cases, emergency caesarean may be necessary.",
    "Shoulder dystocia is defined as the need for additional obstetric interventions during delivery after gentle downward traction fails. Risk factors include previous shoulder dystocia, macrosomia, maternal diabetes, maternal obesity, induction of labor, prolonged labor, and assisted vaginal delivery. Prevention strategies include cautious management of suspected macrosomia, with early induction in gestational diabetes and consideration of cesarean section in pregnancies with maternal diabetes. Diagnosis involves gentle traction, and management includes the McRoberts' maneuver and suprapubic pressure, avoiding lateral and downward traction. Post-delivery, there is an increased risk of postpartum hemorrhage and vaginal tears. It is crucial to maintain skills in managing shoulder dystocia to minimize complications. Complete documentation in maternal notes is essential, including the use of a shoulder dystocia proforma.",
    "The clinical guideline for Assisted Vaginal Birth at RSCH PRH outlines protocols for midwives and obstetricians when assisting women in labor. The goal is to achieve a vaginal birth with minimal morbidity. The guideline covers indications and contraindications for operative vaginal birth, risks of instrumental delivery, informed consent procedures, location options for the procedure, analgesia choices, hygiene practices, neonatal resuscitation requirements, and specific techniques for ventouse, forceps, and rotational forceps deliveries. Post-operative care includes perineal and vaginal trauma inspection, antibiotic administration, and pain management. Documentation requirements post-delivery are detailed, along with the importance of debriefing sessions for patients. The guideline emphasizes individualized care and support for women undergoing assisted vaginal births.",
    "The Caesarean Section Protocol, MP050, provides guidelines for healthcare professionals involved in caesarean sections. It covers various categories of caesarean sections, emphasizing the importance of documentation and adherence to safety checklists. Recommendations include avoiding routine suturing of peritoneum and subcutaneous tissue, preferring sutures over staples for skin closure, and considering negative pressure wound therapy for high BMI individuals to reduce infections. Other key points include delayed cord clamping, cord milking when necessary, administering oxytocin appropriately, and ensuring newborn resuscitation readiness. The protocol also stresses early skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding support post-operation. It highlights the need for VTE risk assessment, discussions on future pregnancies, and thorough discharge planning. The document also outlines risks and outcomes associated with caesarean versus vaginal delivery, urging timely referrals and collaboration with obstetric anesthetists.",
    "The Obstetric Haemorrhage Protocol at University Sussex Hospital's NHS Trust East covers antepartum hemorrhage, placental abruption, placenta praevia, postpartum hemorrhage, and management for women declining blood products. Key principles emphasize the use of measurable standards with room for professional judgment. Responsibilities are outlined for midwives, anaesthetists, and obstetricians to follow the protocol and exercise professional judgment. Definitions of obstetric hemorrhage are provided, including minor and major categories. Management involves clinical review, assessment, referral, risk assessment, care planning, communication, and clear responsibilities. Communication among staff is crucial, with specific protocols for different hemorrhage types. Postnatal care, monitoring, and follow-up are essential. Women declining blood products should have individual plans, and debriefing and follow-up appointments are recommended. Thromboprophylaxis and accurate documentation are emphasized throughout the management process.",
    "The Perinatal Collapse in Pregnancy & Puerperium Maternity Protocol provides guidelines for managing maternal collapse, a rare but life-threatening event during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Key recommendations include prompt resuscitation, use of the Modified Early Obstetric Warning System (MEOWS), involvement of specialist clinicians for complex cases, and collaboration between different healthcare professionals for effective management. Common causes of maternal collapse discussed include major obstetric hemorrhage, cardiac disease, thromboembolism, amniotic fluid embolism, sepsis, drug toxicity, eclampsia, intracranial hemorrhage, and anaphylaxis. The protocol emphasizes the importance of following Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines, considering aortocaval compression in pregnant women, and performing perimortem caesarean section if needed. Debriefing, training, and auditing are recommended for continuous improvement in managing maternal collapse.",
    "The Obstetric High Dependency Care clinical guideline outlines the management of women requiring high dependency care during pregnancy. It categorizes care levels into 0 to 3 based on the severity of the condition. The guideline emphasizes the need for clear documentation, one-to-one nursing care, and involvement of specialist clinicians when necessary. It provides guidance on transferring women to High Dependency Units (HDU) or Intensive Care Units (ITU) within maternity services, as well as outside maternity services. Specific equipment requirements, roles and responsibilities of staff, and criteria for discharge from HDU/ITU are detailed. The protocol highlights the importance of professional judgment in applying the recommendations and the need for regular review in line with Trust and National recommendations. Staff are required to access, understand, and follow the guidance, using their professional judgment when necessary.",
    "The clinical guideline outlines the Baby Abduction Policy at Brighton and Sussex NHS Trust, focusing on ensuring a safe environment and preventing baby abductions. Key principles include commitment to safety, responsibilities of staff, and immediate actions in case of abduction. Maternity, portering, security, and switchboard staff must adhere to the guidance and act swiftly. Immediate actions involve informing security and the police. Ongoing actions include moving parents to a private area, checking identification, and cooperating with authorities. Training for staff on abduction risks is essential, and audits will be conducted after each incident. The policy emphasizes fairness, respect, and dignity in line with Human Rights FREDA principles.",
    "The clinical guideline for hyponatremia in labor provides standards for managing low sodium levels in pregnant individuals during labor. Key recommendations include encouraging oral intake, monitoring fluid balance, and specific protocols for low and high-risk care. Oxytocin dosing regimes are outlined, along with a management flowchart based on sodium levels and symptoms. Severe hyponatremia (sodium <125 mmol/L with symptoms) is deemed a medical emergency, requiring urgent senior obstetric and anesthetic review. Treatment aims to alleviate symptoms rather than correcting sodium levels completely. This involves strict fluid restriction, hourly sodium monitoring, and 1.8% Sodium Chloride boluses under ITU supervision. The goal is to increase sodium levels by no more than 10 mmol/L in 24 hours. Regular communication with obstetric and anesthetic teams is emphasized throughout the management process.",
    "This clinical guideline focuses on the management of maternal deaths during the childbearing period. It outlines responsibilities of midwives, obstetricians, and management, including reporting maternal deaths and immediate management steps. A detailed checklist for notifying relevant parties is provided. Key actions include informing next of kin, completing documentation, and activating investigation policies. The guideline also covers managing maternal deaths in primary care, reporting to relevant authorities, and handling paperwork and documentation. It emphasizes the importance of following specific procedures, such as involving the Medical Examiner and Coroner, issuing death certificates, and considering cultural and religious aspects. The guideline also highlights the need for staff debriefing and providing information to relatives. Additionally, it includes instructions for certifying deaths and registering them appropriately.",
    "The guideline focuses on managing nausea and vomiting in pregnancy (NVP) and hyperemesis gravidarum (HG). NVP affects most pregnant individuals and can be managed in General Practice, while HG, a severe form, may require specialist care. Key recommendations include using antiemetic medications like pyridoxine/doxylamine or cyclizine, assessing severity with the PUQE scoring system, monitoring renal function and vitamin levels, and considering thiamine for severe cases. General Practitioners should consider alternative causes if symptoms start after 16 weeks, monitor various parameters, assess mental health, offer counseling, and prescribe antiemetics. In secondary care, management involves reviewing risks, using antiemetics, ensuring nutrition and hydration, and offering support groups. Referral for specialist care should be considered if needed. Resources for support and further information are provided, including contact details for specialist centers and patient information leaflets.",
    "The clinical guideline focuses on preventing and managing venous thromboembolism (VTE) in pregnancy and the postnatal period. Key recommendations include conducting pre-pregnancy risk assessments for individuals with a history of VTE, offering thromboprophylaxis with LMWH for high-risk pregnant individuals, starting antenatal thromboprophylaxis early in pregnancy, initiating postnatal thromboprophylaxis 6 hours after birth, and using LMWH as the preferred agent for both antenatal and postnatal thromboprophylaxis. Contraindications to LMWH use are outlined, and alternative agents like danaparoid and fondaparinux may be considered with hematologist consultation. The guideline discourages the use of aspirin for thromboprophylaxis in obstetric patients and restricts warfarin use in pregnancy to specific situations. Prompt investigation and management of DVT and PE symptoms are emphasized due to VTE being a leading cause of maternal death in the UK. Follow-up care should involve a multidisciplinary team, and pre-pregnancy advice is crucial for medication review and pregnancy care planning.",
    "In pregnancies complicated by diabetes, maintaining optimal blood glucose levels during labor is crucial to prevent adverse outcomes. Glycemic targets of 70 to 125 mg/dL are recommended. Maternal hyperglycemia during labor can lead to fetal hypoxemia and neonatal hypoglycemia. Individualized glucose monitoring and insulin management, including the use of continuous glucose monitoring devices and intravenous insulin protocols, are essential. Patients on insulin pumps can continue use during labor, with specific management protocols in place. For cesarean births, insulin pump users can follow hospital policies, while patients with gestational diabetes may require subcutaneous correctional insulin. Postpartum, insulin dosing is typically reduced, with close monitoring and adjustments necessary. Metformin is recommended for postpartum type 2 diabetes and is safe for breastfeeding. Follow-up testing and monitoring for diabetes postpartum are essential. Gestational diabetes may not require medication postpartum, and breastfeeding may lower insulin requirements. Close monitoring of glucose levels is crucial postpartum, with insulin adjustments based on individual needs.",
    "The clinical guideline for term premature rupture of membranes (PROM) focuses on the management of this condition, emphasizing the decision between inducing labor or waiting for spontaneous labor. Inducing labor is recommended to reduce the risk of infection for both the mother and newborn. Oxytocin induction is preferred for patients without contraindications. Expectant management can be considered for uncomplicated pregnancies where patients prefer to wait for labor to start. Hospitalization is advised for PROM cases to decrease complications. Antibiotic prophylaxis is used when necessary, but it is generally avoided unless specific criteria are met. Group B streptococcus colonization does not always require immediate intervention. The guideline highlights the importance of monitoring for signs of infection and fetal well-being during expectant management. It also stresses that antibiotic prophylaxis is not needed for patients with negative GBS cultures and that management for those with unknown GBS status should be based on standard risk assessment.",
    "The clinical guideline for managing uterine fibroids in reproductive-age females includes various treatment options based on symptoms and patient preferences. Expectant management, hysteroscopic fibroid resection, and medical therapy with contraceptives or intrauterine devices are initial options. Second-tier treatments include GnRH agonists, uterine artery embolization, and tranexamic acid. For patients not desiring fertility, hysterectomy or myomectomy may be considered. Laparoscopic myomectomy is preferred over open abdominal myomectomy due to less blood loss and lower complication rates. Patients with bulk or pain symptoms can opt for UAE or GnRH analogs. Hysteroscopic myomectomy is recommended for submucosal fibroids in patients desiring fertility. Surgical approach does not affect ovarian reserve. Further randomized trials are needed for comparison. Invasive treatments like UAE and myomectomy are options for patients with fibroids. Patients desiring pregnancy may consider myomectomy or hysteroscopic myomectomy.",
    "Pregnancy of unknown location (PUL) refers to a scenario where a patient with a positive pregnancy test has a transvaginal ultrasound showing neither an intrauterine pregnancy (IUP) nor an ectopic pregnancy. The management of PUL involves continued evaluation until a final diagnosis is reached to prevent severe maternal outcomes. Initial assessment includes history, physical examination, and ultrasound, with further workup based on findings. Serial human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) measurements and ultrasound assessments are crucial. Management varies based on stability and patient desires, with hemodynamically unstable cases needing immediate intervention, stable cases potentially undergoing expectant management, and undesired pregnancies requiring proactive intervention. Special consideration is given to patients with persistent hCG elevations or non-pregnancy-related causes. The algorithm does not apply to unstable patients or rare conditions like malignancy or pituitary hCG production. Patients desiring pregnancy are managed differently.",
    "The clinical guideline provides recommendations for diagnosing pregnancy loss through transvaginal ultrasound evaluation in cases of nonviable intrauterine pregnancies up to 20 weeks of gestation. Key points include confirming intrauterine gestation and excluding ectopic pregnancy through ultrasound, with specific criteria for diagnosing pregnancy loss based on gestational sac diameter and cardiac activity. Various ultrasound criteria are outlined for different levels of diagnostic certainty, considering patient preferences and clinical context. Challenges in assessment, such as gestational duration discrepancies and multiple gestations, are discussed. Additional ultrasound findings suggestive of non-viable or poor outcomes are highlighted. The guideline emphasizes the importance of expertise in sonography and equipment quality in making accurate diagnoses. The document also mentions the need for further research to compare ultrasound techniques and consider the false-positive rate in diagnosis."
  ],
  "system_prompt": "You are a medical AI assistant helping to identify relevant clinical guidelines for specific medical issues. Your task is to analyze the clinical scenario and determine which guidelines are most relevant, using the specified probability levels.",
  "user_prompt": "Analyze the following clinical scenario and determine which guidelines are most relevant.\n\nIMPORTANT: You MUST use EXACTLY these probability levels for each guideline:\n- Certain (directly applicable to the main clinical issues and patient's specific context)\n- Highly Likely (closely related to the main clinical issues and patient's specific context)\n- Likely (potentially relevant to secondary issues or patient's specific context)\n- Unlikely (minimal relevance to the patient's specific context)\n- Not Relevant (no clear connection to the patient's specific context)\n\nPlease provide a response in EXACTLY this format:\n\n### Most Relevant Guidelines\n[List guidelines marked as 'Certain' or 'Highly Likely', ordered by relevance]\n\n### Potentially Relevant Guidelines\n[List guidelines marked as 'Likely', ordered by relevance]\n\n### Less Relevant Guidelines\n[List guidelines marked as 'Unlikely', ordered by relevance]\n\n### Not Relevant Guidelines\n[List guidelines marked as 'Not Relevant']\n\nFor each guideline, use EXACTLY this format:\nGuideline Name: Probability of Relevance\n\nAssessment Criteria:\n1. Consider the patient's specific context (e.g., pregnancy status, age, comorbidities)\n2. Focus on guidelines that provide actionable recommendations for the patient's current situation\n3. Prioritize guidelines that address the primary clinical issues\n4. Consider guidelines that may be relevant for secondary issues or future management\n5. Be conservative in your assessment - only mark as 'Certain' if the guideline is directly applicable to the main clinical issues and patient's specific context\n\nIMPORTANT FORMATTING RULES:\n- Each guideline MUST be on a new line\n- Each guideline MUST follow the format: 'Guideline Name: Probability of Relevance'\n- The probability MUST be one of the five levels listed above\n- ALL guidelines MUST be listed, even if not relevant\n- Do not add any additional text or explanations\n\nClinical Scenario:\n**Dictation: Clinical Interaction – Abnormal Uterine Bleeding**  **Patient Details:**  \n- Name: [Fictional Name] Jane Doe  \n- Age: 36  \n- BMI: 18.9 (weight 52 kg, height 1.65 m)  \n- Gravida: 1, Para: 1 (prior full-term vaginal delivery)  \nLast Menstrual Period (LMP): 2 weeks ago (currently mid-cycle)  \n- Contraception: None currently  **History of Presenting Complaint:**  \nMs. Doe presents with a 4-month history of irregular menstrual bleeding. She reports episodes of heavy bleeding lasting 7–10 days, occurring every 2–3 weeks, with associated fatigue. She denies intermenstrual spotting but admits to occasional cramping. No history of post-coital bleeding. She has not been sexually active in the past year.  **Relevant Medical History:**  \nNo known bleeding disorders or thyroid dysfunction.  \nNo prior gynecological procedures (e.g., hysteroscopy, D&C).  \nNo history of fibroids or endometriosis.  \nNo chronic medical conditions.  **Medications & Allergies:**  \nOccasional ibuprofen for cramps (no regular medications).  \nNo known drug allergies.  **Social History:**  \nNon-smoker, occasional alcohol (1–2 units/week).  \nWorks as a teacher; moderate stress levels reported.  **Examination Findings:**  \n- General appearance: Pale conjunctivae (possible anemia).  \n- Abdomen: Soft, non-tender, no palpable masses.  \n- Speculum exam: Cervix appears normal, no visible lesions.  \n- Bimanual exam: Uterus anteverted, normal size, no adnexal tenderness.  **Notable Omissions (for testing purposes):**  \nNo documented assessment of iron studies or hemoglobin.  \nNo inquiry about family history of gynecological malignancies.  \nNo discussion of prior Pap smear history or HPV vaccination status.  \nPelvic ultrasound not yet performed.  **Impression:**  \nAbnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) in a premenopausal patient—differential includes ovulatory dysfunction (e.g., PCOS, thyroid disorder), endometrial polyp, or early perimenopausal changes.  **Management Plan:**  \n1. **Investigations:**  \n   Full blood count (FBC) to assess for anemia.  \n   TSH and prolactin to evaluate endocrine causes.  \n   Pelvic ultrasound to rule out structural pathology.  \n   (No endometrial biopsy arranged at this stage.)  2. **Symptomatic Relief:**  \n   Trial of tranexamic acid during heavy bleeding.  \n   Consider combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) for cycle regulation if no contraindications.  3. **Follow-Up:**  \n   Review in 6 weeks with investigation results.  \n   If bleeding worsens or anemia confirmed, escalate to gynecology referral.  **Counseling Provided:**  \nReassured that AUB is common but requires evaluation.  \nAdvised to monitor bleeding patterns and report syncope or severe fatigue.  **Dictated by:** Dr. [Fictional Name] Smith  \n**Date:** [Fictional Date]  --*Note: This is a fictional dictation for testing purposes only. No real patient data or medical advice is contained herein.*\n\n\n\nAvailable Guidelines:\nBASHH - 2014 - Mx of Vulval Conditions.pdf: The 2014 UK National Guideline on the Management of Vulval Conditions provides recommendations for managing various vulval disorders. General advice for all conditions includes avoiding irritants, informing the GP, considering STI screening, and assessing for sexual dysfunction. Specific conditions like vulval lichen sclerosus and vulval lichen planus have distinct symptoms, signs, complications, and treatment with ultra-potent topical steroids. Referral to a vulval clinic is recommended for certain cases. Vulval eczema, lichen simplex, and vulval psoriasis have their management strategies involving topical corticosteroids and lifestyle modifications. Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia requires referral for colposcopy and specific treatment options. Vulvodynia management involves a multidisciplinary approach, with treatment options like topical local anesthetics, physical therapies, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and surgery. Follow-up is essential for monitoring progress and providing psychological support. Unprovoked vulvodynia is managed similarly as a chronic pain syndrome. Various treatment modalities like tricyclic antidepressants and referral to a pain clinic may be necessary.\nBHIVA - 2020 - HIV Guideline.pdf: The clinical guideline provides recommendations for managing HIV in pregnant and postpartum women to prevent vertical transmission to infants. Key points include initiating antiretroviral therapy (ART) in all pregnant women, monitoring CD4 cell counts and viral loads, and choosing specific ART regimens based on viral load levels. Delivery mode recommendations vary based on viral load levels. Postpartum care stresses continuing cART, mental health assessment, and infant monitoring. The guideline also covers psychosocial care, sexual health screening, and infant feeding guidance. It emphasizes multidisciplinary care, peer support, mental health assessment, and social support for women with HIV during and after pregnancy to improve maternal health outcomes and reduce vertical transmission rates through evidence-based strategies.\nBJOG - 2016 -  - Management of Bladder Pain Syndrome.pdf: The clinical guideline for managing Bladder Pain Syndrome (BPS) emphasizes a comprehensive initial assessment including medical history, physical examination, and diagnostic tests. Conservative treatments like dietary modifications and stress management are recommended initially, followed by pharmacological options if needed. Intravesical treatments can be considered if conservative measures fail. Referral to secondary care and multidisciplinary team discussions are advised for patients not responding to initial treatments. Physiotherapy and psychological support are beneficial for refractory cases. Long-term follow-up may be necessary until symptoms are controlled. Safe treatment options in pregnancy include oral amitriptyline and intravesical heparin. Avoiding certain treatments during pregnancy is crucial. Multimodal therapy may be considered if single drugs are ineffective, with individualized treatment plans based on clinical expertise. Regular follow-ups and support groups are recommended for ongoing management. Areas for future research include standardized assessment tools and the role of conservative treatments in BPS.\nBJOG - 2016 - Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy.pdf: The clinical guideline on ectopic pregnancy diagnosis and management stresses the use of transvaginal ultrasound and beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin levels for diagnosis. Treatment options include surgical, pharmacological, and conservative approaches tailored to the type of ectopic pregnancy. Anti-D immunoglobulin should be offered, and long-term fertility prospects discussed. Methotrexate is recommended as first-line treatment in specific cases, with expectant management suitable in selected cases. Various surgical techniques are available based on the type of ectopic pregnancy. Support and counseling are essential during treatment. Providers need appropriate training in ultrasound, surgical, and medical management. Follow-up plans should be documented, with a 3-month waiting period before conceiving post-methotrexate treatment. The guideline also suggests areas for future research and audit topics to ensure quality care, addressing fertility outcomes, Rh immune globulin use, surgical approaches, and psychological effects on patients.\nBJOG - 2017 -  External Cephalic Version and Reducing the Incidence of Term Breech Presentation.pdf: External Cephalic Version (ECV) is a procedure to turn a breech baby to a head-down position, reducing the need for a caesarean section. ECV should be offered at term from 37 weeks of gestation and can be supported by tocolysis with betamimetics. Regional analgesia may be used for pain relief during ECV. Trained practitioners should perform ECV, and women should be informed of its risks and benefits. In specific cases, ECV can be considered from 36 weeks of gestation or even intrapartum. ECV after a prior caesarean delivery is not associated with increased risk. Postural management alone is not effective for spontaneous version. Further research is needed to enhance ECV success rates. Complications of ECV are rare. It is crucial to detect breech presentation antenatally. Studies on ECV outcomes, complications, and patient satisfaction are ongoing, emphasizing the need for continuous evaluation and improvement in ECV practices.\nBJOG - 2017 -  Management of Breech Presentation.pdf: The clinical guideline on the management of breech presentation provides recommendations for healthcare professionals and pregnant women. Key points include offering external cephalic version (ECV) for term breech presentations, counseling on risks and benefits of ECV and mode of delivery options, and discussing planned vaginal breech delivery versus caesarean section. Caesarean section reduces perinatal mortality compared to vaginal breech birth, but has associated risks. Skilled intrapartum care and proper case selection are crucial for the safety of vaginal breech delivery. Management should include continuous fetal monitoring, selective episiotomy, and avoiding fetal trauma. In preterm breech births, individualized management is recommended. For twin pregnancies with breech presentation, caesarean section for the first twin is advised. Organizational support for vaginal breech delivery services is essential. Future research areas and audit topics are outlined. The guideline emphasizes evidence-based decision-making and standardized methodology in developing recommendations.\nBJOG - 2017 -  Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in Pregnancy.pdf: The clinical guideline focuses on managing inherited bleeding disorders in pregnancy, including hemophilia, von Willebrand disease (VWD), factor XI deficiency, and rare bleeding disorders. Recommendations include determining baseline factor levels pre-pregnancy, genetic counseling for carriers, monitoring and maintaining factor levels during pregnancy, and multidisciplinary antenatal care. Treatment options for VWD include DDAVP, VWF concentrates, tranexamic acid, and factor replacement. Factor XI deficiency management involves tranexamic acid, factor XI concentrate, and FFP, with personalized labor and delivery plans. Individualized treatment plans based on factor levels and bleeding phenotype are crucial. Recommendations include tailored management strategies, avoiding certain medications, and personalized care for optimal outcomes. Specific guidance is provided for labor, delivery, and postpartum care, including prophylactic treatments and genetic testing for at-risk fetuses. Neonatal bleeding risks and management are categorized based on specific diagnoses, with detailed strategies for term neonates.\nBJOG - 2017 -  Prevention of Early‐onset Neonatal Group B Streptococcal Disease.pdf: The clinical guideline for the prevention of early-onset neonatal Group B Streptococcal (EOGBS) disease provides recommendations for managing pregnant women at risk and newborns exposed to GBS. Key points include: universal screening is not recommended, clinicians should be aware of risk factors, intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis (IAP) should be offered to high-risk women, IAP is recommended for confirmed preterm labor, immediate IAP for known GBS carriers at term, and prompt treatment for babies with signs of EOGBS disease. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not needed for all cases, and postnatal prophylaxis is not recommended for low-risk term babies. Breastfeeding is encouraged regardless of GBS status. Monitoring and early treatment are crucial for babies at risk. The guideline emphasizes the importance of individualized care based on clinical factors and available treatment options. Local protocols should be followed, with any deviations documented.\nBJOG - 2018 - Denison - Care of Women with Obesity in Pregnancy.pdf: The clinical guideline for managing women with obesity in pregnancy focuses on optimizing care throughout pregnancy. Key recommendations include pre-conception weight optimization, providing information on risks associated with obesity in pregnancy, offering folic acid supplementation, and ensuring appropriate antenatal care. Maternity units should have protocols for risk assessments, monitoring for gestational diabetes, mental health screening, and fetal surveillance. Labor and birth planning should include discussions on birth options, active labor management, and considerations for cesarean sections. Postpartum care should address weight management, contraception advice, and breastfeeding support. Specialized care is needed for women with prior bariatric surgery. The guideline underscores the need for further research to understand the impact of obesity on maternal and fetal health during pregnancy. Additionally, the guideline highlights the importance of intrapartum management, mode of delivery, and prevention of complications in obese pregnant women.\nBJOG - 2019 - Thomson - Care of Women Presenting with Suspected Preterm Prelabour Rupture of Membranes from 24 0 Weeks of.pdf: The clinical guideline on preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (PPROM) provides recommendations for diagnosis, assessment, involvement of neonatologists, and management. Key recommendations include diagnosing PPROM through maternal history and speculum examination, offering antibiotics and corticosteroids, diagnosing chorioamnionitis using clinical assessment and tests, and considering expectant management until 37 weeks. Neonatologists should be involved in cases of PPROM, and magnesium sulfate can be offered in established labor. Tocolysis is not recommended, and outpatient care should be individualized. Emotional support and discussions with a neonatologist are important. Corticosteroids should be considered from 24 weeks, and magnesium sulfate offered from 24 to 29+6 weeks. Amnioinfusion is not routine, and expectant management until 37 weeks can be offered. Further research is needed in PPROM management. Links to support groups are provided.\nBJOG - 2020 -  Management of Gestational Trophoblastic Disease.pdf: Gestational Trophoblastic Disease (GTD) management involves recognizing symptoms like irregular bleeding and positive pregnancy tests. Diagnosis is confirmed through histological examination. Complete molar pregnancies are best removed via suction curettage. Cervical preparation before surgery is safe, and oxytocic infusions should be used cautiously. Repeat surgery may be needed for persistent bleeding. Histological assessment is recommended for all miscarriages to exclude trophoblastic neoplasia. Elevated hCG levels post-pregnancy may indicate GTN and should prompt referral to a GTD center. Women with suspected ectopic molar pregnancies are managed like typical ectopic pregnancies. Combined molar and viable twin pregnancies require specialized care. Follow-up for GTD is crucial, involving hCG monitoring and potential chemotherapy. Women treated for GTN should delay pregnancy. Long-term outcomes are generally positive, with high cure rates and successful pregnancies. Additional research is needed to improve outcomes and manage relapsed disease. Local adaptations to guidelines should be documented.\nBJOG - 2020 - Murphy - Assisted Vaginal Birth.pdf: The Assisted Vaginal Birth Green-top Guideline No. 26 from April 2020 provides recommendations for preparing, defining, recommending, and managing assisted vaginal births. Key points include encouraging continuous labor support, informing about epidural effects, promoting different labor positions, and recommending delayed pushing. Clinical judgment is crucial, with relative contraindications like fetal bleeding disorders. Safe assisted births require assessment, communication, and expertise, with ultrasound assessment recommended. Consent must be obtained and documented. Experienced operators should perform assisted births, choosing instruments based on skill level. Post-birth care includes prophylactic antibiotics, analgesia, and psychological support. Documentation should be detailed, and adverse outcomes trigger incident reports. Training in vacuum and forceps birth is essential, with shared decision-making to reduce psychological morbidity. Future plans and follow-up care are vital, emphasizing honesty, adverse event reporting, and a safe maternity unit framework.\nBJOG - 2021 - Navaratnam - Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling.pdf: Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are prenatal diagnostic tests with a low risk of miscarriage. Amniocentesis should be done after 15 weeks, and CVS after 10 weeks of gestation. Women with multiple pregnancies have a slightly higher miscarriage risk. Screening for blood-borne viruses is crucial before these tests. Care should follow specific guidelines, including providing information on aftercare and pregnancy options based on results. Risks include infection, procedure failure, and fetal injury. Operators must maintain competency and seek help if needed. Severe maternal sepsis is rare. Testing for viruses like HIV and Hepatitis B is important, with low transmission risks if well controlled. Amniocentesis may increase HBV transmission risk with high viral loads. No evidence suggests Hepatitis C transmission risk. Third-trimester amniocentesis may be considered for specific fetal conditions.\nBJOG - 2022 - Girling - Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy.pdf: Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy (ICP) clinical guidelines recommend considering ICP in pregnant women with itching and raised bile acid concentrations of 19 micromol/L or higher. Additional investigations are not routinely recommended unless itch is severe or associated with other conditions. Severe or atypical cases should be discussed with a hepatologist. Confirming ICP postnatally is crucial, with a focus on symptom resolution and normal liver function tests. The risk of stillbirth increases with peak bile acid concentrations, warranting planned birth timing. Ultrasound and cardiotocography do not predict or prevent stillbirth in ICP. No treatments have been shown to improve pregnancy outcomes or reduce bile acid concentrations significantly. Ursodeoxycholic acid is not routinely recommended for adverse perinatal outcomes in ICP. Active management with planned early birth is suggested to reduce adverse outcomes, and close monitoring with regular tests and measurements is essential. Maternal vitamin K treatment may be necessary in cases of reduced fat absorption or abnormal coagulation studies. Follow-up postpartum is advised to confirm resolution. In subsequent pregnancies, baseline tests should be performed, and repeat testing should be based on clinical indications. Future research should focus on prognostic tools, testing for gestational diabetes, and effective treatments for itching and adverse perinatal outcomes in ICP.\nBJOG - 2022 - Shennan - Cervical Cerclage.pdf: The Green-top Guideline No. 75 on Cervical Cerclage provides recommendations for the insertion and management of cerclage in pregnant women at risk of preterm birth and second trimester fetal loss. Key recommendations include offering history-indicated cerclage for women with specific risk factors, considering cerclage for women with a short cervix and certain histories, and individualizing care for emergency cerclage cases. The guideline emphasizes the importance of informed decision-making, potential complications, and the choice of suture material and technique. It also highlights that cerclage is not recommended for certain conditions like multiple pregnancies or Mullerian anomalies. The guideline suggests that further research is needed in some areas and provides insights into the removal of cerclage, adjuvant management, and post-cerclage care.\nBJOG - 2022 - Stock - Antenatal corticosteroids to reduce neonatal morbidity and mortality.pdf: Antenatal corticosteroids are crucial in reducing perinatal and neonatal death, as well as respiratory distress syndrome, when given within seven days prior to preterm birth. They should be offered to women between 24+0 and 34+6 weeks' gestation with imminent preterm birth anticipated, including those with twins and triplets. For planned caesarean births between 37+0 and 38+6 weeks, a discussion about corticosteroids' risks and benefits is advised. Corticosteroids are effective within 48 hours before birth, with benefits even within 24 hours. Late preterm births (35+0 to 36+6 weeks) should consider corticosteroids, but risks like neonatal hypoglycemia must be weighed. Women with diabetes can receive corticosteroids with additional monitoring. Corticosteroids should not delay birth if necessary for the mother or baby's health. Limited evidence supports repeated corticosteroid courses, with a maximum of three courses, and caution is advised in systemic infections. Future research should focus on effectiveness in various conditions and potential off-target effects.\nBJOG - 2024 - DeÂ Silva - Outpatient Hysteroscopy.pdf: The clinical guideline emphasizes the importance of providing dedicated outpatient hysteroscopy services for women with abnormal uterine bleeding and reproductive issues. Key recommendations include offering written information to patients before the procedure, using vaginoscopy as the standard technique, and preferring mechanical hysteroscopic tissue removal systems over miniature bipolar electrodes. Conscious sedation should not be routinely used, and NSAIDs are recommended for pain management. Safety checklists, informed consent, and proper documentation are crucial. Cervical preparation with prostaglandins and smaller diameter hysteroscopes can reduce pain. Saline should be used as the distension medium. Avoiding routine cervical dilatation and local anesthesia for vaginoscopic approaches are advised. The guideline also discusses the importance of patient monitoring, quality assurance tools, and the need for further research on pain management strategies and hysteroscopy techniques.\nBMS - 2024 - Management of unscheduled bleeding on HRT.pdf: The British Menopause Society guideline on managing unscheduled bleeding on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) emphasizes assessing women with unscheduled bleeding, identifying endometrial cancer risk factors, and determining when to investigate. Recommendations include adjusting HRT to reduce bleeding episodes, assessing cancer risk factors and bleeding patterns, offering examinations and investigations, and adjusting HRT regimens based on risk factors. The guideline discusses risk factors for endometrial cancer, optimizing HRT with endometrial assessment, and adjusting HRT based on ultrasound findings. It highlights the importance of individualized management strategies, including progestogen adjustments, non-hormonal alternatives, lifestyle modifications, and considering surgical options if needed. The document also addresses the impact of different progestogens and HRT regimens on endometrial protection, emphasizing the use of continuous combined HRT for endometrial safety. Regular monitoring, counseling on contraceptive needs, and timely referrals are crucial components of managing unscheduled bleeding on HRT.\nClinical Consensus No. 455 Fetal Sex Determination and Disclosure.pdf: Clinical Consensus No. 455 focuses on fetal sex determination and disclosure during obstetric ultrasound examinations. Key recommendations include respecting parental wishes regarding disclosure, making efforts to determine fetal sex during ultrasounds, and providing direct access to ultrasound reports for patients/parents. The guideline emphasizes the importance of detecting fetal genital anomalies and communicating fetal sex information clearly. It suggests re-examination or referral if fetal sex cannot be determined and highlights the need for reports to include a visible alert about the presence of fetal sex details. Overall, the guideline underscores the significance of fetal genitalia assessment in routine second-trimester ultrasounds and stresses the importance of communicating fetal sex information to patients while upholding their preferences.\nESHRE - PCOS - 2023.pdf: The 2023 International Evidence-Based Guideline for the Assessment and Management of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) comprises 254 recommendations and practice points to enhance consistent, evidence-based care and improve health outcomes in PCOS. Key updates include refined diagnostic criteria, recognition of broader PCOS features, diverse burden of disease emphasis, and evidence-based medical and fertility management. Recommendations encompass diagnostic assessments, irregular menstrual cycles, biochemical and clinical hyperandrogenism evaluation, ultrasound criteria for polycystic ovarian morphology, anti-Müllerian hormone use, ethnic variations, menopause considerations, cardiovascular risk assessment, lifestyle interventions, psychological aspects, weight management strategies, medication options like metformin and oral contraceptives, laser therapies for hirsutism, bariatric surgery, antenatal care, infertility treatment algorithms, and IVF considerations. Shared decision-making, access to evidence-based information, and individualized care are highlighted. The guideline emphasizes comprehensive, patient-centered care to address the multifaceted aspects of PCOS effectively.\nESHRE GUIDELINE ENDOMETRIOSI 2022.pdf: The ESHRE clinical guideline for endometriosis offers evidence-based recommendations for diagnosis and treatment. Key points include using NSAIDs or hormone therapies like GnRH agonists for pain management, preferring surgical excision over ablation, and recommending cystectomy for ovarian endometrioma. Referral to specialized centers is advised for complex cases, with tailored treatment plans and long-term monitoring emphasized. Surgical options are effective for pain relief, but risks should be considered, especially in rectal surgery. Medical therapies can complement surgery, with limited evidence supporting preoperative hormone treatment. Shared decision-making is crucial in choosing between medical and surgical interventions. ART can be considered for infertility, with antibiotic prophylaxis recommended during treatment. Regular monitoring, lifestyle modifications, and awareness of associated risks are essential. The guideline covers various patient populations, including adolescents and postmenopausal women, and addresses extrapelvic endometriosis, pregnancy effects, and cancer risk. Genetic testing for risk assessment is advised in research settings. Prevention strategies and disclosure of conflicts of interest are highlighted. The guideline development process involves evidence review, consensus meetings, and implementation strategies for dissemination. Monitoring asymptomatic cases is generally not recommended, and routine cancer screening beyond existing guidelines is not advised. The guideline will be revised in 2025, with stakeholder input and copyright restrictions in place.\nESHRE Guideline - 2022 - Endometriosis.pdf: The ESHRE clinical guideline for endometriosis provides recommendations for diagnosis and treatment. Key points include offering NSAIDs, hormone therapy, and surgical options for managing pain. Referral to specialized centers is advised for deep cases. Surgical excision is preferred over ablation. Hormone therapy post-surgery can improve pain outcomes. Treatments for infertility include IUI or ART. Continuous OCP use is recommended for pain. Surgical interventions significantly improve pain and quality of life. Long-term hormone treatment may prevent symptom recurrence. Research is needed for diagnosis and management. Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment can reduce pain and infertility risks. Surgical, medical, and non-medical interventions are covered. Shared decision-making is emphasized. Non-medical strategies like acupuncture and physiotherapy can help. Adolescents may use hormonal contraceptives first. Postmenopausal women may need surgery. Aromatase inhibitors can be considered. Monitoring extrapelvic endometriosis is uncertain. Primary prevention includes a healthy lifestyle. Hormone treatments have varying effects on cancer risk. Surgical excision may reduce ovarian cancer risk. Pregnancy may not always improve symptoms.\nESHRE PIL - Endometriosis.pdf: This booklet addresses endometriosis, a common condition in women characterized by pelvic pain, reduced quality of life, and infertility. Diagnosis involves clinical evaluation and laparoscopy. Treatment options include medications, hormonal therapies, and surgery. Fertility can be preserved through surgical interventions or assisted reproduction techniques. Effective communication with healthcare providers is crucial for devising an appropriate treatment plan. The booklet covers symptoms, diagnosis, various treatment modalities, fertility considerations, and contact information for endometriosis organizations. It stresses the importance of seeking medical advice for individualized care.\nFIGO - 2015 - Intrapartum Fetal Monitoring - Cardiotocography.pdf: The FIGO consensus guidelines on intrapartum fetal monitoring recommend that cardiotocography (CTG) should not replace clinical judgment but be used in high-risk situations for fetal hypoxia. Continuous CTG is advised when abnormalities are detected during intermittent auscultation. Maternal positioning during monitoring is crucial, avoiding prolonged supine recumbent positions. Initial monitoring should be external fetal heart rate (FHR) monitoring, with simultaneous maternal heart rate monitoring in specific cases. Analysis of CTG tracings involves assessing baseline, variability, accelerations, decelerations, and contractions. Management of fetal hypoxia/acidosis requires prompt intervention and addressing underlying causes. Continuous CTG may not significantly improve outcomes and can lead to unnecessary interventions. Regular staff training is essential for safe monitoring. Clinical guidelines should be straightforward and objective for effective technology use.\nGTG 2008 - Prevention of Entry-Related Laparoscopic Injuries.pdf: The RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 49 focuses on preventing gynaecological laparoscopic injuries during entry techniques. Key recommendations include training surgeons in safe laparoscopic techniques, inserting the primary trocar at a 90-degree angle to the skin in a controlled manner, and maintaining intra-abdominal pressure at 20-25 mmHg before trocar insertion. The guideline discusses using the Veress needle or open (Hasson) approach for entry, with no significant safety advantage to either technique. Alternative sites for entry include Palmer's point, especially in cases of previous surgery or splenomegaly. Special considerations are outlined for obese, thin, and young nulliparous women. Surgeons are advised to inform patients of risks and potential complications, ensure appropriate training and supervision, and document counseling and adverse events. The guideline emphasizes the importance of individualized patient care and local adoption of recommendations.\nGTG 2010 - Malaria in Pregnancy - Prevention.pdf: This clinical guideline focuses on the prevention of malaria in pregnancy for UK-based residents traveling to malaria-endemic areas. Pregnant women should consider postponing travel if possible, and if not, they should be educated on malaria risks and prevention strategies. Chemoprophylaxis with mefloquine is recommended in the second and third trimesters in chloroquine-resistant areas, while atovaquone-proguanil and proguanil plus chloroquine are options in certain regions. Doxycycline and primaquine are contraindicated. Standby emergency treatment should be provided to pregnant travelers, and quinine and clindamycin are recommended for treatment. Pregnant women should seek medical care promptly if malaria is suspected. The guideline emphasizes the importance of risk awareness, bite prevention, chemoprophylaxis, and prompt diagnosis and treatment to prevent malaria complications during pregnancy.\nGTG 2010 - Malaria in Pregnancy - Treatment.pdf: The clinical guideline focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of malaria in pregnancy, emphasizing the importance of early detection and management to prevent adverse outcomes. Symptoms include flu-like illness with fever, chills, headache, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and malaise. For severe falciparum malaria, prompt treatment with IV artesunate is recommended. Pregnant women with uncomplicated malaria should be hospitalized, while those with severe cases should be admitted to an intensive care unit. Regular monitoring and management are crucial, with blood films checked every 24 hours. Quinine with clindamycin is used for uncomplicated malaria, and IV artesunate or quinine for severe cases. Clindamycin should not be used in pregnancy. Artemisinin-based therapies are preferred in the second and third trimesters. Chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine are no longer recommended due to resistance. Radical cure with primaquine is not advised during pregnancy. Monitoring for fetal distress, obstetric management, and prevention of vertical transmission are essential in managing malaria in pregnancy.\nGTG 2011 - APH.pdf: Antepartum haemorrhage (APH) is bleeding from the genital tract after 24 weeks of pregnancy and before delivery, commonly caused by placenta praevia and placental abruption. It affects 3-5% of pregnancies and is a significant cause of maternal and perinatal mortality. Clinical assessment is crucial to determine the need for urgent intervention. Maternal stabilization and fetal monitoring are priorities, with investigations such as blood tests and ultrasounds to assess the extent of bleeding. Hospitalization is recommended for moderate to severe bleeding. Delivery timing depends on maternal and fetal conditions, with cesarean section for significant compromise. Management includes resuscitation, monitoring, and potential corticosteroids for preterm birth risk. Anti-D Ig is given to RhD-negative women. Massive APH requires multidisciplinary protocols and blood product transfusions. Postpartum issues like thromboprophylaxis and neonatal assessment are important. Future research areas include prevention of placental abruption and optimal timing of delivery in unexplained APH cases. Management of massive APH involves a systematic approach focusing on communication, resuscitation, monitoring, and controlling bleeding through prompt delivery. Fluid therapy and blood product transfusion aim to maintain specific blood parameters.\nGTG 2011 - Pregnancy and Breast Cancer.pdf: The clinical guideline focuses on managing breast cancer in women of childbearing age. Key recommendations include multidisciplinary team treatment, tailored therapy based on tumor characteristics and pregnancy stage, and non-hormonal contraception post-treatment. Women planning pregnancy post-breast cancer should consult with specialists, with most advised to wait at least 2 years after treatment. Fertility preservation options, like GnRH analogues and cryopreservation, should be discussed before treatment. Pregnancy after breast cancer should be jointly supervised, with considerations for cardiomyopathy risk, delivery complications, and breastfeeding. Assisted reproduction post-treatment may be limited, and hormone replacement therapy may be needed for pregnancy after chemotherapy-induced menopause. Addressing reproductive concerns and fertility preservation options is crucial for young women with breast cancer.\nGTG 2012 - Initial Mx of Chronic Pelvic Pain.pdf: This guideline focuses on the initial management of chronic pelvic pain in women. Chronic pelvic pain is a symptom with various contributing factors, including physical, psychological, and social aspects. The initial assessment should identify these factors and establish a management plan in partnership with the patient. Referral to specialists may be necessary if pain is not adequately controlled. History-taking should include pain patterns, associated symptoms, and effects of movement. Red flag symptoms should be noted, and screening for infections like STIs should be offered. Diagnostic tools such as TVS, MRI, and laparoscopy can aid in identifying structural abnormalities. Treatment options include hormonal therapy, antispasmodics, analgesia, ovarian suppression, and dietary modifications. Self-management techniques and support from organizations are also beneficial. The guideline emphasizes a comprehensive approach to managing chronic pelvic pain, recognizing its multifactorial nature and tailoring treatment plans to individual needs.\nGTG 2014 - Endometrial Hyperplasia.pdf: The clinical guideline on the management of endometrial hyperplasia emphasizes the importance of identifying and monitoring risk factors, utilizing the WHO classification for diagnosis, and employing methods like endometrial sampling and hysteroscopy for surveillance. Progestogens, particularly the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS), are recommended as first-line treatment for hyperplasia without atypia, with a minimum treatment duration of 6 months and follow-up biopsies. Surgical options may be considered in certain cases, with total hysterectomy advised for atypical hyperplasia. Women desiring fertility preservation should be counseled on risks, and hormone replacement therapy should be used cautiously. Regular surveillance is crucial, and management decisions should be individualized. The guideline also addresses specific scenarios like hyperplasia related to tamoxifen use and endometrial hyperplasia within polyps. Future research recommendations include exploring biomarkers and weight loss effects on regression.\nGTG 2015 - Birth After Previous CS.pdf: The clinical guideline on birth after previous caesarean birth recommends antenatal care involving counseling and decision-making checklists for vaginal birth after caesarean (VBAC) or elective repeat caesarean section (ERCS). Most women with a singleton pregnancy and prior lower segment caesarean delivery are suitable for planned VBAC, with contraindications including previous uterine rupture or classical caesarean scar. VBAC success rates are 72-75%, with continuous monitoring and labor in specialized centers advised. ERCS is recommended after 39+0 weeks, with consideration of maternal and fetal risks. Counseling should cover success rates, uterine rupture risks, and maternal outcomes. Factors influencing VBAC success include previous vaginal delivery and maternal characteristics. The guideline emphasizes personalized decision-making, patient preferences, and the importance of informed consent for mode of delivery. VBAC is generally considered safe for most women with a single prior caesarean, with special considerations for those with multiple prior caesareans.\nGTG 2015 - Blood transfusion in Obstetrics.pdf: The clinical guideline on blood transfusion in obstetrics provides recommendations to reduce the risk of transfusion in pregnant women. It emphasizes optimizing hemoglobin levels through antenatal care, screening for anemia, and offering oral iron supplementation as the first-line treatment for iron deficiency. Active management of the third stage of labor and delivery in a hospital setting for high-risk women are recommended to minimize blood loss. Consent for blood transfusion should be obtained whenever possible, and regular blood group and antibody status checks are essential during pregnancy. Cell salvage is recommended for patients with significant blood loss during delivery. Management of obstetric hemorrhage should include appropriate use of blood components based on clinical and hematological assessments. The guideline also highlights strategies to minimize the use of banked blood and emphasizes the importance of monitoring and auditing practices related to obstetric hemorrhage.\nGTG 2015 - Chickenpox in Pregnancy.pdf: This clinical guideline focuses on varicella prevention and management in pregnant women. Key recommendations include considering varicella vaccination for non-immune women, avoiding contact with chickenpox and shingles, and administering VZIG if exposed. Pregnant women with chickenpox should contact their doctor immediately, potentially be prescribed aciclovir, and may require hospital referral for severe cases. Risks to the fetus and newborn are discussed, with individualized delivery plans recommended for pregnant women with chickenpox. Varicella vaccination is deemed cost-effective for susceptible women. Screening for VZV immunity is not routinely recommended. VZIG may be offered to non-immune pregnant women with significant exposure to chickenpox. Awareness of infection risks and prevention strategies is crucial. Prophylaxis with VZIG is vital for newborns exposed to chickenpox around delivery. Breastfeeding is safe for women with chickenpox. Recommendations for further research and audit topics are provided.\nGTG 2015 - FGM.pdf: Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) guidelines emphasize the importance of clinicians understanding the complications associated with FGM and being aware of legal obligations. Health professionals should provide information on UK laws to women with FGM and ensure a safe and private environment for care. Mandatory reporting to police for girls under 18 with FGM is required. Training on FGM management is recommended for gynaecologists and midwives. Referral pathways should be clear, and psychological assessment and treatment should be offered to affected women. De-infibulation should be considered before pregnancy. Screening for hepatitis C is advised during antenatal care. Intrapartum and postnatal care for women with FGM should be carefully managed. Legal and regulatory processes must be followed and documented. Global epidemiology and data collection on FGM are crucial for tracking care for affected women. Specialized multidisciplinary FGM services should be accessible, and healthcare professionals should offer sensitive and appropriate care to women with FGM.\nGTG 2016 - Epilepsy in Pregnancy.pdf: The clinical guideline on epilepsy in pregnancy emphasizes the importance of accurate diagnosis by a neurologist, assessment of risks to the mother and baby, and consideration of differential diagnoses for seizures in pregnant women. Management includes individualized care for antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) based on fetal risk and seizure control, folic acid intake, and minimizing AED exposure to reduce congenital malformations. Regular antenatal care with an epilepsy care team, monitoring for fetal abnormalities, and managing seizures in labor are critical. Postnatal care involves continued AED use, monitoring neonates for adverse effects, and ensuring effective contraception. Healthcare providers should be knowledgeable about disability legislation protecting individuals with epilepsy. The guideline underscores the importance of preconception counseling, monitoring AED exposure, and optimizing outcomes for women with epilepsy during pregnancy.\nGuideline No. 451 Asymptomatic Endometrial Thickening in Postmenopausal Women.pdf: The SOGC Clinical Practice Guideline No. 451 on Asymptomatic Endometrial Thickening in Postmenopausal Women provides recommendations for managing postmenopausal women with endometrial thickening. Key points include: not routinely screening with pelvic ultrasound for endometrial cancer, most cases present with postmenopausal bleeding, low malignancy risk with endometrial thickness <11 mm, individualized further investigations based on ultrasound findings and risk factors, and no need for routine screening ultrasounds in asymptomatic women on hormone therapy. Recommendations include endometrial tissue sampling for women with thickness >11 mm or positive ultrasound findings, consideration of individual risk factors for further investigations, and the use of hysteroscopy or dilation and curettage for monitoring or assessment. The guideline also discusses the impact of hormone therapy on endometrial health, management of cervical stenosis, and preoperative considerations for hysteroscopy.\nGuideline No. 452 Diagnosis and Management of Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy.pdf: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is a common liver condition in late pregnancy characterized by itching and elevated bile acids, posing risks such as preterm birth and stillbirth. Treatment involves ursodeoxycholic acid for itching and planned early birth based on bile acid levels. Recurrence in future pregnancies is common. Clinicians should suspect ICP in pregnant individuals with itching, confirm with bile acid testing, offer ursodeoxycholic acid, and monitor based on bile acid levels. Continuous fetal monitoring during labor is recommended. Maternal and fetal risks include pre-eclampsia, preterm birth, and neonatal complications. Ursodeoxycholic acid is the main treatment, with potential benefits in reducing preterm birth risk. Referral to a specialist may be needed for refractory cases. Postpartum follow-up, contraception considerations, and recurrence risk should be addressed. The World Health Organization recommends combined contraception postpartum for those with ICP. Further research is needed to enhance understanding and management of ICP.\nJoint RCOG BASHH Guideline - Genital Herpes in Pregnancy.pdf: The clinical guideline on the management of genital herpes in pregnancy provides recommendations for healthcare professionals caring for pregnant women with genital herpes infections. Key points include treating first episodes with aciclovir, considering symptomatic relief options, and offering vaginal delivery with suppressive aciclovir therapy from 36 weeks gestation. Caesarean section is advised for third trimester acquisitions to prevent neonatal transmission. Type-specific HSV antibody testing can guide management decisions. Recurrent genital herpes in pregnant women generally has a low risk of neonatal transmission, allowing for vaginal delivery in most cases. Daily suppressive aciclovir should be considered for recurrent infections. For HIV-positive women with HSV, daily suppressive aciclovir is recommended. Neonates born to mothers with HSV should be monitored and treated appropriately to prevent postnatal transmission. The guideline emphasizes the importance of multidisciplinary team discussions and appropriate testing and treatment strategies.\nJoint RCOG BSGE Guideline - Suspected Ovarian Masses in Premenopausal Women.pdf: The RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 62 focuses on the management of suspected ovarian masses in premenopausal women. Key recommendations include conservative management and laparoscopic techniques for benign masses, referral to a gynaecological oncologist for suspicious cases, and the use of serum CA-125 levels and ultrasound findings to assess malignancy risk. Expectant management is suitable for asymptomatic women with small simple cysts. Surgical intervention is recommended for persistent or increasing cysts, especially in cases of mature cystic teratomas. Laparoscopic approach by experienced surgeons is preferred for elective surgical management, with careful consideration to avoid spillage of cyst contents. The guideline emphasizes early diagnosis and referral for improved outcomes and highlights the importance of accurate risk assessment using tools like the Risk of Malignancy Index (RMI) and ultrasound rules.\nJoint RCOG and BSGE Guideline- Laparoscopy in Pregnancy.pdf: The clinical guideline focuses on the laparoscopic management of non-obstetric abdominal conditions in pregnancy, such as appendicitis, gallbladder disease, and adnexal tumors. It underscores the safety of laparoscopy for both the mother and fetus when performed by experienced professionals. Laparoscopic surgery offers advantages like faster recovery and lower infection rates. Maternal and fetal outcomes are generally good, and surgery can be performed up to 34 weeks gestation if necessary. Surgeons should be skilled in laparoscopy to reduce complications, and a multidisciplinary team should manage pregnant women needing surgery. Factors like expertise, gestation, and patient preference should guide the choice between laparoscopic and open surgery. Intraoperative monitoring and careful anesthesia management are crucial. The guideline emphasizes the importance of timely surgical intervention for conditions like appendicitis to prevent complications. More high-quality evidence is needed, and national databases could aid in research due to challenges in conducting randomized trials for these conditions.\nMD090 Disengaging a Deeply Impacted head at LSCS and use of Fetal Pillow.pdf: This guideline focuses on managing deeply impacted fetal heads during lower segment Caesarean sections (LSCS) in pregnant women with a cephalic presentation. The key recommendations include using the Fetal Pillow as the first-line action to disengage the head, followed by reverse breech extraction if needed. For first stage LSCS, reverse breech extraction is recommended as the first-line action. The guideline provides a decision flowchart for managing impacted fetal heads and instructions for inserting the Fetal Pillow. It emphasizes the risks associated with second-stage LSCS and the importance of systematic management to reduce maternal and neonatal complications. The guideline also includes an audit proforma to assess the use of the Fetal Pillow and document delivery outcomes.\nMP071 Provisions and Schedules of Postnatal Care.pdf: The clinical guideline outlines the postnatal care provisions and schedules for women and individuals in the postnatal period. Key recommendations include encouraging skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding, performing routine observations, assessing VTE risk, providing postnatal information, and developing individualized postnatal care plans. Communication support, transitional care, and postnatal support in cases of poor outcomes for the term neonate are emphasized. Other critical management steps include coordinating care between settings, conducting newborn checks within 6-72 hours, offering mental health support, arranging follow-up appointments, administering vaccinations and screenings, and ensuring proper documentation. The guideline also covers topics like care of the perineum, infant feeding, parenting support, discharge criteria, bloodspot screening, and coordination of follow-up appointments and community visits.\nNICE - 2021 - Antenatal Care.pdf: The NICE Antenatal Care Guideline provides recommendations for organizing and delivering antenatal care, addressing routine clinical care, information provision, and managing common pregnancy issues. Key points include involving partners in care decisions, assessing risks such as domestic abuse and female genital mutilation, monitoring fetal growth and well-being, discussing fetal movements, and identifying breech presentation. Recommendations emphasize individualized care, clear communication, and support for pregnant women's needs and preferences. Antenatal appointments should include assessing risks for conditions like gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia, monitoring blood pressure and urine protein levels, and discussing birth preferences. The guideline also covers interventions for issues like nausea and vomiting, heartburn, pelvic girdle pain, and vaginal discharge. Additionally, it addresses the importance of sleep position after 28 weeks to reduce the risk of stillbirth. Overall, the guideline aims to enhance antenatal care quality and outcomes for pregnant women and their babies.\nNICE Guidance - 2010 - Hysterectomy for Endometrial Cancer.pdf: Laparoscopic hysterectomy for endometrial cancer is a safe and effective procedure when conducted by a multidisciplinary team with advanced laparoscopic skills. Proper patient selection and additional training are crucial. The surgery offers a less invasive alternative with faster recovery times than open surgery. Conversion to laparotomy rates may vary, but overall postoperative complications are lower with laparoscopic hysterectomy. However, more data on long-term outcomes are needed for future assessments. It is essential to have appropriate clinical governance, consent procedures, and audit mechanisms in place to ensure the success and safety of laparoscopic hysterectomy for endometrial cancer.\nNICE Guidance - 2023 - Ectopic.pdf: The clinical guideline on Ectopic Pregnancy and Miscarriage focuses on diagnosing and managing early pregnancy complications, including ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage. Key recommendations include offering pregnancy tests to women of reproductive age with non-specific symptoms, prompt referral for suspected ectopic pregnancy, and utilizing ultrasound scans for diagnosis. For cases of increasing serum hCG levels, a transvaginal ultrasound scan is recommended, with subsequent management based on the findings. Methotrexate or surgical options are advised for unruptured tubal ectopic pregnancies, with specific criteria for each treatment modality. Anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis is recommended for Rh-negative women undergoing surgery. The guideline emphasizes the need for further research into the psychological impact of different management approaches and suggests standardizing practices based on evidence to improve outcomes and reduce costs. Early diagnosis and appropriate management are crucial to minimize psychological distress and prevent adverse outcomes associated with early pregnancy complications.\nNICE Guidance - 2024 - Endometriosis.pdf: The NICE guideline on endometriosis diagnosis and management covers various aspects of care. Key recommendations include assessing deep endometriosis extent, interpreting MRI scans by a specialist, considering laparoscopy for diagnosis even with normal ultrasound, offering treatment based on symptoms rather than stage, and discussing surgical options with patients. Management may involve hormonal or surgical treatment, with excision preferred over ablation for endometriomas. Laparoscopic surgery is recommended for endometriosis, especially in cases involving the bowel, bladder, or ureter. Hormonal treatment alone is not advised for women trying to conceive. Research recommendations include exploring pain management programs, assessing the effectiveness of lifestyle interventions, and determining optimal hormonal treatment doses for fertility outcomes in endometriosis patients prioritizing fertility. The guideline emphasizes the impact of endometriosis on quality of life and the need for tailored information and support interventions for patients and their partners.\nNICE Guideline - 2021 - IOL.pdf: The NICE guideline on inducing labor provides recommendations for healthcare professionals and pregnant women regarding the circumstances, methods, assessment, monitoring, pain relief, and management of complications related to labor induction. Key recommendations include discussing birth preferences early in pregnancy, offering induction for specific circumstances like post-term pregnancy or preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, monitoring uterine activity and fetal well-being, providing pain relief options, and managing complications like hyperstimulation or unsuccessful induction. The guideline emphasizes shared decision-making, individualized care, and regular monitoring during the induction process. It also highlights the importance of considering factors such as fetal well-being, maternal preferences, and previous obstetric history when determining the most appropriate method of induction. Healthcare professionals are encouraged to provide information and support to help pregnant women make informed decisions about labor induction.\nRCOG - 2025 - GTG 76 -Management of Thyroid Disorders in Pregnancy.pdf: The clinical guideline for the management of thyroid disorders in pregnancy emphasizes the importance of using trimester- and manufacturer-specific pregnancy reference ranges for thyroid function tests. Recommendations include iodine supplementation, targeted testing for high-risk populations, and levothyroxine treatment for hypothyroidism. Women on levothyroxine should increase their dose upon pregnancy confirmation and undergo regular monitoring. Testing for thyroid peroxidase antibodies is not recommended unless there is thyroid dysfunction. Antithyroid drugs should be used cautiously in hyperthyroidism during pregnancy, with propylthiouracil preferred. Postpartum thyroiditis management involves monitoring and possible levothyroxine replacement. The guideline also addresses the impact of iodine deficiency on fetal development and the importance of maintaining optimal thyroid function for maternal and fetal health. Postpartum thyroid dysfunction can have lasting consequences like hypothyroidism. Monitoring thyroid function in pregnant women with thyroid antibodies is crucial to prevent postpartum depression. Selenium supplementation may impact postpartum thyroid status in women with thyroid antibodies. Safety of iodine supplementation in these women needs further investigation. These guidelines are meant as general recommendations, not prescriptive directions. Deviations from local protocols should be documented in the patient's case notes.\nRCOG - Birth After Previous Caesarean Section - 2015.pdf: The clinical guideline on Birth After Previous Caesarean Birth recommends offering planned vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) to most women with a single lower segment cesarean delivery, with contraindications being previous uterine rupture or classical cesarean scar. VBAC success rates are around 72-75%, with previous vaginal delivery predicting success. Induction or augmentation of labor increases uterine rupture risk. Elective repeat cesarean sections (ERCS) should be done after 39 weeks with appropriate care. VBAC may not be suitable for certain complications. Antenatal care should be structured, with counseling by the maternity team. ERCS has a higher neonatal respiratory morbidity risk compared to VBAC. Consideration should be given to VBAC in women with multiple future pregnancies. Decision aids, personalized tools, and risk-benefit discussions are crucial for choosing the delivery mode. Various studies have explored outcomes and risks associated with different delivery methods post-cesarean. Factors like uterine rupture, placenta previa, and maternal morbidity have been studied in relation to VBAC and ERCS.\nUHS Anaemia in pregancy UHS-CG-0008-2023 (3).pdf: The clinical guideline focuses on the management of anaemia during pregnancy and the postnatal period. Key recommendations include screening for anaemia at booking and 28 weeks, providing dietary advice to meet increased iron requirements, and initiating treatment if hemoglobin levels are below certain thresholds. Management strategies include dietary advice, oral iron replacement, and intravenous iron therapy. Iron deficiency is a common cause of anaemia in pregnancy, with symptoms such as fatigue, dizziness, and shortness of breath. Consequences of anaemia include increased risks of perinatal and neonatal mortality, low birth weight, and preterm birth. Monitoring hemoglobin levels, offering prophylactic iron to high-risk individuals, and considering intravenous iron therapy in specific cases are essential components of care. Prioritizing iron infusion for pregnant individuals with low hemoglobin levels approaching term and postpartum monitoring are critical for reducing complications. Blood transfusion should be considered after careful evaluation and exploring alternative treatments, with thorough documentation and informed consent from patients.\nUHSussex - Cord Prolapse Protocol.pdf: Cord prolapse management involves the descent of the umbilical cord past the presenting part in the presence of ruptured membranes. Immediate action is crucial, with methods like bladder filling to relieve cord compression. In the hospital setting, a category 1 caesarean birth within 30 minutes is recommended for non-reassuring fetal heart rate patterns. Training for staff, monitoring through incident forms, and postnatal debriefing are crucial. Risk factors include long cord, breech presentation, and iatrogenic factors like artificial rupture of membranes. The incidence ranges from 0.1% to 0.6%, with higher rates in breech presentations. Immediate transfer to a labor ward is advised in community settings. This protocol aims to ensure timely and appropriate management of cord prolapse to optimize maternal and fetal outcomes.\nUHSussex - Fetal Heart Monitoring Guideline.pdf: The Fetal Heart Monitoring clinical guideline provides recommendations for antenatal and intrapartum fetal monitoring. Antenatally, intermittent auscultation is recommended over routine listening, with electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) reserved for high-risk pregnancies. Computerised CTG (cCTG) with DR analysis is advised at 26/40 for severe pre-term pregnancies. During labor, intermittent auscultation is recommended for low-risk pregnancies, while continuous monitoring is suggested for increased-risk pregnancies. Actions include hourly reviews, systematic assessments, and documentation. Interpretation of intrapartum CTG involves assessing contractions, baseline fetal heart rate, variability, decelerations, and accelerations. Classifications include normal, suspicious, and pathological, with corresponding actions for each. Conservative measures may be initiated based on underlying causes. Continuous CTG reviews and fresh eyes assessments are crucial. The guideline emphasizes a holistic approach to fetal monitoring and individualized care based on clinical findings and preferences.\nUHSussex - MD090 - Disengaging a Deeply Impacted head at LSCS and use of Fetal Pillow.pdf: The clinical guideline focuses on the disengagement of a deeply impacted fetal head during a lower segment Caesarean section (LSCS) using a Fetal Pillow. The Fetal Pillow, a soft silicone balloon, is inserted into the vagina before LSCS to elevate the fetal head in cephalic presentation. It is recommended as the first-line action for disengaging a deeply impacted fetal head. If the head remains impacted, a reverse breech extraction technique can be considered. Indications for Fetal Pillow use include failed instrumental delivery, full dilatation cesarean with the fetal head at or below the ischial spines, and severe caput or molding. Proper operator training is essential, and various assessments before and during the procedure are crucial. Documentation of key parameters such as delivery difficulty, Apgar score, injuries, blood loss, and other outcomes is emphasized. The guideline aims to improve clinical practice based on current evidence and best practices.\nUHSussex - MP019 - Hypertension and Pre-eclampsia in Pregnancy.pdf: The clinical guideline for hypertension and preeclampsia in pregnancy focuses on the management of hypertensive disorders in pregnant individuals. Key recommendations include assessing proteinuria in hypertensive disorders, immediate referrals for high-risk individuals, and considering antihypertensive drugs like labetalol, nifedipine, and methyldopa. For chronic hypertension, pre-pregnancy advice on weight management and antihypertensive drug considerations are crucial. Planned early birth before 37 weeks is not recommended unless medically necessary. Labetalol infusion is the first-line treatment for hypertension in pregnancy, with monitoring of blood pressure and fetal well-being essential. Fetal monitoring recommendations vary based on the type of hypertension. Intrapartum care should align with NICE guidelines, with close blood pressure monitoring and fluid balance control. A flowchart for midwives in community antenatal settings aids in the assessment and management of pregnant individuals with hypertension.\nUHSussex - MP044 - Failed intubation in the Obstetric patient.pdf: The clinical guideline addresses failed intubation in obstetric patients undergoing general anesthesia in the peri-partum period. It emphasizes the need for a protocol with measurable standards and the use of professional judgment in its application. The responsibility lies with anaesthetists, midwives, and obstetricians to follow the guidance and utilize their expertise. Key considerations include physiological changes in pregnancy, the importance of maternal and fetal well-being, and human factors affecting practice. An algorithmic approach is recommended for managing difficult airways in pregnant patients, with specific algorithms provided by OAA/DAS for unanticipated difficult airways. The guideline aims to ensure safe and effective management of failed intubation in obstetric patients.\nUHSussex - MP046 - Management of Breech and ECV.pdf: Breech presentation refers to a fetus positioned with the buttocks, legs, or feet closest to the cervix. Perinatal risks are higher with breech presentation compared to cephalic presentation. Management includes monitoring and offering external cephalic version (ECV) at 36-37 weeks. ECV success rate is around 50%. Contraindications include certain conditions like placenta previa. Options for persistent breech presentation include planned caesarean section or vaginal breech birth. Vaginal breech birth requires thorough risk assessment and a detailed birth plan. Continuous monitoring, pain relief options, and a multidisciplinary team approach are essential. In labor, interventions may be needed if progress is slow. Delivery maneuvers depend on experience and preference. Cord compression is common during delivery. Planned caesarean section is recommended for preterm breech or twin pregnancies. Vaginal breech birth requires organizational support and skills training. Individualized risk assessment is crucial, and in some cases, emergency caesarean may be necessary.\nUHSussex - MP048 - Shoulder Dystocia.pdf: Shoulder dystocia is defined as the need for additional obstetric interventions during delivery after gentle downward traction fails. Risk factors include previous shoulder dystocia, macrosomia, maternal diabetes, maternal obesity, induction of labor, prolonged labor, and assisted vaginal delivery. Prevention strategies include cautious management of suspected macrosomia, with early induction in gestational diabetes and consideration of cesarean section in pregnancies with maternal diabetes. Diagnosis involves gentle traction, and management includes the McRoberts' maneuver and suprapubic pressure, avoiding lateral and downward traction. Post-delivery, there is an increased risk of postpartum hemorrhage and vaginal tears. It is crucial to maintain skills in managing shoulder dystocia to minimize complications. Complete documentation in maternal notes is essential, including the use of a shoulder dystocia proforma.\nUHSussex - MP049 - Assisted Vaginal Birth.pdf: The clinical guideline for Assisted Vaginal Birth at RSCH PRH outlines protocols for midwives and obstetricians when assisting women in labor. The goal is to achieve a vaginal birth with minimal morbidity. The guideline covers indications and contraindications for operative vaginal birth, risks of instrumental delivery, informed consent procedures, location options for the procedure, analgesia choices, hygiene practices, neonatal resuscitation requirements, and specific techniques for ventouse, forceps, and rotational forceps deliveries. Post-operative care includes perineal and vaginal trauma inspection, antibiotic administration, and pain management. Documentation requirements post-delivery are detailed, along with the importance of debriefing sessions for patients. The guideline emphasizes individualized care and support for women undergoing assisted vaginal births.\nUHSussex - MP050 - Caesarean Section.pdf: The Caesarean Section Protocol, MP050, provides guidelines for healthcare professionals involved in caesarean sections. It covers various categories of caesarean sections, emphasizing the importance of documentation and adherence to safety checklists. Recommendations include avoiding routine suturing of peritoneum and subcutaneous tissue, preferring sutures over staples for skin closure, and considering negative pressure wound therapy for high BMI individuals to reduce infections. Other key points include delayed cord clamping, cord milking when necessary, administering oxytocin appropriately, and ensuring newborn resuscitation readiness. The protocol also stresses early skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding support post-operation. It highlights the need for VTE risk assessment, discussions on future pregnancies, and thorough discharge planning. The document also outlines risks and outcomes associated with caesarean versus vaginal delivery, urging timely referrals and collaboration with obstetric anesthetists.\nUHSussex - MP053 - Obstetric Haemorrhage.pdf: The Obstetric Haemorrhage Protocol at University Sussex Hospital's NHS Trust East covers antepartum hemorrhage, placental abruption, placenta praevia, postpartum hemorrhage, and management for women declining blood products. Key principles emphasize the use of measurable standards with room for professional judgment. Responsibilities are outlined for midwives, anaesthetists, and obstetricians to follow the protocol and exercise professional judgment. Definitions of obstetric hemorrhage are provided, including minor and major categories. Management involves clinical review, assessment, referral, risk assessment, care planning, communication, and clear responsibilities. Communication among staff is crucial, with specific protocols for different hemorrhage types. Postnatal care, monitoring, and follow-up are essential. Women declining blood products should have individual plans, and debriefing and follow-up appointments are recommended. Thromboprophylaxis and accurate documentation are emphasized throughout the management process.\nUHSussex - MP055 - Perinatal Collapse in Pregnancy & Puerperium.pdf: The Perinatal Collapse in Pregnancy & Puerperium Maternity Protocol provides guidelines for managing maternal collapse, a rare but life-threatening event during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Key recommendations include prompt resuscitation, use of the Modified Early Obstetric Warning System (MEOWS), involvement of specialist clinicians for complex cases, and collaboration between different healthcare professionals for effective management. Common causes of maternal collapse discussed include major obstetric hemorrhage, cardiac disease, thromboembolism, amniotic fluid embolism, sepsis, drug toxicity, eclampsia, intracranial hemorrhage, and anaphylaxis. The protocol emphasizes the importance of following Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines, considering aortocaval compression in pregnant women, and performing perimortem caesarean section if needed. Debriefing, training, and auditing are recommended for continuous improvement in managing maternal collapse.\nUHSussex - MP056 - Obstetric High Dependency Care.pdf: The Obstetric High Dependency Care clinical guideline outlines the management of women requiring high dependency care during pregnancy. It categorizes care levels into 0 to 3 based on the severity of the condition. The guideline emphasizes the need for clear documentation, one-to-one nursing care, and involvement of specialist clinicians when necessary. It provides guidance on transferring women to High Dependency Units (HDU) or Intensive Care Units (ITU) within maternity services, as well as outside maternity services. Specific equipment requirements, roles and responsibilities of staff, and criteria for discharge from HDU/ITU are detailed. The protocol highlights the importance of professional judgment in applying the recommendations and the need for regular review in line with Trust and National recommendations. Staff are required to access, understand, and follow the guidance, using their professional judgment when necessary.\nUHSussex - MP059 - Baby Abduction Policy.pdf: The clinical guideline outlines the Baby Abduction Policy at Brighton and Sussex NHS Trust, focusing on ensuring a safe environment and preventing baby abductions. Key principles include commitment to safety, responsibilities of staff, and immediate actions in case of abduction. Maternity, portering, security, and switchboard staff must adhere to the guidance and act swiftly. Immediate actions involve informing security and the police. Ongoing actions include moving parents to a private area, checking identification, and cooperating with authorities. Training for staff on abduction risks is essential, and audits will be conducted after each incident. The policy emphasizes fairness, respect, and dignity in line with Human Rights FREDA principles.\nUHSussex - MP064 - Hyponatraemia in Labour.pdf: The clinical guideline for hyponatremia in labor provides standards for managing low sodium levels in pregnant individuals during labor. Key recommendations include encouraging oral intake, monitoring fluid balance, and specific protocols for low and high-risk care. Oxytocin dosing regimes are outlined, along with a management flowchart based on sodium levels and symptoms. Severe hyponatremia (sodium <125 mmol/L with symptoms) is deemed a medical emergency, requiring urgent senior obstetric and anesthetic review. Treatment aims to alleviate symptoms rather than correcting sodium levels completely. This involves strict fluid restriction, hourly sodium monitoring, and 1.8% Sodium Chloride boluses under ITU supervision. The goal is to increase sodium levels by no more than 10 mmol/L in 24 hours. Regular communication with obstetric and anesthetic teams is emphasized throughout the management process.\nUHSussex - MP076 - Maternal death.pdf: This clinical guideline focuses on the management of maternal deaths during the childbearing period. It outlines responsibilities of midwives, obstetricians, and management, including reporting maternal deaths and immediate management steps. A detailed checklist for notifying relevant parties is provided. Key actions include informing next of kin, completing documentation, and activating investigation policies. The guideline also covers managing maternal deaths in primary care, reporting to relevant authorities, and handling paperwork and documentation. It emphasizes the importance of following specific procedures, such as involving the Medical Examiner and Coroner, issuing death certificates, and considering cultural and religious aspects. The guideline also highlights the need for staff debriefing and providing information to relatives. Additionally, it includes instructions for certifying deaths and registering them appropriately.\nUHSussex - Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy + Hyperemesis Gravidarum - 2025.pdf: The guideline focuses on managing nausea and vomiting in pregnancy (NVP) and hyperemesis gravidarum (HG). NVP affects most pregnant individuals and can be managed in General Practice, while HG, a severe form, may require specialist care. Key recommendations include using antiemetic medications like pyridoxine/doxylamine or cyclizine, assessing severity with the PUQE scoring system, monitoring renal function and vitamin levels, and considering thiamine for severe cases. General Practitioners should consider alternative causes if symptoms start after 16 weeks, monitor various parameters, assess mental health, offer counseling, and prescribe antiemetics. In secondary care, management involves reviewing risks, using antiemetics, ensuring nutrition and hydration, and offering support groups. Referral for specialist care should be considered if needed. Resources for support and further information are provided, including contact details for specialist centers and patient information leaflets.\nUHSussex - Obstetric VTE - 2025.pdf: The clinical guideline focuses on preventing and managing venous thromboembolism (VTE) in pregnancy and the postnatal period. Key recommendations include conducting pre-pregnancy risk assessments for individuals with a history of VTE, offering thromboprophylaxis with LMWH for high-risk pregnant individuals, starting antenatal thromboprophylaxis early in pregnancy, initiating postnatal thromboprophylaxis 6 hours after birth, and using LMWH as the preferred agent for both antenatal and postnatal thromboprophylaxis. Contraindications to LMWH use are outlined, and alternative agents like danaparoid and fondaparinux may be considered with hematologist consultation. The guideline discourages the use of aspirin for thromboprophylaxis in obstetric patients and restricts warfarin use in pregnancy to specific situations. Prompt investigation and management of DVT and PE symptoms are emphasized due to VTE being a leading cause of maternal death in the UK. Follow-up care should involve a multidisciplinary team, and pre-pregnancy advice is crucial for medication review and pregnancy care planning.\nUptodate - 2025 - Preexisting and gestational diabetes - Intrapartum and postpartum glucose management.pdf: In pregnancies complicated by diabetes, maintaining optimal blood glucose levels during labor is crucial to prevent adverse outcomes. Glycemic targets of 70 to 125 mg/dL are recommended. Maternal hyperglycemia during labor can lead to fetal hypoxemia and neonatal hypoglycemia. Individualized glucose monitoring and insulin management, including the use of continuous glucose monitoring devices and intravenous insulin protocols, are essential. Patients on insulin pumps can continue use during labor, with specific management protocols in place. For cesarean births, insulin pump users can follow hospital policies, while patients with gestational diabetes may require subcutaneous correctional insulin. Postpartum, insulin dosing is typically reduced, with close monitoring and adjustments necessary. Metformin is recommended for postpartum type 2 diabetes and is safe for breastfeeding. Follow-up testing and monitoring for diabetes postpartum are essential. Gestational diabetes may not require medication postpartum, and breastfeeding may lower insulin requirements. Close monitoring of glucose levels is crucial postpartum, with insulin adjustments based on individual needs.\nUptodate - 2025 - Prelabor rupture of membranes at term.pdf: The clinical guideline for term premature rupture of membranes (PROM) focuses on the management of this condition, emphasizing the decision between inducing labor or waiting for spontaneous labor. Inducing labor is recommended to reduce the risk of infection for both the mother and newborn. Oxytocin induction is preferred for patients without contraindications. Expectant management can be considered for uncomplicated pregnancies where patients prefer to wait for labor to start. Hospitalization is advised for PROM cases to decrease complications. Antibiotic prophylaxis is used when necessary, but it is generally avoided unless specific criteria are met. Group B streptococcus colonization does not always require immediate intervention. The guideline highlights the importance of monitoring for signs of infection and fetal well-being during expectant management. It also stresses that antibiotic prophylaxis is not needed for patients with negative GBS cultures and that management for those with unknown GBS status should be based on standard risk assessment.\nUptodate - 2025 - Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas) Treatment overview - UpToDate.pdf: The clinical guideline for managing uterine fibroids in reproductive-age females includes various treatment options based on symptoms and patient preferences. Expectant management, hysteroscopic fibroid resection, and medical therapy with contraceptives or intrauterine devices are initial options. Second-tier treatments include GnRH agonists, uterine artery embolization, and tranexamic acid. For patients not desiring fertility, hysterectomy or myomectomy may be considered. Laparoscopic myomectomy is preferred over open abdominal myomectomy due to less blood loss and lower complication rates. Patients with bulk or pain symptoms can opt for UAE or GnRH analogs. Hysteroscopic myomectomy is recommended for submucosal fibroids in patients desiring fertility. Surgical approach does not affect ovarian reserve. Further randomized trials are needed for comparison. Invasive treatments like UAE and myomectomy are options for patients with fibroids. Patients desiring pregnancy may consider myomectomy or hysteroscopic myomectomy.\nUptodate - Approach to the patient with pregnancy of unknown location.pdf: Pregnancy of unknown location (PUL) refers to a scenario where a patient with a positive pregnancy test has a transvaginal ultrasound showing neither an intrauterine pregnancy (IUP) nor an ectopic pregnancy. The management of PUL involves continued evaluation until a final diagnosis is reached to prevent severe maternal outcomes. Initial assessment includes history, physical examination, and ultrasound, with further workup based on findings. Serial human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) measurements and ultrasound assessments are crucial. Management varies based on stability and patient desires, with hemodynamically unstable cases needing immediate intervention, stable cases potentially undergoing expectant management, and undesired pregnancies requiring proactive intervention. Special consideration is given to patients with persistent hCG elevations or non-pregnancy-related causes. The algorithm does not apply to unstable patients or rare conditions like malignancy or pituitary hCG production. Patients desiring pregnancy are managed differently.\nUptodate - Pregnancy Loss Ultrasound Diagnosis.pdf: The clinical guideline provides recommendations for diagnosing pregnancy loss through transvaginal ultrasound evaluation in cases of nonviable intrauterine pregnancies up to 20 weeks of gestation. Key points include confirming intrauterine gestation and excluding ectopic pregnancy through ultrasound, with specific criteria for diagnosing pregnancy loss based on gestational sac diameter and cardiac activity. Various ultrasound criteria are outlined for different levels of diagnostic certainty, considering patient preferences and clinical context. Challenges in assessment, such as gestational duration discrepancies and multiple gestations, are discussed. Additional ultrasound findings suggestive of non-viable or poor outcomes are highlighted. The guideline emphasizes the importance of expertise in sonography and equipment quality in making accurate diagnoses. The document also mentions the need for further research to compare ultrasound techniques and consider the false-positive rate in diagnosis."
}

A: ### Most Relevant Guidelines
BJOG - 2024 - DeÂ Silva - Outpatient Hysteroscopy.pdf: Certain  
ESHRE - PCOS - 2023.pdf: Highly Likely  
NICE Guidance - 2024 - Endometriosis.pdf: Highly Likely  
BJOG - 2016 - Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy.pdf: Likely  

### Potentially Relevant Guidelines
BJOG - 2017 -  Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in Pregnancy.pdf: Likely  
BJOG - 2016 -  - Management of Bladder Pain Syndrome.pdf: Unlikely  
BJOG - 2017 -  Management of Breech Presentation.pdf: Unlikely  
BJOG - 2017 -  External Cephalic Version and Reducing the Incidence of Term Breech Presentation.pdf: Unlikely  

### Less Relevant Guidelines
BASHH - 2014 - Mx of Vulval Conditions.pdf: Unlikely  
BHIVA - 2020 - HIV Guideline.pdf: Unlikely  
BJOG - 2018 - Denison - Care of Women with Obesity in Pregnancy.pdf: Unlikely  
BJOG - 2019 - Thomson - Care of Women Presenting with Suspected Preterm Prelabour Rupture of Membranes from 24 0 Weeks of.pdf: Unlikely  

### Not Relevant Guidelines
BJOG - 2020 -  Management of Gestational Trophoblastic Disease.pdf: Not Relevant  
BJOG - 2020 - Murphy - Assisted Vaginal Birth.pdf: Not Relevant  
BJOG - 2021 - Navaratnam - Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling.pdf: Not Relevant  
BJOG - 2022 - Girling - Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy.pdf: Not Relevant

--- Token Usage Report ---
Prompt tokens: 15232
Completion tokens: 366
Total tokens: 15598
Estimated cost: $0.007799